CONTRIBUTORS STANDARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS

1. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION

1.1 The definitions and rules of interpretation in this Clause apply in these Terms and Conditions.

“ANL” means Associated Newspapers Limited, registered address, Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London W8 5TT and registered company number 84121;

“Affiliates” means in relation to a person, any direct or indirect parent undertaking or subsidiary undertaking from time to time of such person, or any other direct or indirect subsidiary undertakings from time to time of any parent undertaking of such person. An undertaking is a “subsidiary undertaking” of another undertaking (its “parent undertaking”) if that other undertaking, directly or indirectly, through one or more subsidiary undertakings:

(a) holds 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(b) it is a member of the undertaking and has the right to appoint or remove 50% or more of its board of directors or equivalent managing body; or

(c) it is a member of the undertaking and controls alone, or pursuant to an agreement with other shareholders or members, 50% or more of the voting rights in the undertaking; or

(d) has the right to exercise a dominant influence over it, for example by having the right to give directions with respect to its operating and financial policies, with which directions its directors are obliged to comply.

“Content” means any and all text, Images, Videos, Lineage, audio or video material, recordings of moving images with or without sound, all stills, images, content, materials, information, data, software and executable code, in whatever medium or form supplied or made available by or on behalf of the Supplier in connection with these Terms and Conditions;

“Fees” means the fees that we have agreed to pay the Supplier respect of the licence of the Content as set out in the self-generated Invoice;

“Images” means any photos, print graphics, interactive or digital graphics or other still images;

“Intellectual Property Rights” means all intellectual property rights wherever in the world arising, whether registered or unregistered (and including any application), including copyright, know-how, confidential information, trade secrets, business names and domain names, Marks, patents, petty patents, utility models, design rights, semi-conductor topography rights, database rights and all rights in the nature of unfair competition rights or rights to sue for passing off;

“Lineage” means written content or text material accompanying the content supplied by Supplier;

“Licensed Media” means:

(a) any and all digital or electronic publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website, and which in each case is owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time including those which operates under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, ‘Metro’ or ‘This is Money’ brands, or any derivative of such brands, including, but not limited to the publications owned or operated by ANL and which are located at www.metro.co.uk, www.mailonline.co.uk, Mailonline.co.uk/au, www.dailymail.co.uk, www.dailymail.com and www.thisismoney.co.uk and any subsequent or additional URLs which may replace them from time to time;

(b) any and all print publications through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed which ANL operates including those under the ‘Mail Online’, ‘Mail’, ‘the Daily Mail’, ‘Mail on Sunday’, ‘Mail Plus’, or ‘Metro’ brands, or any derivative of such brands;

(c) any of the above publications’ pages or articles (including its mobile versions) on any social media accounts or news aggregator websites from time to time (including, but not limited to, Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, Instagram, MSN, Apple i news and Yahoo; and

(d) any media player owned or operated by ANL or any of its Affiliates from time to time (with or without embedding functionality and whether incorporated in the publications set out above or in any third party sites, services, apps or publications).

“Marks” means any and all trade marks, trade names, service marks, trade dress, logos, URLs, identifying slogans or other distinctive brand features of a party to these Terms and Conditions, whether or not registered;

“Supplier” means the entity set out in the self-generated Invoice; and

“Video” means a recording of moving images with or without sound supplied by Supplier.

2. GRANT OF LICENCE

2.1 Subject to these Terms and Conditions, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL and each of its Affiliates a non-exclusive (unless otherwise agreed), royalty-free, worldwide, perpetual licence to use, reproduce, distribute, publicly perform, display, edit and transmit the Content in connection with and through the Licensed Media and to make the same available to end users of the Licensed Media.

2.2 The Supplier, by granting the licence detailed in Clause 2.1, also grants ANL the express right to ANL and each of its Affiliates to grant a sub-licence to end users and readers of Licensed Media to the extent necessary for end users and readers to view

and use the Content in accordance with the Licensed Media’s terms of use from time to time.

2.3 The Supplier agrees that ANL shall be entitled to change, modify and edit the Content for technical or editorial purposes (including, without limitation, cropping or framing the Content).

2.4 ANL shall be entitled to reproduce the whole or any part of any Content in any secondary reproductions of Licensed Media (e.g. compilations, screen shots, stills, thumbnails) in order to promote or market the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including any and all print, digital and electronic publications.

2.5 If the Content includes Videos, ANL shall be entitled to embed, and enable, facilitate and support the embedding and organic sharing of Content by any end user of, all or any part of the Content through any media or outlet and in any format now known or hereafter developed, including without limitation, on any internet-based service, digital service, mobile service, product, platform, application (apps), intranet, webpage or website. ANL shall be entitled to manage, control and change the embedding functionality and settings of any of its media players from time to time as ANL shall determine in its sole discretion.

2.6 ANL agrees that it shall include the credit marked on the Images and Videos or notified by the Supplier on any use or reproduction of the Images and Videos.

2.7 Any inadvertent failure by ANL to accord the credit shall not constitute a breach of these Terms and Conditions by ANL provided that ANL uses its reasonable endeavours to remedy such failure that the Supplier makes ANL aware of, as soon as reasonably practicable and on a prospective basis only. For the avoidance of doubt, ANL will not be required to recall any print or other material already printed nor incur legal costs or expenses.

2.8 The Supplier hereby waives all moral rights in the Content to which the Supplier may be entitled under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (UK) or the Copyright Act 1968 (Australia) as amended from time to time (and under all similar legislation from time to time in force anywhere in the world) to the extent necessary for ANL to exploit the Content in the Licensed Media.

2.9 The Supplier hereby acknowledges and agrees that the Content may be copied or reproduced under separate licences or arrangements with NLA Media Access and all other such database aggregators and services. As such, the Supplier hereby grants to ANL all such licences and rights as are required in order to enable others to access, copy and reproduce all or part of the Licensed Media (whether via press cuttings or similar services) pursuant to those licences or arrangements, including the non-exclusive right to syndicate (including electronic syndication or syndication for use in electronic databases) or distribute the Licensed Media (containing the Content) to NLA Media Access and all other owners of such databases, databanks and services for storage, copying, republication and redistribution to third parties for further storage, copying, publication and distribution in any medium.

2.10 ANL will have the non-exclusive right to store the Content (whether or not the Content has been published by ANL) in any of its electronic databases and to allow access to the databases for research purposes.

3. MARKS

3.1 The Supplier acknowledges and agrees that ANL owns all right, title and interest in and to the Licensed Media and ANL’s Marks. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall confer in the Supplier any right of ownership in the Licensed Media or ANL’s Marks.

3.2 Supplier hereby grants to ANL a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty free licence to use, reproduce, display and transmit the Supplier’s Marks solely for the purposes of performing its obligations under these Terms and Conditions, including in connection with the presentation of the Content within the Licensed Media.

4. FEES AND PAYMENT

4.1 In consideration of the provision of the Content by the Supplier, ANL shall pay the Fees which shall be all inclusive for the rights granted above (including syndication).

4.2 ANL will send Supplier a self-generated invoice (“Invoice”) reflecting the uses along with the payment of the Fee, no more than forty-five (45) days after the use. If the Supplier believes ANL has used Content that is not reflected in an Invoice, or for which payment was not made within forty-five (45) days after the use, the Supplier will promptly notify ANL:

(a) via mailonlinecontributionqueries@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s online digital publication and provide links to the URL(s) or scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment; or

(b) via accountspayable@dmgmedia.co.uk if the use relates to ANL’s print publications and provide scans of the pages where it believes its images have been used without payment,

Each of (a) and (b) a (“Notification”). If ANL accepts that Content has been used without timely payment of the Fee, it will pay the Fee within fifteen (15) business days of ANL’s receipt of the Notification.

4.3 Payment shall be made direct to the bank account nominated in writing by the Supplier.

4.4 If a party fails to make any payment due to the other under these Terms and Conditions by the due date for payment (due date), then, without limiting the other party's remedies under these Terms and Conditions, the defaulting party may be required to pay interest on the overdue amount at the rate of 2% per annum above the Bank of England base rate from time to time. Such interest shall accrue on a daily basis from the due date until the date of actual payment of the overdue amount, whether before or after judgment. The defaulting party shall pay the interest together

with the overdue amount. This Clause shall not apply to payments that the non-paying party disputes in good faith.

4.5 If ANL disputes any invoice or other statement of monies due, ANL shall immediately notify the Supplier in writing.

4.6 ANL may, without limiting any other rights or remedies it may have, set off any amounts owed to it by the Supplier against any amounts payable by it to the Supplier.

4.7 All Fees are exclusive of VAT or GST, as applicable.

5. WARRANTIES AND INDEMNITIES

5.1 Each party to these Terms and Conditions represents and warrants to the other party that:

(a) it has the full corporate right, power and authority to enter into these Terms and Conditions and to perform its obligations hereunder;

(b) the execution of these Terms and Conditions by such party, and the performance by such party of its obligations and duties hereunder, do not and will not violate any agreement to which such party is a party or by which it is otherwise bound;

(c) it shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations in relation to the performance by it of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions including but not limited to all applicable laws and regulations concerning bribery and corruption; and

(d) when executed and delivered by such party, these Terms and Conditions will constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of such party, enforceable against such party in accordance with its terms.

5.2 The Supplier represents and warrants to ANL that:

(a) it has sufficient rights in the Content to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(b) it has secured all third party permissions and releases necessary to grant to ANL the right to use and disseminate such Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions;

(c) it will take all reasonable precautions in accordance with generally recognised industry standards not to provide Content that contains any matter which is defamatory, libellous, unlawfully threatening or unlawfully harassing, causes injury, invades privacy rights, or is otherwise actionable in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed;

(d) the Content:

(i) does not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights;

(ii) is created, compiled and published using reasonable care and skill and do not violate any law, statute, ordinance, rule, court order, code of practice or regulation (whether on a regulatory or statutory basis) or generally recognised industry standards, in each case in any jurisdiction where the Content and/or the Licensed Media are directed, including but not limited to the Editors’ Code of Practice issued by the Editors’ Code of Practice Committee in the UK, and where relevant the Statement of General Principles issued by the Australian Press Council from time to time; and

(iii) does not contain any viruses, Trojan horses, worms, time bombs, cancel bots or other computer programming routines that are intended to damage, detrimentally interfere with, surreptitiously intercept or expropriate any system, data or personal information;

(e) the only costs to be borne by ANL in respect of the use of the Content in the manner envisaged by these Terms and Conditions are the Fees and (with the exception of the Fees) it shall be responsible for all payments, fees, royalties, charges or otherwise due to all and any third parties arising out of the same; and

(f) the Supplier’s Marks do not infringe any third party's Intellectual Property Rights or other rights of any third party.

5.3 The Supplier shall indemnify and hold harmless and keep ANL (and each of its employees, directors and agents) fully and effectively indemnified from and against any and all losses, demands, claims, damages, costs, expenses (including consequential losses and loss of profit, legal costs and expenses and VAT or GST thereon) and liabilities suffered or incurred, directly or indirectly by ANL as a result of any breach by the Supplier of the warranties set out in Clauses 5.1 and 5.2.

5.4 Should any legal proceedings against ANL follow from the publication of any Content, then ANL or any other Affiliate shall be entitled, in its absolute discretion (but shall be under no obligation), to take such action as it shall deem fit, including without limitation, settling or defending such claim. The Supplier shall make itself available to assist ANL in every reasonable way possible and hereby acknowledges and agrees that it shall have no claim against ANL in any way relating to ANL's conduct of any such claim where ANL has used the Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

6. LIMITATION OF REMEDIES AND LIABILITY

6.1 Nothing in this Clause 6 shall limit a party’s liability for death or personal injury.

6.2 The liability of the Supplier shall not be limited in respect of a claim by ANL under Clause 5.3.

6.3 Subject to Clauses 6.1 and 6.2, the liability of ANL to Supplier in contract, tort, negligence, pre-contract or other representations or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or the performance or observance of its obligations under these Terms and Conditions shall be limited in aggregate to the aggregate Fees paid by ANL to the Supplier in the six months immediately preceding the incurring of such loss or damage.

6.4 ANL shall not be liable in contract, tort (including negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent misrepresentations) or otherwise arising out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions for:

(a) any economic losses (including, without limitation, loss of revenues, profits, contracts, business or anticipated savings); and

(b) any loss of goodwill or reputation; or

(c) any special, indirect or consequential losses, in any case, whether or not such losses were within the contemplation of the Supplier at the date of these Terms and Conditions, or were suffered or incurred by that party arising out of or in connection with the provisions of these Terms and Conditions or any matter arising under these Terms and Conditions.

The following clause 6.5 does not apply to, and shall have no effect in, Australia:

6.5 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereof, whether imposed by statute or by operation of law or otherwise, that are not expressly stated herein, including without limitation, the implied warranties of satisfactory quality and fitness for a particular purpose.

The following clause 6.6 applies to, and has effect in, Australia only:

6.6 Except as set out in these Terms and Conditions and to the extent permitted by law, ANL excludes all conditions, terms, representations (other than fraudulent or negligent representations) and warranties relating to the subject matter hereto. To the extent that ANL’s liability for breach of an implied warranty or condition cannot be excluded by law, ANL’s liability will be limited, at ANL’s election, to the resupply of the services or the payment of the costs of the resupply of the services.

6.7 Each provision of this Clause 6 excluding or limiting liability shall be construed separately, applying and surviving even if for any reason one or other of these provisions is held inapplicable or unenforceable in any circumstances and shall remain in force notwithstanding the expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions.

6.8 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in these Terms and Conditions, if ANL believes that any Content may create liability for ANL, ANL may remove such Content from the Licensed Media as ANL believes, in its sole discretion, is prudent or necessary to minimise or eliminate ANL’s potential liability.

7. POST- TERMINATION RETENTION OF CONTENT

7.1 ANL’s right to use the Content as contemplated hereunder is perpetual and shall survive the termination of these Terms and Conditions.

7.2 On expiry or termination of these Terms and Conditions for any reason, all provisions of these Terms and Conditions shall cease to have effect, except that any provision which can reasonably be inferred as continuing, including, but not limited to,

the perpetual rights and licences granted under Clause 2.1, shall continue in full force and effect.

7.3 For the avoidance of doubt, neither the termination (for any reason) nor expiration of these Terms and Conditions shall require ANL to delete or destroy copies of, or remove from transmission or display, all or part of any Licensed Media containing Content in accordance with the terms of these Terms and Conditions.

8. GENERAL

8.1 Any notice required to be given under these Terms and Conditions shall be in writing and shall only be deemed to have been duly served if hand delivered or sent by first class recorded delivery within the United Kingdom and outside the United Kingdom by registered airmail and to the party’s registered address and in the case of ANL to Northcliffe House, 2 Derry Street, London, W8 5TT with a copy to contracts@assocnews.co.uk

8.2 Any notice pursuant to Clause 8.1 shall be deemed to have been served:

(a) if hand delivered, at the time of delivery;

(b) if sent by post, two days after posting; and

(c) if sent by airmail, seven days after posting.

8.3 Supplier shall not be entitled to assign the benefit and/or burden of these Terms and Conditions in whole or in part without the ANL’s prior written consent.

8.4 Unless a signed and dated agreement exists between the parties, these Terms and Conditions contain the entire agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter covered and supersede any previous agreements, arrangements, written or oral, between the parties in relation to such matters.

8.5 The parties acknowledge that no standard terms and conditions sent to the Supplier by A&N Media Finance Services Limited (A&N) shall apply to these Terms and Conditions. Similarly, no terms or conditions endorsed upon, delivered with or contained in the Supplier's quotation, acknowledgement or acceptance of order, specification, invoice or similar document shall take effect in relation to the licence of Content under these Terms and Conditions and the Supplier waives any right which it otherwise might have to rely on such terms and conditions.

8.6 The parties acknowledge that ANL enters into these Terms and Conditions for the benefit of itself and each of its Affiliates. Any Affiliate from time to time may for its own benefit enforce in its own right any term of these Terms and Conditions subject to and in accordance with the provisions of the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the terms of these Terms and Conditions may be varied, amended or modified or these Terms and Conditions may be suspended, cancelled or terminated by agreement in writing between the parties or may be rescinded, in each case without the consent of any such Affiliate. Except as provided in this Clause 8.6, a person who is not a party to these Terms and Conditions has no right under the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 to enforce any terms of

these Terms and Conditions but this Clause 8.6 does not affect a right or remedy of a third party which exists or is available apart from that Act.

8.7 If any provision (or part of a provision) of these Terms and Conditions is found by any court or administrative body of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unenforceable or illegal, the other provisions shall remain in force.

8.8 If any invalid, unenforceable or illegal provision would be valid, enforceable or legal if some part of it were deleted, the provision shall apply with whatever modification is necessary to give effect to the commercial intention of the parties.

8.9 Each party shall do, sign, execute and deliver all deeds, documents, instruments and acts reasonably required of it by notice from the other party to carry out and give full effect to these Terms and Conditions and the rights and obligations of the parties under it.

8.10 Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall be construed as creating a partnership or joint venture of any kind between the parties or as constituting either party as the agent of the other party for any purpose whatsoever and neither party shall have the authority or power to bind the other party or to contract in the name of or create a liability against the other party in any way or for any purpose.

8.11 These Terms and Conditions and any disputes or claims arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims) are governed by and construed in accordance with the law of England.

8.12 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

The following clause 8.13 shall have apply to, and have effect, in, Australia only:

8.13 The parties irrevocably agree that the courts of England have non-exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute or claim that arises out of or in connection with these Terms and Conditions or its subject matter or formation (including non-contractual disputes or claims).

APPENDIX 1

Invoice format:

The invoice for content licensed under this agreement must at a minimum include or be supplemented with the following information:

· Type of content claimed (video, words, pictures)

· Article IDs or links

· Video IDs for video invoices

· Title of caption

· Fee claimed if exclusively negotiated/applicable

Please note that standard rates apply where exclusive rates have not been agreed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Beach BBQs, ocean sunsets and a trip to Stingray City: Antigua and Peter Island make a big impression on Rory Bremner



Even with the plethora of medium and long-haul destinations available to today’s discerning travellers, there’s still something special about the Caribbean - that collection of islands cast like a string of pearls into the sea between the Americas.

The islands offer many contrasts: from the exclusive, super-rich haunts of St Barth’s and Mustique to those playboy tax-havens and cruise-ship magnets St Thomas and St Maarten; from the smoky, sultry, Latin American passion of Cuba and Puerto Rico to the yacht-friendly breezes of the Grenadines or the steel-drum, calypso exuberance of the cricketing West Indies.

Palm-fringed beaches? Ocean sunsets? Rum punch and Pina Coladas? Get in.

Jewel in the Caribbean's crown: Rory Bremner takes in the view of the beach at Peter Island

Our mission: to compare and contrast two holiday experiences, Antigua and Peter Island. One, a popular and much-loved destination with cricket-lovers and yachtsmen alike; the other, an exclusive private island lying between the British Virgin Islands of Tortola and Virgin Gorda. Well, somebody had to do it.

Our only restriction was time: we had just seven nights in which to complete our enviable task. Hence my first piece of advice: take longer.

If you believe that getting there is half the fun, you’ll enjoy the trip to Peter Island, because it can seem like it has taken half your holiday to get there. Relax. It’s worth it. But you will have to fly via Antigua and St Maarten - and maybe drop off passengers at a third island en route. Welcome to the mad, dysfunctional world of local island-hopping airline LIAT (locals love to tell you that’s an acronym for Leave Island Any Time. You better believe it). Tip number two: plan your flights carefully.

Height of luxury: Curtain Bluff is perched on a promontory stretching into the sea with the Atlantic Ocean on one side and the Caribbean on the other

Soak in the view: The guests Rory met at Curtain Bluff said they came back time and again

So, Antigua first. I love Antigua. It’s wilder, more laid-back and rougher round the edges than its bigger, brasher neighbours. In a word, it’s real. The people are fiercely proud of their island but they're relaxed, friendly and good-humoured too - think of the swagger and smile of cricketer Viv Richards in his pomp.

The island lacks the crime of Jamaica or St Kitts, the super-rich clientele of St Barth’s, or the commercialism, high-end tourist developments and sheer excess of Barbados. You’re less likely to run into Simon Cowell or Jodie Marsh here. (Although Eric Clapton has a place on the island along with - commendably - a rehab clinic.)

As you drive across Antigua, either along the coast or through the rainforest interior, you pass rough bungalows, shacks, graveyards (for humans and cars), schools and Baptist churches. While there are some resorts to the north and west, the more luxurious hotels are dotted along the south coast, including Curtain Bluff, perched on a promontory stretching into the sea with the Atlantic Ocean on one side and the Caribbean on the other.



Our schedule meant we merely overnighted there, and had time only to enjoy the good food and quick service at dinner, listen to the Atlantic breakers crashing onto the beach just yards from our balcony, and meet the owner Chelle Hulford. Everyone meets Chelle. She’s an institution, mingling with guests, hosting drinks and chatting with the clientele who love Curtain Bluff, rate it highly and come back time and again. That’s recommendation enough.

Natural haven: The Inn at English Harbour has a genuinely timeless, colonial charm

Lounging in the lap of luxury: The Inn's rooms have recently been refurbished

On our return from Peter Island, we spent two very pleasant nights at the Inn at English Harbour. The harbour is a natural haven for weary craft that are grateful to find peaceful shelter at the end of their travels. The same could be said of the hotel. But don’t be put off: like Curtain Bluff, The Inn has a devoted and regular clientele - though no children under ten (or, it seemed, under 60) - and it has a genuinely timeless, colonial charm.

The three distinctive white-washed, verandahed pavilions that house the hotel’s 24 rooms have recently been refurbished. Although none have baths, they are impressive, with polished wooden floors, period furniture and grand beds, some four-postered. (Book an upstairs room to avoid being disturbed by footsteps above. Nothing to do with a ghost: more the American couple who started pacing the room above ours at 6.30am and were still at it three hours later).



Food should be the hotel's next priority - it could be improved - but the poolside lunches and Thursday night’s beach-side barbecue, accompanied by a steel band, were delicious, and the hotel’s more elegant restaurant, higher up the hill, looked like a beautiful spot to dine. Alas, our flight was too late to let us sample that delight.

Simply fabulous: Rory explores the grounds of his luxury resort on Peter Island

Historic: Nelson's Dockyard is the British Naval Base established in English Harbour in the 1770s

The presence of a dozen or more yachts peacefully at anchor in the harbour is one reason why there are no high-octane watersports, but we took a kayak, and later the hotel’s water taxi, and visited Nelson’s Dockyard, the British Naval Base established in English Harbour in the 1770s. Its grey stone Georgian buildings have been restored and converted for a variety of modern uses, including a hotel and an interesting museum.

There are two other must-do activities on the island. Firstly, hang out at Shirley Heights, high above English Harbour, on a Thursday or Sunday night. Everyone goes to party to the steel bands and enjoy food and drink from local stalls. Secondly (a new one, this), put on your bathers and go to Stingray City, a reef off the coast where you can swim and kneel in the shallow water while feeding friendly stingrays. Children will love it. We did too.

Wet and wild: Stingray City offers swimmers the chance to get up close to the local sea life

But now to the jewel in our Caribbean crown: Peter Island. A private island, owned by the founder of Amway, it’s home to a resort of 52 rooms, the more expensive of which overlook Dead Chest Island, where Blackbeard’s infamous 15 men were allegedly marooned. (‘Yo, ho, ho, and a bottle of rum….’)



Only one pirate supposedly made it over to Peter Island, but he died on the beach. Perhaps he saw the resort’s prices.

In addition to the rooms there are also three beautifully-appointed villas, the largest of which sleeps 12 and is stunningly-designed. Named Falcon's Nest, it boasts an infinity pool, waterfall, guest wings, dining room, double-height reception room - and a $12,000 (£7,300) a night price tag (plus 18 per cent service) to match.

The rest of the resort isn’t cheap either, but apart from the odd gripe on TripAdvisor (NO LOBSTER! shrieked one, with all the indignation of Michael Winner failing to find fresh Parmesan on Barbados), it is simply fabulous.



Of the 1800 lush acres of land, only 300 are developed, meaning it doesn’t feel crowded, and should you wish to walk the 2.5 miles up to the top of the estate to watch the sunset over Norman Island (reputedly the inspiration for Robert Louis Stevenson’s Treasure Island), you will pass just a handful of fellow-guests, on their way to the tennis court or the huge spa for their Ayurvedic treatments.



Peaceful retreat: Of the 1800 lush acres of land on Peter Island, only 300 are developed

Taste for the good life: A chef grills seafood during a beach barbecue on Peter Island

It says something for this exceptional place that you soon forget the effort it took to get here. The final stretch of the journey is a 20-minute ferry trip from Tortola and on the boat you’ll meet some of the 160-odd staff who work here - they live on Tortola and take the ferry each day.



Their friendliness and good humour pervade the resort, and some - like the remarkable Jean Kelly - have been here for decades. In Jean’s case, nearly three decades. She’s the life and soul of Peter Island, in her 80s and still - complete with spectacular hair-do (some of it her own) - ever-present at breakfast, where the must-have coconut-crusted French toast is named after her.



Everything is catered to American standards. And high standards at that.

We were on what’s called the Full American Food Plan, and if you’ve ever seen a Full American, you’ll be able to imagine what was on offer. At breakfast we took our pick from pancakes, granola and maple syrup, omelettes, fruit salad and eggs Benedict, while dinner one night involved a wine tasting and gourmet menu to accompany the wines (but still no lobster).



At night, sitting in the Tradewinds Restaurant, you see the lights of Tortola twinkling like a starcloth across the shimmering sea.

Treasure island: The white sand of Deadman's beach is lapped by the crystal clear Caribbean sea

Stunningly-designed: Falcon's Nest features an infinity pool, waterfall, guest wings, dining room, double-height reception room - and a £7,300 a night price tag

Some nights and most days you can eat at the beach bar, as can day visitors from yachts moored offshore (all beaches in the Virgin Islands are public). Here, and at Tradewinds, Captain will mix you the best Raspberry Mojito or BBC (Baileys, Banana, Coconut) you’ve ever tasted.

By day you may want to lounge on the beach or by the pool - we took a free kayak and Hobie Cat one day - but if the wind is up (Tradewinds is appropriately named on these days, the breeze being quite strong), you should book yourself (early) into one of the six huts on White Bay beach and spend the day on the sheltered side of the island, swimming and snorkelling.

Wherever you go - spa, beach, restaurant - you’re assured a memorable experience. On the ferry back, you’ll share the journey with the homeward shift of hotel staff, many of whom you’ll know by now. 'You’ll be back', they say, laughing. And they’re right. At least I damn well hope they’re right. I’ll start saving now.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Girls go to....Burma? Lucy Verasamy on an unusual voyage in the land that time forgot



I didn't know what to expect on a boat journey through Burma. Nobody I knew had been before - or even considered it for a holiday. My brother had crossed the border from Thailand for the day when travelling, but that was about it. Even the Lonely Planet guide had limited information and a serious lack of photos.

I loved the idea of exploring somewhere 'new', but with such a rich and varied history. I travelled with two girlfriends and we were very aware we were going somewhere remote. Usually glued to our phones, we knew there would be no internet connection and limited phone signals for almost two weeks. It would be a digital detox - the longest I'd been disconnected in years.

Going with the flow: Lucy poses with an officer's hat on her river cruise

The journey took us hundreds of miles north along the Chindwin River, the main tributary of Burma's largest river, the Irrawaddy, and back again. Our home for 11 days was the Orcaella, a new boat launched recently by Orient-Express. Orcaella's clever design means it can travel along a previously unexplored stretch of the silty, Ovaltine-coloured Chindwin. At about half a mile wide but only several feet deep in places, the river becomes too shallow to navigate in the dry season, making the trip possible only five times a year. So the journey is even more special.

We flew with Singapore Airlines to Singapore, then took its sister carrier Silk Air to Burma's capital Rangoon (now called Yangon).



On arrival, the tiredness hit us, but our spirits were lifted when we were met by our guide, Michael, who turned out to be possibly the smiliest person we'd ever encountered. We spent a night in the colonial style Governer's Residence in Rangoon, one of many hotels from Orient-Express - which until now, I had associated with trains rather than hotels and boats. After a good night's sleep, we jumped on a short-hop flight to Mandalay, where a small, traditional motor boat took us from the shore to the middle of the river and finally to Orcaella.

Slow road: A novice monk hitches a lift on a cattle cart

This is what I'd been waiting for! The boat was a home from home. My cabin had the comfiest bed (so much so, I ended up asking where the mattress was from) and its en suite bathroom had a rainwater shower as well as Bulgari shampoos and shower gels. There was wardrobe space for my fortnight's-worth of clothes and more. The floor-to-ceiling sliding windows overlooked the river and the lush banks. It was a perfect view at sunrise and sunset.

Orcaella has 25 cabins and wasn't what I'd expect from a cruise boat. There was plenty of space to yourself if you wanted, but if you felt the need to chat, you could easily bump into the friendly staff or other holidaymakers.

There was a mixture of age groups and nationalities. Everyone kept themselves to themselves at first, but as the time passed we mingled and started dining together. Our table got bigger each evening as the number of place settings grew.

As well as the digital detox, I was hoping for a health detox. I've been to Asia before and the heat and humidity made me lose my appetite. But this was impossible on Orcaella. The food was amazing and stood out as one of the best things about the trip.

Alternative transport: Lucy enjoying a ride at the elephant camp

The chef, Ban, who previously worked at the celebrity detox spa Chiva-Som in Thailand, spoilt us with a huge choice of food every day - and always beautifully presented. We felt so pampered. All meals included Western and Eastern dishes, and some days it was impossible to choose.

Nothing was too much trouble for the kitchen. On request they would rustle up delicious dishes from previous nights, and they remembered anything you disliked, too. I still dream of the after-dinner petits fours - from dark chocolate salted caramels to orange madeleines to homemade squishy marshmallows.

I was glad there was a gym on board. It was compact but had everything needed, as well as windows looking out on the river banks and an endless supply of cold water and cold towels. If the heat got too much, the top deck had a small swimming pool surrounded by sunloungers; here, dragonflies hovered overhead, hopefully eating any lurking mosquitoes. Also on the top deck was the spa. The wafting incense oils smelt amazing. On a rare rainy afternoon, I chose the Vital Energy massage. I loved it. The pressure was just right and I couldn't believe the masseuse was only 19. She was so strong.

As we glided along the river, Burma unfolded in front of us. The scenery was almost hypnotic - you couldn't help but stare. It was a conveyor belt of thick greenery and palm trees, cliff faces and gorges, almost like Jurassic Park. Mist or smoke rose from hilltops in the distance. Now and again there would be pointy golden stuppas and pagodas punctuating the greenery, gleaming as the gold caught the sun. There were excursions pretty much every day and we visited tiny villages and bustling market towns. Each one was so different, whether in size or vibe.

Some of the Burmese were super-shy, but most were very friendly. Some were as curious about us as we were about them. Many had not seen Westerners before and there was barely any Western influence. A few had smartphones and we took it in turns to take photos. Apart from that, all I noticed of the West was a poster of Frank Lampard and the Chelsea team and the catchy tune of a One Direction ringtone.



Stirring for the soul:Temples in Bagan Burma has influences from both Thailand and India. We visited temples and saw Buddhas of every shape and size, some smothered in gold leaf, others painted in traditional colours - and some decorated with flashing LEDs; a bit Vegas and very unexpected!

We saw identically dressed, maroon-robed, barefoot monks quietly weaving through small towns and down dusty rural roads. In the busier towns, people on bikes and motorbikes zipped along pot-holed routes, one hand on the steering and the other cradling a small child or umbrella. In the more rural spots were white cows with skinny haunches pulling wooden carts along dirt tracks, and water buffalo ploughing the fields.

We saw men and women knee-deep in waterlogged rice paddies wearing traditional triangular bamboo hats. Several times we saw older Burmese ladies puffing away on fat home-made cigars. It was almost surreal; like stepping back in time.

Several individual trips stood out. Midway through the journey we headed inland to an elephant camp - a great experience. We got to see the animals close-up while they were bathing and being fed, and got a little snap-happy.

Going to a monastery to see a traditional ceremony was facinating and a privilege. And we visited the traditionally and colourfully dressed Naga tribe - where we joined in with singing and dancing and were offered local food wrapped in banana leaves with rice wine served in a hollowed-out cylinder of bamboo.

Home from home: The new cruise boat Oracaella

It wasn't until this trip that I discovered that Orient-Express funds local development. Orcaella's doctor visits the more rural spots to offer health care and the firm helps to supply, maintain and build schools. We were all struck by the impeccable behaviour of the children. During the trip I never saw any babies or children screaming or crying - not one tantrum. They were super-cute, too. If I ever adopt, I'd quite like a Burmese baby! And the adults looked so youthful.



It turned out our guide Michael was a good ten years older than we thought. There must be something in the water...Michael couldn't have been more helpful and patient, or better at gauging how much information to give us so it wasn't overwhelming. As well as passing on his calming Buddhist philosophy, he showed us how to make a gold-leaf Buddha 'wish', helped us barter for bamboo bags and found the best places for photos - a big advantage when we reached Bagan, known as the city of 2,000 temples.



The view from one took our breath away. As we wilted in the heat and humidity, Michael was immaculate, cool as a cucumber and unflustered in his well-pressed shirt and traditional Burmese longhi (sarong). There was not a bead of sweat on his brow.



On hotter days, it was a relief to return to the air-conditioning of the boat. To travel so many miles and see so much of a country, but have to unpack only once and have a full laundry service, was a great luxury.



There was plenty to keep us entertained in the evenings. We dressed up for sunset cocktails on the upper deck - I had packed a few maxi-dresses, thinking this, along with Deet spray, was the best way to avoid evening mosquitoes. But the gentle breeze from the river kept biters at bay. And having learnt that the British in colonial India used the quinine in tonic water as a natural anti-malarial, enjoying G&Ts was not just decadent but practical too.

One very warm evening we transferred by tuk-tuk to a colonial-style house for dinner by candlelight where we were greeted with champagne and enjoyed a delicious three-course gourmet barbecue.

At night, in the middle of the river in the heart of rural Burma, there were inky-black skies - so when we launched paper lanterns from the top deck, the sight was stunning.



I saw so much in two weeks, and being cut off from the rest of the world meant stresses melted away. It was relaxing but also eye-opening; an insight into another world Burma is beautifully unspoilt and remote, and I hope that it doesn't change too much. I came home with a memory bank fit to burst with beautiful images and special moments - plus two mozzie bites and a bag full of homemade marshmallows!

Travel Facts

Singapore Airlines (singaporeair.com) offers flights from Heathrow and Manchester to Singapore. Onward connections to Rangoon are operated by both Singapore Airlines and SilkAir. Return fares from £655. When connecting through Changi airport before September 30, 2014, passengers can claim £20 of vouchers to spend in transit.

An 11-night cruise on Orcaella exploring the Chindwin River starts from £4,500 and includes meals, excursions, transfers and domestic flights. For more details, visit orcaella.net or call 0845 077 2222.












@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ben Fogle on working up an appetite for the Azores... and sampling volcanic hot pot

I have been obsessed with islands since I was a child. My young imagination was sparked by books such as Treasure Island, Lord Of The Flies and other works of fiction whose plots are inextricably linked with exotic blobs of land surrounded by oceans. This obsession has continued into adulthood. Indeed, I have an island to thank for my career as a broadcaster.

My experience in the BBC reality show Castaway 2000 - when I was marooned with 35 others on the isle of Taransay in the Outer Hebrides - led to the television presenting roles that catapulted me to fame. Since then I have visited islands as remote as St Helena in the South Atlantic and the Pitcairns in the South Pacific.

Spring time: Ben relaxes in the warm water at Terra Nostra Park

So after marrying into a family who love holidaying in Portugal, it was only a matter of time before I visited the Azores. I've always been intrigued by this chain of islands 850 miles west of the coast of Portugal and I was smitten soon after arriving.

The nine islands all have volcanic origins and the contrast between the fiery lava-rich soil and the lush green vegetation is breathtaking. A dip in the hot springs at Ponta Da Ferraria on São Miguel island is a must for any visitor. It's a natural swimming pool on the coast formed by lava.

Sea water flowing into the pool is heated by a bubbling spring that pumps out water at a piping 60C. Thermal springs have had an important bearing on the culinary traditions of the Azores. At Furnas Lake, also on São Miguel, you can have 'Cozido nas caldeiras' (meat and veg stew) cooked for seven hours in pots buried 3ft deep in the ground - a kind of volcanic hot pot.

Soaring beauty: Mount Pico seen from the city of Horta on the Island of Faial

Energetic travellers to the Azores should climb the tallest peak on the islands - and indeed the whole of Portugal: the 7,713ft Mount Pico on the isle of Pico. It's a challenging trip - which requires a guide - but the reward is a mesmerising view over the ocean from the summit. While there are plenty of activities to keep you entertained on shore, no trip to these islands would be complete without some whale-watching.

The seas around the Azores provide one of the best habitats in the world for marine mammals, and more than 24 species of whales have been sighted in these waters.

I headed out to sea early in the morning in a fast inflatable boat in the hope of glimpsing one of these magnificent creatures. Our boat leapt from wave to wave as we headed deep into the Atlantic swell.

There are few sights as majestic as that of a breaching sperm whale. These marine mammals, which measure up to 65ft, are elusive but with patience you will be rewarded with an experience that will take your breath away.



Travel Facts

Sunvil (sunvil.co.uk, 020 8758 4722) offers packages to the Azores from £601. The price includes seven nights' B&B at the Hotel Talisman in Ponta Delgada, capital of the Azores on São Miguel, return flights from Gatwick to Ponta Delgada with Sata International and transfers.

For more information on the Azores, go to visitazores.com.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rochelle, Marvin and baby Alaia-Mai just can't get enough... of the Maldives!



The Maldives have been the beautiful backdrop to the most special times of my life – so it should be no surprise to learn that they've become the No 1 holiday destination for me and my husband, Marvin. We first came here at the end of 2011 – and got engaged.



We loved it, and after we were married, there was only one choice for the honeymoon. We returned at the end of 2012 as Mr and Mrs Humes. Then, at the end of last year, we were back again, and this time as a trio, with our seven-month-old daughter Alaia-Mai. So what is it we like so much about the Maldives that has attracted us three times in three years?



Totally tranquil: Rochelle and Marvin relax on Kanifushi

A big thing for us, both being in the public eye, is that you can be sure of privacy. It's also somewhere you feel very safe. Another draw is that everybody who works there treats you so warmly. Returning this time with Alaia-Mai, we really noticed how great people in the Maldives are with children. They all really wanted to make our visit a great experience.



Having been there twice before, we didn't have any anxieties about taking Alaia-Mai, even though she was very young – and she enjoyed every minute of our time there because she got so much fuss! We flew out on the day after Boxing Day as I can't bear that lull between Christmas and New Year. The break was tricky to organise because Marvin had just finished an especially busy time with the JLS farewell tour, and was lined up to take over as co-presenter of the new series of BBC1's The Voice as soon as we got back.



Paradise found: The main pool on the ocean at Atmosphere resort

Thankfully, getting to the Maldives is surprisingly easy. We flew direct with British Airways to the islands' capital, Male, and then boarded a seaplane to take us to the new Atmosphere resort at Kanifushi. I'm actually really scared of flying – I can get petrified, and was dreading the seaplane experience. But, funnily enough, I liked mal' plane. One definite plus was that the landing on the sea was a much more gentle experience than touching down on a runway in a big jet. We didn't really know what to expect from Atmosphere as it's a brand new resort – but being in the Maldives, I knew that we were in for a treat.



And Kanifushi didn't disappoint. What we most wanted to do once we'd arrived was to put up our feet up and switch off. The Maldives are definitely the place for this: there's pure tranquillity everywhere. Every view looks like something from a picture postcard or an illustration from a travel magazine, and I've never seen water so blue. While we were looking to enjoy some relaxing time, it's certainly not just a 'fly-and-flop' place.



Quenching an island thirst: Rochelle tweets a photo home

You can have a very active holiday if you want to. A host of water sports are available – Marvin loves scuba-diving here – and you can take excursions to see dolphins out at sea or head out to look at some more of the islands that make up the Maldives. There was one activity we were most looking forward to: the resort's New Year's Eve party. We knew from previous experience that they know how to throw a good party in the Maldives. Sure enough, the celebration at Kanifushi was fantastic.



We had a fine dinner on the beach followed by fireworks, then live music and a great DJ set. Did we get up and sing? No – but maybe if we'd had a few more mojitos...

For children older than Alaia-Mai, the resort has a great kids' club where they put on all sorts of fantastic things, such as fashion shows and treasure hunts, tennis, volleyball and football. And, of course, there's PlayStation on tap. Meals at the resort are incredible.



Everything is always very fresh and healthy. Marvin and I love fresh fish and great fruit and there was always a lot of both available here. And there's an amazing variety of eating places to choose from. Just Veg is the first vegetarian restaurant in the Maldives and serves cuisine from the Mediterranean, Arabic and Indian regions. Teppanyaki Grill claims to offer 'an authentic Teppanyaki experience', so diners share a table surrounding a large hotplate. The Spice is the main restaurant offering a varied menu of different cuisines, and all fabulous.



Beach baby: Daughter Alaia-Mai has fun on the beach

Our favourite food is Japanese, so we ate a lot of sushi. The main restaurant had a big barbecue every night with fresh fish and meats, which was also great. In the Maldives, informality is the watchword, and that was just what we needed as in our working lives we have to be so busy. When I'm going to be on stage, for example,



I spend so much time having to get all dressed up. So the laid-back style of the Maldives came as a welcome break. We've been back in Britain for only a few months and already we're dreaming of our next trip – counting the days until we can get back to the Maldives for another blissful family holiday. We can't wait.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Australia's hippest hop spot: Cuisine, calm and the chicest retreat on Kangaroo Island



There's nothing like running on a beach. And if that beach is on South Australia's Kangaroo Island, with its pristine sands and turquoise waters, then it's a truly wonderful sensation.

I must admit I've never really been much of a runner. But after a glorious month-long tour of Australia and having piled on the inevitable pounds, I found myself on one of the most beautiful stretches of sand on Earth being put through my paces by a former chef at famous London restaurant The Ivy.

Jump to it: Sian meets one of the locals (sort of) at the Southern Ocean Lodge

Sue Pearson is something of a legend on Kangaroo Island.

She arrived in this wilderness more than ten years ago and now runs 'the best fish and chip shop in the world', according to one local newspaper. She also runs a four-day training programme called Soul To Sole. It's basically away of getting yourself in shape while exercising and eating healthily.

I loved every second of my mini-fitness venture and just wish I could replicate it at the end of every holiday.

My husband Jonathan and I were staying at the much-acclaimed Southern Ocean Lodge on Kangaroo Island, or KI to the locals.

The island is a 30-minute flight from Adelaide. Alternatively, you can do an easy 90-minute drive through world-class wine country and board a ferry on the Fleurieu Peninsula.

Whichever option you choose, you will get the sense of being in a very special place from the moment you arrive.

KI is roughly the size of Kent, and a microcosm of different Australian landscapes.

It's the place to see the best of Australia if you don't have time to see the whole country. Even on our short trip from the airport, we glimpsed bushland, eucalyptus woods, white sandy dunes and spectacular seascapes. And there were, unsurprisingly, a lot of kangaroos.

The Southern Ocean Lodge is perched on the island's wild south coast. It is a mind-blowingly beautiful location, with the sweeping white sands of Hanson Bay visible from every part of the resort. Each time we were greeted by the panorama, we couldn't help but say: 'Wow!'

On our first day, a friendly member of staff took us through our personalised itinerary as we sipped a glass of bubbly. We'd advised staff beforeoffered hand that we wanted to walk on rugged clifftops and cycle on empty roads.

As we chatted, a tanned and toned blonde woman walked towards us. We exchanged greetings and she introduced herself as Sue Pearson. Within a matter of minutes, I was readily agreeing to take part in the Soul To Sole fitness experience with her on the final day of our break.

A view to remember: As its name suggests, the hotel looks out towards the Southern Ocean

Staff clearly take pride in the Southern Ocean Lodge and couldn't wait to show us our suite. Each of the 21 guest rooms is named after a local shipwreck and they snake gently down the hillside towards Hanson Bay.

Our room was the pinnacle of luxury living, and if there hadn't been so much to do during our stay, I would have loved to spend more time on the heated terrace, snuggled up with alpaca blankets and books, soaking up the drama of the Southern Ocean and watching the weather change.

Our suite's walk-in wardrobe and bed were enormous, while the wooden floors of the lounge segued into soft carpet in the bedroom and heated limestone tiles in the huge bathroom.

Occupying centre-stage in the bathroom was a spectacular wooden tub. There was such attention to detail throughout. There was a Bose music system, cosy eco-fire, a fridge bursting with local food and drink, organic linens and even a tan leather toilet-roll holder.

And I don't know whether it was the KI water, the hairdryer or the shampoo infused with native lemon myrtle and wild lavender, but my hair had never looked and felt so good.

We spent the next two days exploring Kangaroo Island.

It is Australia's third-biggest island, and actually larger than we thought at almost 100 miles long and 34 miles wide. It' is also home to about 4,500 people. The guided tours in 4WD comfort with Exceptional Kangaroo Island were superb. A third of the island is a national park, with stunning natural features such as the wind-sculpted Remarkable Rocks and Admirals Arch in Flinders Chase. There, we watched seals being hurled against the rocks before swimming back to do it all again.

Then we went to Seal Bay and found ourselves within touching distance of these wonderful mammals. It's one of the rare places on Earth where you can actually walk with sea lions on the sands. No wonder they call this area the Galapagos of Australia.

Ogling animals in a zoo is simply not the same as viewing them in the wild. We saw koalas munching away in eucalyptus trees, dolphins frolicking and seal pups learning to swim. We also went stargazing and came across penguins on the beach.

In the resort's restaurants, there's a distinct focus on seafood, as you might expect, with plenty of sweet crayfish, scallops and King George whiting. But there's also an abundance of produce such as organic lamb and honey. In fact, here the world's only pure Ligurian bee colonies produce highly prized honey. I bought several pots of this liquid gold to take home as presents, along with delicious native jams and pretty decent bottles of sauvignon blanc.

Soaking up the scenery: Sian does her best Mae West impression in her suite's giant bath

For my hardcore final day of exercise, I braced myself by feasting on lavish seafood suppers and getting acquainted with local wines. The hotel boasts the biggest and best stocked open bar I have ever seen, but staff are always on hand to mix cocktails or dig out unusual wines.

The service is seamless but laid-back at the same time.

Guests can be as sociable or as private as they want to be. We were both. The kitchen prepared us picnics for our bike rides a deux, but we also got chatting to some nice people at the lovely Li'Tya Spa in the grounds and joined them for a jolly supper one evening.

Our final morning in paradise dawned all too quickly, and I found myself on the white-sand beach of Emu Bay, nervous about the day ahead, yet curiously excited at the same time. Since most of my holiday clothes by now had become ridiculously tight, I was also grateful for the prospect of burning off a few calories. Sue and I jogged, chatted and laughed a lot - there's something about the sound of crashing waves that makes you forget you're exercising.

One of the aims of Soul To Sole is to increase nutritional knowledge and gain culinary skills.

Sue cooked me lunch in her own home and it was wonderful: seasoned scallops with vegetables grown nearby, followed by sweet and fluffy local ricotta served with home-grown figs and a drizzle of honey. The flavours were simple yet sublime.

Kangaroo Island is the place where all my expectations of a perfect holiday were realised. I've travelled extensively in Australia, but the uber-chic take on wilderness at the Southern Ocean Lodge, coupled with Soul To Sole, beat it all. It's not cheap, but then good things rarely are.

Mae West once said that too much of a good thing is wonderful.

When you are sitting in a wooden bath, sipping champagne and watching baby seals frolic in the waters below, you know what she meant.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the trail of Robbie Williams: Stoke plans 40th birthday tourist route to honour singer



From the humble Tupelo home of Elvis Presley to Walthamstow Stadium, where David Beckham once collected glasses , you're nobody until somebody creates a tourist trail about you.



Now the city of Stoke is about to bestow the same honour on its most famous son. To celebrate Robbie Williams turning 40, his place of birth has come up with a specially designated route that promises to take fans on a tour of the landmarks where the young singer spent his childhood.



Gutted: Robbie Williams will stay in LA for his 40th birthday but Stoke will party anyway, launching a tourist trail in his honour

Included are Vale Park, home to Port Vale, the crooner's favourite football team; houses he used to live in and The Queen's Theatre, where he once trod the boards as the Artful Dodger in Oliver! A bus tour is also planned on the weekend of his actual birthday, February 13th.



Perhaps the ultimate accolade comes in the form of a blue plaque, which will be unveiled in front of the singer's parents in a ceremony in a park in the Tunstall area of the city.



Essential viewing: The Port Vale ground where Robbie supported his team as a child

Although Williams used his blog to express his gratitude for the acknowledgement, he won't be in attendance, blaming a 'surprise few days' planned in LA by his wife Ayda Field.



The singer said: 'She’s gutted, I’m gutted and we all wish that we could be there. I've got a work trip to Australia immediately after which makes it a geographic impossibility because I'm in LA right now.'

He added: 'When my dad first started to tell me about the plans to honour my birthday I thought it was going to be a small affair.

'But as the weeks have gone on it seems that things have somewhat snowballed. I actually can't get my head around it.

'It all feel like it's happening to someone else, someone who's far more deserving.'

Pete Conway, Williams' father, told local paper The Sentinel that he was a 'very proud dad'.



'It's wonderful. I am looking forward to it. It's quite incredible to see the civic honours being bestowed on Rob.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From Coronation Street to Canada: The show's stars take a whirlwind Ontario tour

It's strange but true, Coronation Street is massive in Canada. We were there for a tour of shows around Ontario, telling stories of our characters in the show – Eileen and Paul – and the Corrie cobbles.

It only seemed right then, after a week of waxing lyrical about Weatherfield, that we took off to explore one of Canada's largest provinces. We went in search of adventure, to recharge our batteries and indulge our passion for food and wine – and started at one of Ontario's crown jewels, the incredible Niagara Falls.

Natural beauty: A rainbow stretches over the famous Niagara Falls

There is something humbling about the power of the Falls and despite the noise, mist and constant lashing, it is compelling.

From the Falls, we moved downstream 20 minutes to the genteel charm of Niagara On The Lake, a picture-perfect town famed for some of Canada's great theatre, old world feel and fantastic wineries.



Had we not set ourselves a strict itinerary, we could still be ambling from vineyard to vineyard now, not just tasting the iconic ice-wine – a dessert wine from grapes that have been frozen while on the vine – but drinking our way through Ontario's hidden gems: their great reds and whites.

Knee-wobbling: Toronto's iconic CN Tower

We ate and sampled as much as we could at the wineries of Peller and Inniskillin. The tasting menu at Peller was divine and drinking the glorious Inniskillin Vidal ice-wine as we sat among the vines on which it grew will live long in our memory.



Alas, we had to leave to dive headfirst into the wonderful, multicultural city of Toronto. Canada's largest city sits on the shore of the mighty Lake Ontario. It has all a big city has to offer – huge skyscrapers, sports spectacles with the Blue Jays baseball and Maple Leafs hockey teams and a world-class art collection in the Art Gallery of Ontario.



But Toronto is far from a hubbub, it's unbelievably calm and clean and relaxed. So, there we were for two fun-filled nights of cosmopolitan life including the knee-wobbling trip to the top of the CN Tower.



We gorged on sublime cod's tongues at Rodney's Oyster Bar and drank Canada's finest contribution to cocktail culture, the Caesar – vodka, spice and clamato (a mix of salty clam broth and reconstituted tomato juice).



Everyone claimed to make the best one and recipes included pickled beans, shrimp, oysters and one with a rasher of bacon.



Having sampled so many, we declare the version made at The Sheraton Hotel in Hamilton the best. We also became experts on poutine, a street dish of chips, gravy and cheese curds. Alongside Betty's hotpot, chips and gravy is a Weatherfield staple and to find it in such abundance 3,500 miles from home was very welcome.



Cheers: Sue and Tony, seated right, visit the Inniskillin winery where they sampled ice-wine

From Toronto, we jumped aboard the fantastic Via Rail train to head north east to Canada's capital, Ottawa. It's smallish, dominated by the government buildings and all the trappings of offices and suits that come with it. However, again it's pristine, and great to explore on foot, which was lucky because it was Rib Fest during our visit.

The streets were thick with hickory smoke and a brisk walk was just what was needed to burn off more excess. The food in Murray Street market was fantastic and made us desperate to buy, go home and cook.



Fortunately though, we found Whalesbone on the corner of Gladstone and Bank, a small bar and restaurant specialising in Canadian seafood. We had oysters washed down with Ontario riesling. But the revelation was spicy clams, deep-fried in beer batter in their shells – possibly the greatest bar snack we'd ever sunk our teeth into, albeit very carefully.



Breathtaking beauty: Algonquin National Park offers complete isolation, silence and beauty

The following day – with heavy heads and hearts – we set off for the four-hour drive north east to Algonquin National Park. As we approached and started to take in the breathtaking beauty of the trees, our heads began to clear and our hearts soared.



They positively skipped several beats when we arrived at our lakeside accommodation of Arowhon Pines – a remote setting of luxury log cabins deep in the wilderness. Here, we took a canoe and disappeared into complete isolation, silence and beauty.



Its effect after a week of Weatherfield-fuelled madness was hypnotic. We paddled and drifted and sat and stared. Without a care or witnessing another soul, its beauty was beyond words and the peace beyond anything either of us has ever found. Ontario provided us with several holidays in one. And, if you go, can you get us some clamato juice? After such an incredible holiday, we need a Caesar.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@'Guidebooks aren't holiday bibles': Simon Reeve on getting the best from your travels



BBC presenter Simon Reeve is known for his numerous adventure travel series that have taken him on at least three laps around the globe, so it seems only fitting that he is calling me from Varanasi, in India, for our interview.

The man behind the programmes Tropic of Capricorn, Tropic of Cancer, Indian Ocean and Pilgrimage is currently filming a new series, Sacred Rivers, looking at the world's most iconic waterways and how they have shaped our lives.

'The reason people first settled along rivers is that we saw them as holy,' he explains. 'For this series we're travelling along the Ganges, Yangtze and the Nile, dipping in and out of interesting and sacred places along the way.'

In search of adventure: Simon has circumnavigated the globe multiple times for his varying travel series

The world's holiest city for Hindus, Varanasi has certainly impressed the adventurer.

'It is pretty extraordinary. Beautiful, ancient, dirty, joyous, upsetting - the intensity of life in India is taken up to level 11. We were just filming the cremation area on the river earlier, they were constantly bringing new bodies along, limbs were falling off as the bodies were burned, it's gruesome, but incredible.'

A long-time traveller, who spent plenty of time backpacking from place to place before he discovered that he could make travel his living, Simon is also working with Lastminute.com to encourage people to travel more spontaneously.

So does he live by his own advice?

'I have a young son, so I'm almost required to be spontaneous. We're not beholden to school holidays at the moment, just to his mood, so we have to remain completely adaptable.

'But in the past I managed to be more spontaneous. I can remember one trip in which I turned up at Stansted Airport with two friends planning to buy tickets to Spain. Somehow we decided to go to Copenhagen instead and when we turned up it was freezing cold, three of us didn't have coats, two of us were wearing flip flops. It was a comedy of muppetry and errors. But one of the most pleasurable experiences in life is a proper adventure with mates, being cast into a foreign land, there's a lot to be said for it.'

Of course, there must limits to heading off on a whim to explore a new destination. While Simon may be willing to turn up under-dressed in Denmark, where does he draw the line when it comes to planning an impulsive but safe independent trip?



Indian experience: The star is currently filming in the sacred Hindu city of Varanasi

Chaotic scenes: Hindu pilgrims visit Varanasi to bathe in the Ganges river

'The first thing I'd say is never arrive late in the afternoon, you really need to get there with plenty of time to have a look around and decide where to stay.

'Secondly, d on’t get too hung up on review sites, most of them talk cobblers. Don’t follow the crowd, trust people, but not too much, and when things go wrong, remember those are some of the most memorable times you can have. Things rarely go catastrophically wrong, normally they just provide an opportunity for you to soak up life where you are, in a way that you can’t get in a western-run hotel.'

The importance of creating your own experience is key, says Simon.



'Try to make your own itinerary. I'm not advocating ditching the guide book, they are absolutely invaluable for information. But sometimes with guides, it's a case of the tail that wags the dog. People follow its advice rather than their own instincts and desires - it’s a reference book not a religious text to follow to the letter. '

It seems Simon has strong opinions on the use of guidebooks.

'Many years ago, in a relationship I was in the early stages of having, I went back to this girl's house and was looking at her bookshelf. There was any number of guidebooks, endlessly marked up with those sticky page highlighters, the books were covered. I think I decided then that she wasn't right for me. I fear of that type of travel, "we will go to this place this place this place".



'Although, of course, there is a balance between casting caution to the wind and rocking up in Paris at 1.30am with nowhere to stay and planning an adventure three years in advance. '

Unspoilt: Laos is one of Simon's recommendations as it is still unblemished by mass tourism

Thanks largely to his voyages off the beaten track - in 2003, his series Meet the Stans explored Central Asia, and in 2005, Places That Don't Exist saw him visiting unrecognised nations, such as Somalia, Azerbaijan and Trans-Dniester, where he was arrested for 'spying' - he has become a bit of a pin-up for independent travellers.

So for those who, like Simon, enjoy nothing more than grabbing a backpack, travelling light and heading off into the unknown, what are the top destinations to visit this year?

African gem: Mozambique, with its wildlife and spotless islands, is Simon's hot tip

' What has fascinated me about people’s adventures is that in the past, people were happy to go to Macchu Picchu and the outer reaches of Thailand, but now people want to go further than that. The opportunities we have now are extraordinary.



'Laos is one place I'd suggest. It’s very unspoilt and people rightly associate that with a lack of facilities eg indoor toilets but for those willing to experience a few minor hardships for a greater trip, it's worth it.



'I also think Mozambique is extraordinary, it has a really wonderful vibe. It used to get vast numbers of visitors until the civil war but now it is slowly on the up. My mind and heart are constantly drawn back to Africa, it's an extraordinary continent offering a rich mix of experiences and generally people are not put off by negative stories.'

But Simon is also keen to get away from the belief that you have to get as far as possible to have an adventure.



'You can have exciting and memorable experiences close to home. I am rather taken by the idea that you take a glass, upturn it on a map of your area then draw ring around rim. Then explore that circle so you know it like back of hand. It's all too easy to travel other side of earth and not know your home area. Our island has a lot going for it, it is stunningly beautiful.'

But for now it is back to filming Sacred Rivers and the colourful scenes along the Ganges.

Nowhere like home: He may have visited more than 90 countries, but Simon also loves exploring his local area

' For those looking at making travel plans, I'd say do it now. I’ve just seen bodies being cremated in Varanasi. Life is so short and people put big trips off, thinking they have got to highlight every page of a guidebook before they go. Just head out and have an adventure.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cornwall, LA glamour and tasting lamb's tongue: Checking In with Nadia Sawalha



Go west: Nadia Sawalha loves nothing more than escaping to Cornwall

The TV presenter and budding chef talks tasty holidays, her love of Cornwall and the importance of removing your moustache even when abroad...



IN WHICH COUNTRY DO YOU FEEL MOST AT HOME?



South London but my spiritual home is Cornwall. Where I spent my childhood summer holidays. Now we stay in Sennen Cove. Sennen beach is just the most beautiful one I've ever visited.



WHO IS YOUR IDEAL TRAVEL COMPANION?



My husband Mark. We love the same places - Cornwall, Barcelona and New York.



YOUR MOST MEMORABLE TRAVEL DESTINATION?



Los Angeles. We hired a house in the Hollywood Hills, which was once owned by Orson Welles. I loved the food, the people, the energy, everything about it.



THE THREE BEST THINGS TO DO THERE?



The Universal Studios Tour. The ArcLight cinema on Sunset Boulevard where movie goers can dine before or during a film. The beaches are a must: Paradise Cove is gorgeous and we loved Santa Monica.



WITH MONEY NO OBJECT, WHERE IN THE WORLD WOULD YOU HAVE DINNER?



The hotel Il San Pietro di Positano in Positano, Italy. Jamie Oliver spent his honeymoon there. It's built into the cliffs and has a huge veranda with the best views of the Amalfi coast.



Italian idyll: Nadia would love to try the food at the hotel Il San Pietro di Positano

WHAT IS THE STRANGEST DISH YOU'VE EATEN ON YOUR TRAVELS?



Baked lamb's tongue in Morocco. I had to slice bits off it and dip it in cumin and salt. It was slimy, gristly and not very nice.



WHAT DO YOU NEVER TRAVEL WITHOUT?



My hair-removing cream for my moustache and a homeopathic kit.



RECOMMEND A HOLIDAY READ?



The thriller Hangover Square by Patrick Hamilton.



WHERE TO NEXT?



I want to experience the vibrancy of India.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Oz at its bouncing best: England's cricket team (and Piers Morgan's ribs) take a pasting Down Under

One day,' I promised my sons Spencer, Stanley and Bertie, years ago, 'we will go and watch the Ashes in Australia.' After England's rampant 3-0 victory in last summer's contest, the perfect time appeared to have arrived.



'We're going to the 4th and 5th Test matches in Melbourne and Sydney,' I declared in September.



'What if it's already over by then?' asked Stanley, 16.



'It won't be.' I chuckled. 'Not even this Aussie team could lose the first three games at home.'



It's a family affair: Piers with sons Stanley, Bertie and Spencer at the Sydney Opera House

Thus emboldened, I splashed out a sum of money approaching the national debt of Estonia to book us all flights from various parts of the world (me direct on Qantas from Los Angeles, my sons and youngest brother Rupert from London via Singapore Airlines) and well-recommended hotels in both cities.



Today we arrived in Melbourne with the Ashes already lost. Stanley's ominous comment had come true, though inexplicably, it was England who had capitulated so catastrophically. It was like arriving at a war zone moments after your country has surrendered.



Oh, and just to add to the misery, it was raining!



But we comforted ourselves with an excellent dinner at Squires Loft steakhouse, run by an old South African friend of England batsman Kevin Pietersen. The culinary fare was considerably tastier than KP's batting so far on this tour. In fact, I've been tweeting my disappointment at the lack of courage shown by our batsmen, prompting former Australian fast bowler Brett Lee to throw down a gauntlet: facing him for an over in the nets this week. Bring it on...

Danger zone: Piers is struck by a bouncer from former Australian fast bowler Brett Lee

Monday 23 December



Our hotel in Melbourne is The Olsen, a cool, arty boutique property nestling in the equally cool, arty Chapel Street. It's filled with works by famed Australian artist John Olsen, and the rooms are spacious and well-appointed, with notably comfortable beds. Add two excellent restaurants, a decent spa and gym, and one of the world's most helpful chief concierges in Paul Rumpff, and I feel immediately relaxed.



Tonight, former England captain Michael Vaughan invited us to a barbecue (he cooked, and surprisingly well too) and 'garden cricket' at the luxury home he's been renting. A titanic battle ended under floodlights with his eight-year-old son Archie hitting an immaculate, elegant 71 not out as my much older sons peppered him with bouncers, beamers and yorkers. He's got a wonderful cover drive, pull shot, and ruthless determination to spend all day at the crease. Remember the name.

Tuesday 24 December



Spent the morning shopping in Chapel Street, which is like a long, slim version of London's Carnaby Street. The weather's been all over the place - hot and sunny one minute, cold, cloudy and rainy the next. Apparently, it's often like this. Must be why so many Brits emigrate here - it reminds them of home. Dinner was at Caffe e Cucina, a local Italian restaurant. Cheap, cheerful and excellent value. Have the spaghetti vongole - it's quite delicious.

Wednesday 25 December



Christmas in a hot country is weird. I tried it in Los Angeles two years ago and hated it. I like my yuletide festivities to be surrounded by snow, lots of decorations and endless carols. Melbourne had none of these, and didn't feel remotely Christmassy. Most locals go to the beach.



We headed for lunch to No 8 by John Lawson at the Crown Casino and Entertainment complex, where at least they supplied crackers with terrible jokes, silly hats, and an even sillier Santa Claus. They also supplied a quite magnificent traditional Christmas meal, all washed down with fine Puligny Montrachet and Chateau Margaux as the dulcet tones of 1,000 Barmy Army fans, and the Australian team, filled the air from two large suites nearby where they, too, were celebrating the big day.



Chef Lawson is an Essex boy done good. He used to work for Gordon Ramsay, and that pedigree shows in the cooking - this is a top-class restaurant.



At the next table was the widow of legendary Australian tycoon Kerry Packer. Over brandy, I asked Ros if it was true that Kerry once told a Texan cattleman in a casino who was boasting of being worth $100 million: 'I'll toss you for it.' She smiled. 'Yes. Most crazy stories about Kerry are true! It would have been his birthday tomorrow.' We raised our glasses to a great, swashbuckling character who changed cricket for ever, and for much the better, in the mid-1970s with his World Series tournament.

Easy to get around: Trams make their way through a sunny Melbourne

Thursday 26 December



Boxing Day at the Melbourne Test match is one of the most famous sporting occasions in the country, and it didn't disappoint. Our day started with breakfast inside the ground to support the Shane Warne Foundation, which has raised more than £5 million for sick children. A host of stars were there, including Sky Sports commentator David 'Bumble' Lloyd, who told the story of how Jeff Thomson - the fastest-ever bowler - once hit him square in the box during a Test match. As he retold the tale in fabulously gruesome detail, you could actually see tears start to well up in his eyes at the memory.



The MCG is the biggest stadium in cricket, and today we became part of history when the crowd was confirmed at a new world record of 91,092. It's hard to overstate how intense the atmosphere was by about 4pm, when a throbbing mass of drunken Aussies howled on their bowlers to dismember our batsmen. It was how I imagine Rome's Colosseum must have looked and felt back in ancient times.

Tonight, we dined at a superb Italian restaurant called Becco with Sir Viv Richards, the most exciting batsman I ever saw, and an utterly charming man. 'Have the seafood pasta,' he advised. I did, and it was superb. Henry Blofield, commentator extraordinaire, walked past, spied our table, and came over to say hello. Or rather to say: 'My dear old things, how simply delightful to see you!' He really does speak like that off-air, too. A national treasure.

Friends reunited: Piers and Brett Lee make up over a couple of bottles of wine

Friday 27 December



AsI outlined in my Event magazine column earlier this month, a baying mob of 5,000 people amassed around the MCG nets as I faced Brett Lee, who hurtled in like a man possessed. After I'd survived the first two deliveries, the third ball - a ferocious 90mph bouncer - crashed into my back as I ducked, resulting in a loud crack, while the fourth whacked my hip. The fifth hit the stumps, while I managed to dodge the final ball. 'I'm still alive!' I gasped when it was all over. Yes, I was battered and bruised but it also was one of the most thrilling moments of my life.

Sunday 29 December



Been here for a week now, and loved it - even though I'm nursing a broken rib thanks to Brett's 90mph bouncer on Friday. The city is very British in many ways, with the same kind of houses and shopping areas, weather, and sarcastic but warm humour. Everyone we've met has been amazingly friendly and welcoming. Australia is a delightful country.



The Olsen's proven to be a perfect location. It's a well-run but at the same time pleasingly laid-back hotel. To my sons' joy it also backs on to school football pitches which the public can use. Thus, most afternoons a titanic battle of wit, skill and stamina ensues between creaking age (my brother and me) and volatile youth.



The regular verbal 'sledging' jousts almost rival the actual football for quality. Or as my youngest boy Bertie put it tonight: 'Dad, there's been a lot of high-class bantering on the Banter-Bus today.'



Monday 30 December

Flew to Sydney for the second leg of our holiday. It's a very different city to Melbourne, much busier, and more vibrant. And with more consistently good weather.



Our hotel is the QT, part of the same group as the Olsen. It's a designer boutique place, where you're greeted by a striking, beaming redhead in full basque-leather uniform, one of several such women dubbed 'Directors of Chaos'. She epito-mises the sense of sexy, quirky fun about the whole hotel.

Our rooms are great, stocked with enough DIY martini kits and other fancy party-related treats to keep James Bond happy for days.

And the lifts are pure comedy, with the music tailored precisely to how many people are standing in it. If there's only one person then Lonely by Akon plays; two people and it's Just The Two Of Us; eight and you get 50 Cent's In Da Club.

Flying the flag: The Australian cricket team celebrate a 5-0 whitewash over England in Sydney

But the real star for me is the Gowings bar and restaurant. The food, service and drinks are some of the best I've enjoyed in any hotel anywhere in the world.



Tonight, the boys stayed in to watch movies (they're all free for guests at the QT, a nice touch) while Rupert and I joined my rib-breaking tormentor Brett Lee and his elder brother Shane (who also played for Australia) for dinner at Bathers' Pavilion in Balmoral, reputed to be Sydney's best restaurant. It's in an idyllic setting, nestled on a gorgeous quiet beach.



We had oysters, steaks and two magnums of Penfolds and talked cricket for four hours. My idea of a perfect night!

Tuesday 31 December



The QT is a five-minute walk from Darling Harbour, a buzzy area of restaurants, shops and tourist attractions. We had a couple of good seafood meals at the Blue Fish Cafe during the week, and a very palatable takeaway Indian curry from Zaaffran.



Tonight, thanks to the ingenuity of QT promotions chief Stephen Howard, we got on to the 35th-floor roof of the Shangri-La hotel on Sydney Harbour, overlooking the iconic Sydney Bridge and Opera House for the New Year's Eve fireworks. It was a stunning vantage point for what is an absolutely stunning display. Though I was amused to see that at precisely midnight, almost every single guest on the roof pulled out their phone and began taking 'selfies'. We're truly heading to an age where every second of one's life must be instantly recorded and imparted on to friends via Facebook, or complete strangers via Twitter, as a matter of urgency.

Quirky fun: Guests at the QT hotel in Sydney are greeted by a redhead in full basque-leather uniform - one of several such women dubbed 'Directors of Chaos'

Wednesday 1 January



Did a few touristy things. The aquarium at Darling Harbour houses some impressively massive sharks, and the amazing view from the top of the Sydney Tower Eye, the city's tallest building, is definitely worth seeing.



There's also a military submarine in Darling Harbour, which is an incredible experience, if only to see at first hand the ridiculously cramped conditions in which 70 grown men have to exist on these things. I found it claustrophobic after just a few minutes down there. I can't imagine what six months must feel like.



Later I took the boys to a Big Bash game, part of the 20/20 tournament that's hugely popular in Australia. We sat with West Indies batting legend Chris Gayle, who was hilarious, and chatted to Aussie star David Warner in the next box to us ('Who's this, One Direction?' he laughed as I introduced the boys). The only sour note came when former Australian captain Ian Chappell walked past and I held a hand out with the words: 'Hi, Mr Chappell, I'm Piers Morgan. . .' to which he replied: 'Nah, mate, you're a d***head.' As Spencer said: 'It's good when people live down to every expectation.'

Thursday 2 January



Lunch at Doyles on Watson's Bay, Sir Ian Botham's favourite place in Sydney. Had absurdly fresh-tasting crab and their signature fish and chips while taking in the wonderful view. It's worth the half-hour taxi ride, but get the water cab back to town - just because it's great fun.

Iconic: Piers got to watch the New Year's Eve fireworks from the Shangri-La hotel on Sydney Harbour

Saturday 4 January



We've spent the first two days at the Sydney Test, and England's cricket has continued its disastrous path on this tour. But the weather's been wonderful, the people genuinely lovely, and we've enjoyed every minute of the holiday. My highlight today was seeing 84-year-old former Aussie Prime Minister Bob Hawke sink a pint of beer in one go, howled on by 100 drunken men dressed as legendary commentator Richie Benaud. If ever a moment made me fall in love with Australia, it was this.

Sunday 5 January



Got up at 4am to watch Arsenal, the fourth time we've had to rise in the middle of the night to watch our team since we've been out here. But we won, and are top of the Premier League, so at least there's some small solace on the sporting front.

Monday 6 January



Flew back to Los Angeles on Qantas. The First Class service is outstanding, making the 13-hour flight a breeze. On landing, the chief steward approached me. 'Mr Morgan, I'm afraid I have some bad news. . .' My heart raced. 'What is it?' 'England were bowled out for 166 in 31 overs! It was a 5-0 whitewash!' So an indescribable horror on the field, and yet a very easily describable joy off it. I loved Australia. And so did my boys. Oddly, we never once went to the beach. We'll do it next time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Caribbean for kids: Michelle Heaton's family trip to Jamaica is a real Sesame treat!



I love Jamaica. I've been quite a few times and it's my favourite place for a holiday. On previous trips to the Caribbean isle I've stayed in Ocho Rios and Montego Bay and this was my first time in Negril.

The Beaches all-inclusive resort there is a wonderful-looking low-rise establishment on the famous Seven Mile Beach, which often turns up on lists of the best beaches in the world. It's a great place from which to enjoy the beautiful and dramatic sunsets; there are lovely white sands and deep-blue sea – the sort that you seem to find only in the Caribbean.

Sun, sand and fur: Michelle, Hugh and Faith lark around on the beach with the Sesame Street characters

There is so much on offer at Beaches. The resort has three pools (and a huge Pirates Island Waterpark), six bars, a big Red Lane Spa and a nightclub. It runs lots of activities aimed at children – not really for children as young as my daughter, Faith, but my husband Hugh and I knew that there was always something for her to do or see.

This is what appealed about staying here. Holidaying with the baby was a new experience for us.



We are slowly coming to terms with the fact we have a young daughter now, so we have to think about what is best for her whenever we go away. Had we been coming to Jamaica as a couple, we would probably have chosen to stay at a Sandals resort but that's for couples only – not couples with a baby in tow.



New friends: Faith meets a Sesame Street star

Faith's almost two so we had to plan things carefully to make sure that the holiday would be a success for her too. At Beaches we knew that we could expect plenty of help looking after her and entertaining her – there's round-the-clock family support at the resort, which was great.



This was our second long-haul trip with Faith. We took her to Los Angeles last March and that proved to be quite hard work. We thought that just because we had a young child it didn't mean that we couldn't carry on enjoying the sort of holidays we'd always liked – doing exactly what Mummy and Daddy wanted to do, leaving Faith to just tag along.



We quickly realised that we were never going to be happy unless Faith was happy. There was a sudden awareness that we're a family and it's not just two people. So, that was a bit of a shock to the system.



Faith needs her nap times and being away from home you can see she doesn't really like the unfamiliarity of a new environment. She quickly relaxed at Beaches though and enjoyed the surroundings and became accustomed to familiar faces – she quickly got into the flow of things.



We were anxious about how quickly she would settle down because she didn't sleep very well on the Virgin flight to Jamaica from London. Towards the end of the flight, we had a bout of screaming. Virgin put all the families in the same section of the plane, which seems like a good idea. But it also meant that one crying baby could set off another one, which is what happened – for a whole hour. It was quite funny.

Idyllic: The Beaches all-inclusive resort is located on the famous Seven Mile Beach

On our first full day at Beaches, Faith encountered the resort's Sesame Street characters. She was so excited – and we knew that everything would be OK. The characters were throughout the resort all the time and there were a lot of Sesame Street-themed activities, where you went to meet the characters and they read stories – and every evening they put on a stage show for half an hour with song and dance routines. Even though Faith had never previously seen Sesame Street, she got straight into it.

For children slightly older than Faith – for four or five year olds – there were loads of other activities such as colouring books or beach games. I was impressed with how many activities there were. They cater for every age group.



If we wanted some time for ourselves, we were able to leave Faith in the crèche but we didn't do this very often and never for very long. I left her there only for a little bit and we ate with her at every mealtime. Some of the other parents choose to leave their children longer and there's an option for them to be fed as well, but I picked Faith up and we all dined together.



Digging in: The resort's butler can even help with building sandcastles

We didn't really venture off the resort property, there was no need to go anywhere. Besides I've seen all the sights here – my favourite is the Dunn's River Falls near Ocho Rios.



The holiday was excellent value. You pay one flat fee and everything is included. There's top-notch accommodation and brilliant food – you can have anything you want, at any point in the day. You don't need to take your wallet anywhere and there's no tipping – it's just brilliant. And it's perfect for people with a young family. You are never sure with children when they will want to eat – or even what they want to eat. But at Beaches there is so much food to choose from, whatever the time of day.

Faith soon became a big fan of the ice cream, which kept her very happy! Another great facility is the butler service: it's like having your own version of Downton Abbey's Bates on hand to help you. Your butler will even come and help you to pack and unpack – I declined the offer: I couldn't have anybody touching my clothes or make-up, I wouldn't ask anybody to do that. God knows what he'd find!



We're all sold on the Beaches concept now and I would go back like a shot. I'm pregnant at the moment – the baby is due in March – and I think when this one is around Faith's age and she's about four, we'll do another one. I might try the Beaches resort in Turks & Caicos next time – I've heard that's amazing, so fingers crossed we'll be able to go there.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sun, sea, dune buggy adventures... and strictly no dancing on a sun break to Kos



Appearing on Strictly Come Dancing is always great fun, but it's extremely hectic too.



Trying to teach your new celebrity partner the intricacies of the foxtrot, the waltz or the tango involves spending countless hours in a dance studio and it can be exhausting.



With that in mind, I decided to jet off to Kos to spend a week in the sun before the last series started. I travelled with my wife Ola – you'll know her as one of the stars of Strictly too.



Beach boy: James loved taking a dune buggy out to explore the island and find local eateries

We've been to other places in Greece before, including Halkidiki and Skiathos, and have always been impressed. Some friends had told us how much they liked Kos, so that was good enough for us.



We stayed in Psalidi, a small, modern resort on the east coast of the island and close to the capital, Kos Town. It was quiet and the perfect place for a break before putting on our dancing shoes again.



There were a number of watersports on offer at the beach, such as windsurfing and kitesurfing. I also enjoyed heading out on a jet-ski and a wakeboard – you have to use a combination of waterskiing and surfing techniques.



Greek odyssey: Ola loved soaking up the sun at the couples-only resort

Behind the beach was a promenade with lots of good, affordable restaurants. And when we fancied a longer stroll, we headed for Kos Town, about 25 minutes away. Among the highlights of the capital are the handsome 14th Century Neratzia Castle at the entrance to the harbour, and the famous plane tree of Hippocrates – the father of Western medicine is supposed to have given lectures under its leafy boughs.



Our couples-only hotel, the four-star Oceanis Beach & Spa Resort, was a bit of a gem, set among quiet, secluded gardens.



There was plenty to keep me occupied during the day – I find it difficult to stay still for too long, while, in contrast, Ola is more than happy to soak up the sun on the beach or by the pool.



Beside the watersports, I loved splashing about in the pools and there was an excellent spa at the hotel, offering hot stone massages and specialities including the socalled Anatolia Mystic treatment.



When I could persuade Ola to leave her sunlounger, we travelled around the island in a hired dune buggy. This was a brilliant way to explore Kos.



There were ample places to eat at the hotel – a big buffet area, a stylish Italian and a Greek taverna specialising in authentic local dishes. We also visited a number of very good bars and restaurants dotted around the island during those days when we headed out in the dune buggy.



Calamari, delicious Greek salads and a glass of wine... what's not to like?



Fortunately, I don't have to watch my diet too much. I can eat whatever I want – even junk food. That's because dancing on Strictly is the best exercise regime ever. I actually lose quite a lot of weight during the series because I'm training and practising so hard, and also because it's sometimes difficult to find the time to actually sit down and eat a proper meal.



Although I find it hard to sit still for long on holiday, the one thing I never seem to do is dance – not even a bit of Zorba the Greek dancing!


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Breakfast with giraffes and first aid for black rhinos: Just another day on safari in Kenya



Our style crush and fashion inspiration for a first-ever African safari adventure? Meryl Streep in Out Of Africa of course.



My best mate Zoe and I decided we had to have cotton clothes: cool and chic with lots of neutral beiges with khaki, olive and brown tones. But trying to find a 'cool, chic and practical' safari wardrobe is another matter.



The selection was much too clichéd. I didn't want something that said 'big-game hunter' and 'first-time safari' – all hard helmets and mosquito-repellent impregnated nylon shirts. There's nothing chic about that. So, we had to resort to digging out everything remotely safari-esque from our wardrobes.

Girl's night out: Lisa joins Samburu women at a traditional dance

We were warned not to take anything blue as that attracts the tsetse fly, which carries a horrible sleeping illness, and nothing bright or white as that would hardly help us to blend into the landscape.



We were visiting three different locations in Nairobi and around Kenya. Our first stop after the BA flight from London to Nairobi was Giraffe Manor, a gorgeous old house set in 140 acres.



We pulled up at night and were led to a candlelit dining room and served a delicious homely meal of potpie and a big glass of wine before being shown to our room for the night.There were ten rooms named after giraffes that lived or had lived there. Our room was called Lynn, a giraffe we were assured would be waiting at our window first thing in the morning and would be expecting to be fed.



We were told to open our window and feed Lynn the bran pellets that were sitting on a dressing table in a metal pale. Super excited but sleepy we fell asleep in our twin beds in a romantically decorated room under mosquito nets. I opened my eyes at around 6.30am to see Zoe slowly stirring; we looked at each other, smiled, climbed out from under our nets and rushed over to open the window.



Sure enough, Lynn – a beautiful, graceful creature – was gently lolloping over to see us. She stuck her face into the room, not shy at all. Nervously we held out the pellets at arm's reach not sure what to expect. Lynn's long black tongue gently curled out of her mouth and snaked around the pellet as she batted her beautiful long eyelashes in appreciation. It was such a treat and we continued feeding her till most of the pellets had gone.



Hungry visitor: Lynn the giraffe popped in for breakfast on Lisa and Zoe's first day

We made our way downstairs to the breakfast room where huge windows looked out on to beautiful lawns. There were four giraffes with their incredibly long necks elegantly bowed down inside the windows, sharing breakfast with other guests. Alongside the giraffes were warthogs and their babies, who were oinking and snorting around, also trying to be fed – so cute and reminiscent of Pumbaa from The Lion King.



Our next destination was Solio Lodge in Laikipia. The lodge nestles between Mount Kenya and the Aberdare mountains and is set in acres and acres of open grass conservation land. Here they protect and breed the black rhino, which is continually in danger of being poached and becoming extinct.



We booked a helicopter to take us, as by road it would take about four hours and we didn't have time to waste. We set off over the gorgeous landscape looking out beneath us, praying to see herds of wild animals stampeding by. We flew over stunning canyons and the Aberdares with pilot Jamie and our guide William pointing out rose, tea and coffee farms – Kenya's main exports – along the way. As we came into land at Solio we spotted a lion and lioness just below us before they ran off. This was the most wonderful, exciting thing we'd ever seen and were told by the boys that they hadn't been spotted in months. We had been blessed by the safari gods.



Wild bunch:Lisa spotted a lioness tearing into a freshly-killed zebra

The lodge was impressive, modern yet homely with an open fire, a bar, a dining room and a huge staircase leading to a mezzanine. Our bedrooms were spacious and had fireplaces while the bathrooms had free-standing bathtubs and huge, glass-fronted showers with panoramic views of the surrounding landscape and Mount Kenya. While unpacking, a family of zebras walked past, stopping to graze right outside my window.



We met Avo the manager and had a lunch outside, while watching various game walk by. We decided on a massage in our rooms followed by an afternoon of drinking tea and eating homemade biscuits before a yummy evening meal.

The next morning we were up at 4am for our first-ever game drive. It was cold and we had to wrap up as we set off with William in a 4x4. Zoe and I sat up on the roof, eager to spot the wildlife. We didn't have long to wait as we came across white rhino straight away. Next we saw baby leopards, probably brother and sister, rolling around playing with one another. We also spotted buffaloes and bushbuck, eland and oryx antelopes. To finish off an incredible morning we stumbled upon a lone black rhino – it's usual to find them on their own as they are unsociable creatures.



There were many guards on watch at all times in and around the lodge to stop poachers. It made us so angry to know that the rhinos were in danger of being killed, their tusks sold mostly into the Japanese and Chinese markets: such a cruel waste.



Swimming trunks: Lisa sees elephants crossing a river - several of hundreds she came across at in the Samburu region

Back at the ranch Avo introduced us to Solio's newest arrival, a tiny bush baby jumping around with freakishly big eyes and webbed toes. The next morning we woke up again before the sun, eager to see more. We came across the most intense scene, a lioness hungrily tearing into the flesh of a freshly killed zebra. Gruesome yet mesmerising. We watched, trying to get a closer look. Eventually the lioness spotted us, became uncomfortable and ran off. We followed her with our binoculars in the direction of some trees and under them was another lioness and about half a dozen young cubs. It was a wonderful thing to see.



Happy and content we headed back to the lodge for another delicious lunch. As we were eating, Avo got a call from the guards. One of the black rhino had been injured and doctors had been called: would we like to go along? Try stopping us.



We all set off in various jeeps bouncing along the slightly rough terrain. We found it with its back right leg badly injured with deep open bloody cuts that looked infected. The rhino had to be tranquillised to get a proper look and to treat the cuts. This turned out to be quite a tricky operation – it needed about ten guards to hold it down.



It had been another amazing day at Solio. We were sad to leave the next morning but happy to see the Tropic Air chopper coming into land to pick us up to take us to our final destination: Sasaab in northern Kenya. The flight took us across the equator.



Friendly faces: Lisa and Zoe meet locals children and become the centre of attention

Sasaab was so different from the our previous locations. Set on the banks of the river Ewaso Nyiro, the landscape was more barren and less lush than Solio and much less sophisticated than The Giraffe Manor.



This was the Samburu region. Sasaab had a very Moorish feel, with lots of whitewashed walls, beautiful archways and lanterns, and an infinity pool looking down on to stunning views of the river and a spa. There were nine rooms: you could describe them as a cross between posh tents and bungalows, spacious and all with plunge pools and outside bathrooms which made showering at dusk interesting: a multitude of bugs and moths descended on you. Above was an immense, starry night sky.



Tanya and Doug, an Australian couple, run Sasaab. Our evenings were spent sitting under the stars eating together and exchanging stories. Safari is a very social experience. We set off early the next day with a safari picnic.



We met Sammy our guide and Jacob, a stunning warrior from the Samburu tribe who was dressed in all his regalia. He was our spotter. Sasaab is also a wildlife conservancy, helping to protect the Ewaso lions who are in danger of becoming extinct and the Grevy's zebras (named after a former French president).



We saw hundreds of elephants: some feeding by the river, others crossing the road. When we met them on the road we had to stop, turn off the engine and avoid making eye contact for risk of being charged (a situation both exhilarating and terrifying).



Jet set: Lisa and Zoe hopped between safari lodges by helicopter

There were also beautiful reticulated giraffe, native to Somalia and the Samburu region, and a vast array of exotic birds, springbok and beisa oryx.

We were invited the next day to a local village. Gorgeous children and a few silent, moody warriors welcomed us; we were invited into a manyatta, a small hut where a family lived and slept. The roof was a shell made from goat fat, clothes and paper. The children were taken with Zoe and I, playing with our hair and trying to rub our skin to see if the white came off. We played with them for hours.



That evening, back at Sasaab, we were told we were going for a walk, so we set off with Jacob and a couple of other warriors. We were met with two camels and Zoe and I hopped on and had an incredible ride, ending the day with a vodka sundowner on a hill with incredible views, followed by sausages cooked by Jacob on a camp fire.



Our last day was spent out and about with a picnic by the river. We followed a family of lions for hours and got close to them. Back at Sasaab that afternoon Zoe and I relaxed by the pool and I had a pedicure.



On the last evening we went to see a display of dancing by the Samburu men and women down by the river. It was a lively jumping dance that involved all the warriors in their glory showing off and claiming their future wives. It was a mesmerising and an electric atmosphere, everyone dressed up and all the young girls hoping to be noticed by the warriors.



I joined in the dancing: the rhythm and vibrations were intoxicating and it was the most fantastic end to an incredible trip.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They are set to welcome their first child together in November.

So Jamie Redknapp, 48, and his Frida Andersson, 37, made the most of their final baby-free weeks with a romantic babymoon in Santorini.

Marking the first time Jamie has featured his girlfriend on his Instagram page, the Sky Sports pundit shared a slew of snaps of the pair enjoying a beach day.

Cute: Jamie Redknapp's pregnant girlfriend Frida Andersson showed off her bump in a bikini as she cuddled up to shirtless pundit on a babymoon in Santorini

Frida looked radiant as she showcased her burgeoning baby bump in a white bikini while cuddling up to her partner.

Jamie also looked incredible as he put his enviably ripped physique on display in a pair of navy swimming trunks.

Jamie and Frida revealed they were expecting a baby back in May.

They collectively have six children - Jamie shares Charles, 16, and Beau, 12, with ex Louise Redknapp, while Frida shares four with hedge fund manager Jonathan Lourie, 58.

Cute couple: Marking the first time Jamie has featured his girlfriend on his Instagram page, the Sky Sports pundit shared a slew of snaps of the pair enjoying a beach day on Wednesday

Speaking to The Mirror recently, Jamie's father Harry, 74, said: 'Jamie is very happy and Frida is happy. This will be grandchild number eight. We’ve got our hands full!'

He also revealed that the couple had learned the gender of their unborn baby, but are choosing to keep it a secret.

Harry's comments came after Jamie reflected on fatherhood, joking he had a great excuse to avoid night feeds with his two sons because he was playing football.

Adorable: In May, it was revealed that Jamie is expecting his third child, and first child with model girlfriend Frida, nine months after confirming their relationship

In a chat for L'Oreal Men Expert Father's Day Campaign, the dad-of-two candidly spoke about being a father alongside pals Peter Crouch and Jermaine Jenas.

Reflecting on raising the sons he shares with ex Louise, he agreed with his pals the secret to parenting is 'winging it'.

Of how he dealt with night feeds, he said: 'We had a lovely excuse when we were playing [football]... didn't really work when I was off injured though.'

In May, it was revealed that Jamie is expecting his third child, and first child with model girlfriend Frida, nine months after confirming their relationship.

A source told The Sun at the time: 'Jamie and Frida are absolutely delighted. They've been virtually inseparable in lockdown, and their relationship has gone from strength to strength.

'Jamie's been telling pals he's really excited to be a dad again — less excited about the sleepless nights, and ­nappy-changing.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kerry Katona has revealed she's been forced to pull her daughter Heidi out of school after the teen suffered cruel bullying at the hands of 'horrible' boys.

Speaking in her OK! column this week, the Atomic Kitten star, 40, told how she's had to take action after Heidi Croft, 14, was badly picked on.

It comes amid the inquest of Kerry's late ex-husband George Kay on Tuesday, where it was confirmed that he had a drug-related death aged 39 following a cocaine binge at a budget hotel in July 2019.

Oh no: Kerry Katona has revealed she's been forced to pull her daughter Heidi out of school after the teen suffered cruel bullying at the hands of 'horrible' boys

Speaking of her daughter, who she shares with another ex-husband Mark Croft, Kerry told how the youngster had 'got loads more s**t at school from some horrible boys.'

Opting to take action, she explained: 'I’ve decided I’m definitely taking her out of that school. Your schooldays are so important and it’s about investing in your future.'

Kerry then went on to say that she cheered her girl up by treating her to a pamper session, adding: 'Me and Heidi went to get our nails done. It was so lovely to spend some quality time together.'

Bullying hell: Speaking in her OK! column this week, the Atomic Kitten star, 40, told how she's had to take action after Heidi Croft, 14, was badly picked on (pictured on Loose Women in 2020)

In her column, Kerry also revealed woes for another of her daughters as she revealed second eldest Lilly-Sue has been struck down with coronavirus.

The TV star told how Lilly, 18, who she shares with first husband Brian McFadden had 'tested positive' and is 'not feeling very well at all', with Kerry then wishing her girl a speedy recovery.

Amid dramas with her girls, it was told how Kerry's ex-husband George died after a drugs binge at a budget hotel where he crushed a ball of cocaine inside a sock and 'ate' the contents, an inquest heard.

Decision: Opting to take action, she explained: 'I’ve decided I’m definitely taking her out of that school. Your schooldays are so important and it’s about investing in your future'

Illness: In her column, Kerry also revealed woes for another of her daughters as she revealed second eldest Lilly-Sue (pictured) has been struck down with coronavirus

The former rugby league player, 39, collapsed with a seizure was rushed to hospital on July 5, 2019, but died later due to the excess effects of the toxic Class A substance.

Just 12 hours before the tragedy police had been called to the Holiday Inn in Sutton Weaver, Cheshire after Mr Kay was seen wandering around the corridors 'asking for someone to be his friend.'

Mr Kay, who was married to Kerry between 2014 and 2017, was also found erratically shouting and knocking on other guests doors, with hotel staff attempting to return him to his room at one point after he claimed there were 'wasps' inside.

Officers said Mr Kay was hallucinating while under the effects of the drug but let him stay in his room despite noticing traces of cocaine by his bathroom sink.

Verdict: Amid dramas with her girls, it was told how Kerry's ex-husband George died after a drugs binge at a budget hotel where he crushed a ball of cocaine inside a sock and 'ate' the contents, an inquest heard

A policewoman was later disciplined for not searching Mr Kay or arresting him for possessing cocaine. Staff called police and officers attended at 9.54pm but left when Mr Kay agreed to return to his room.

Coroner Peter Sigee today recorded a verdict of drug-related death at an inquest.

Craig Pondsford, the hotel's operations manager, described his behaviour as 'paranoid and irrational' and Mr Kay had urged him to share a line of cocaine.

Mr Pondsford described how he'd spoken to Mr Kay and tried to get him to return to his room.

Collapse: The former rugby league player (pictured in 2018) collapsed with a seizure was rushed to hospital in July 2019

He initially refused before going back inside and sitting on the end of bed and 'staring at the mirror', he said.

Mr Pondsford became so concerned he contacted police and two officers attended the hotel and spoke to Mr Kay, who'd become 'calm' by this point.

The former rugby player's drugs use also got 'significantly worse' after he was prevented from seeing the couple's seven-year-old daughter Dylan-Jorge, it's claimed.

The couple separated in 2015 and reportedly divorced two years later after a tumultuous period together in which Mr Kay was accused of being abusive and violent towards his ex-wife.

Tragic: Just 12 hours before the tragedy, police had been called to the Holiday Inn in Sutton Weaver, Cheshire after Mr Kay was seen wandering around the corridors 'asking for someone to be his friend [Stock image]

Speaking at the inquest, Caroline Garcia, a hotel worker, told the hearing that at around 7pm a colleague rang her to say there was a guest in the corridor making noise.

She went to see what was going on and found a 'strong, tall man speaking with another lady outside one of the rooms'.

Mr Garcia said: 'I thought he was drunk or high and I dealt with the situation. He was not making any sense and said he was looking for someone to be his friend.

'I asked him for ID in order to find his room but he kept constantly saying he was looking for a friend. He was not rude but was not following instructions.

'I got him into a lift and we were there for around an hour. Another colleague of mine got him some water but he was having difficulty drinking the water.

'He asked if I would prepare cocaine for him, but I said I wouldn't do that... He said there was a man in his room but we went to his room and we confirmed there was no one else there. He was refusing to go into the room and was saying it was not his.'

Barman Michael Hulme said: 'Mr Kay was behaving in an erratic manner and the manager was present encouraging him to go back to his room. He was not a threat but he was unpredictable. He asked for cocaine and was told he couldn't have it.

Daughter: Mr Kay's drugs use also got 'significantly worse' after he was prevented from seeing the couple's daughter Dylan-Jorge, who is now seven, it's claimed. George is pictured with 'DJ' in a Facebook picture he described as one of his favourite photographs

Former couple: The inquest heard Mr Kay had been behaving in a 'paranoid and erratic manner'

'We got him to his room and he appeared to be making no sense. He said he had family at the hotel, which we knew wasn't the case and I saw some type of white powder in the bathroom which I thought might be cocaine.'

Luke Smith, a food and beverage supervisor at the hotel, said Mr Kay had been 'agitated and annoyed with himself', wanting to enter the room but 'it was as if something was stopping him'.

'I was concerned about how he might have mental health issues,' Mr Smith said.

'Whilst I was standing in the door, I saw white powder in the bathroom. The following morning he needed house keeping to let him back into his room.

'He pulled out a sock with a large ball and was sat in a chair. He caused the ball to crumble by crushing it and I believed it was drugs.

'He became very unwell, so we put him in the recovery position and called an ambulance.'

Manager Craig Ponsford said Mr Kay had been knocking on another guest's door, behaving in a 'paranoid and erratic way'.

Mr Ponsford added: 'He said he was at the hotel for a family function, but we knew was wasn't true. He kept saying he wanted someone to be his friend.

'We got him to his room and there was around 1/2 teaspoon of white powder in the bathroom. He had calmed down by now and seemed okay and asked for a pizza.

Ex-husband: Kerry Katona and George Kay at The National Reality TV Awards 2015

'I was asking police about on what grounds we could get him removed as I was concerned about his mental health. They said there was no grounds to get him removed.'

Cheshire Police said cocaine worth £100 with a high purity was found in the room.

PC Declan Corcoran said: 'The hotel staff were concerned about a male wandering around and banging on doors refusing to go back to his room.

'When we got there, he was quite calm. He understood that he had been taking drugs. He said he had taken the substance in the bathroom about one hour ago. He said he had been seeing shadows and that he saw wasps in his room.

'He realised he had been hallucinating. He said he was struggling with his mental health because of issues in his personal life. He admitted to taking cocaine that evening.'

The policewoman, who cannot be named, said: 'It looked like he had sniffed a line of cocaine off the side of the sink. If there was half a teaspoon of cocaine, I would have taken it as analysis but there wasn't much there at all.

'I did not believe it was enough to arrest him for possession of drugs. The remnants of cocaine were left in the bathroom. I was mainly concerned about his welfare.'

The hearing was told Mr Kay played rugby for Warrington U21's and went on to play for Sale, Lancashire and Widnes.

His mother Hilary said: 'He had taken recreational drugs from a young age and I was aware of his drug taking in May 2019.

'He had a social life which involves various celebrity friends and they would provide money and there was talk about helping him set up a business abroad. He took a trip to Australia to watch a Rugby tournament.

'He had a lovely time and was not taking any drugs or alcohol at that time. There has been occasions in the past where he had become agitated from his drug usage.

'He knew he had problems but he was a lovely lad who made friends easily. He was kind and would do anything to help anyone. He had personal difficulties which may have increased his drug taking.'

Recording a verdict of drug related death, coroner Peter Sigee said: 'Police officers were called to attend because Mr Kay was behaving in an effective manner.

Rest in peace: Family member said Mr Kay had taken 'recreational drugs' since a young age and were aware of his drug use. Above: Mr Kay, pictured in 2018

'He admitted to taking drugs, he was calm and police did not consider it lawful to arrest or search him. They did not think he required an urgent medical assessment and they left.

'On the morning of 6 July, he was seen to eat a quantity of cocaine and then collapse. It is not possible to say now he came into possession of the cocaine he took on that morning but I am satisfied the death was drug related.'

Mr Kay met Kerry when they were at school together but started dating in 2012 after bumping into each other in Warrington.

They married in September 2014, five months after she had their daughter Dylan-Jorge, now aged seven but split in 2015 and divorced two years later.

Earlier this year Kerry, 40, told of her 'anger' over George's 'selfish' addiction that has left Dylan-Jorge without a father.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck viewed an $85million estate in Beverly Hills on Tuesday, as their rekindled romance goes from strength to strength.

J-Lo, 52 and actor Ben, 54, who were also spotted touring comedian Bob Hope's Toluca Lake abode, are said to have checked out the lavish 38,000 square foot home, complete with 12 bedrooms, 24 bathrooms and a bespoke indoor sports complex with a boxing ring and basketball court - reports TMZ.

The home also features a caretaker's house and a guest penthouse.

Wow: Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck viewed an $85million estate in Beverly Hills on Tuesday, as their rekindled romance goes from strength to strength

The sprawling home boasts parking for 80 guests and a two bedroom guardhouse.

Sources tell the website: 'this looks like this is a house not just for Jen but for them.'

MailOnline has contacted representatives for the couple for comment.

Jen and Ben looked closer than ever as they were spotted touring Bob's $40 million Toluca Lake estate during their house hunting adventures.

Wow: Jennifer and Ben have been seemingly attached at the hip ever since reconciling, 17 years after ending their engagement in 2004

Lavish: J-Lo, 52 and actor Ben, 54, who were also spotted touring comedian Bob Hope's Toluca Lake abode, are said to have checked out the lavish 38,000 square foot home, complete with 12 bedrooms, 24 bathrooms and a bespoke indoor sports complex with a boxing ring and basketball court - reports TMZ

Room for everyone: The home also features a caretaker's house and a guest penthouse

Ever the doting boyfriend, Ben drove his ladylove in his luxurious Mercedes Benz while she peered out the open window.

The couple were reportedly touring the sprawling, five-acre property once belonging to the famous British-American comedian at around 11:30AM, and spent an hour there.

The lavish home is currently owned by billionaire Ron Burkle and comes with luxurious amenities such as a one hole golf course.

The house tour is just another sign of how serious the couple have become, ever since rekindling their romance earlier this year.

Sweeping: The home has stunning greenery and features spectacular views of Beverly Hills

Modern: The estate is the perfect fit for the rich and famous of Hollywood

Jaw-dropping: The home features magnificent high ceilings and open plan rooms

This isn't the first time the couple have been spotted house hunting together, with the duo also spotted checking out potential homes last month.

The two seem on the cusp of moving in together after Jennifer already took steps to make LA her new permanent home.

The Out Of Sight star has been spotted touring schools in the area for her children in recent months, and they're reportedly on board with relocating to the West Coast.

Decadent: The home overlooks stunning grounds and is said to be one Jen and Ben viewed together

Views: One of the living rooms overlooks mountains and a scenic swimming pool

She's normally based in Miami, where her kids can easily spend time with their father, singer Marc Anthony.

Jennifer shares two twins with her ex Marc — 13-year-old Max and Emme — while Ben has three children with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner: Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine.

While planning for relocating her children, J.Lo has reportedly been looking forward to living with her boyfriend again.

'Ben and Jen are spending almost every night together when they’re not working,' an insider told Us Weekly last month. 'They plan on moving in together very soon.'

Jennifer and Ben have been seemingly attached at the hip ever since reconciling, 17 years after ending their engagement in 2004.

The couple recently celebrated Jennifer's 52nd birthday on board a massive yacht as they explored the likes of St. Tropez and Capri together.

Smitten: The couple were spotted touring Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate on Tuesday

Her post comes after a fun-filled trip with his on-again girlfriend Jennifer Lopez on their $130m mega-yacht while off the coast of Italy and France.

Affleck has also reportedly been 'very happy' since rekindling with the Hustlers actress, who began dating in 2002 and got engaged that year.

Ultimately, they split in January 2004 after postponing their wedding in September 2003.

In July 2021, Lopez confirmed they were back together by posting a photo of them kissing after ending her engagement from Alex Rodriguez in May.

And, although the beauty is 'fully committed' to Ben, the brunette beauty isn't planning on jumping into marriage any time soon, a source told E! News.

Future focused: The two seem on the cusp of moving in together after Jennifer already took steps to make LA her new permanent home

A source also recently told ET: '[They] are fully committed to each other... They have been meshing their lives and families and don't feel the need to get engaged yet or even tie the knot.

'They have both been there and don't feel it's necessary. They are both very secure within their relationship and Ben worships her.

'It's truly meant to be and everyone around them thinks they are a perfect match.'

But it doesn't look like it will be long before the loved-up pair take their relationship to the next level by moving in together.

An insider explained: ​'Their friends wouldn't be surprised if they move in together and ultimately end up together. They're spending all of their free time together and making each other a priority.'

Ben has children Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine, with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner, while J.Lo has 13-year-old twins Emme and Max with her ex-husband Marc Anthony, and their reunion doesn't seem to be 'a big deal to either set of kids.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She coupled up with Aaron Francis on week one of Love Island but split after he dubbed her 'too fiery'.

Yet Sharon Gaffka reunited with her former flame as they headed for a dinner date at White City House in London on Tuesday night.

The 25-year-old civil servant seemed in great spirits as she headed out with Aaron, 24, shortly after revealing that ITV bosses cut out discussions about being bisexual.

Former flame: Love Island's Sharon Gaffka reunited with Aaron Francis on a dinner date in London on Wednesday... after revealing show cut discussions about her bisexuality

Sharon looked sensational on the outing as she slipped into a hot pink trouser suit that ensured all eyes would be firmly on her.

She teamed the garment with a skimpy white crop top that put her enviably toned midriff on display.

Aaron also looked stylish on the outing as he layered a taupe shirt over a grey top and black skinny jeans.

After Sharon revealed she was out on the town with Aaron, fans were quick to ask if they were out on a date, which she quickly shut down with an abrupt, 'no.'

Pretty in pink: Sharon looked sensational on the outing as she slipped into a hot pink trouser suit that ensured all eyes would be firmly on her

Candid: The 25-year-old civil servant seemed in great spirits as she headed out with Aaron, 24, shortly after revealing that ITV bosses cut out discussions about being bisexual

Sharon and Aaron coupled up on Love Island but their romance proved to be short-lived after the luxury events manager dumped Sharon following a row she had with fellow contestant Hugo Hammond about 'fake girls'.

While Sharon later tried to forge a relationship with Hugo, he wasn't interested and she ultimately ended up being dumped from the island on day 19.

Meanwhile, Aaron struck up a romance with Lucinda Strafford, but they were dumped on day 28, and broke up within 48 hours of leaving the villa.

Looking good: Aaron also looked stylish on the outing as he layered a taupe shirt over a grey top and black skinny jeans

Just friends: After Sharon revealed she was out on the town with Aaron, fans were quick to ask if they were out on a date, which she quickly shut down with an abrupt, 'no'

The pair's outing came after Sharon revealed her shock that candid discussions she had about her race and sexuality were cut from the show.

The Young Women's Trust ambassador told Metro Online last week that Faye Winter, 26, had asked her if she was bisexual.

To which she replied: 'It's something that I've explored but I've never been in a relationship with a woman.'

During her time on the show, it was made known in a game that she had previously had a threesome involving another woman.

Sharon, said that the aired scenes only scratched the surface of the discussion of modern dating and her sexual experiences on the show, and it is now apparent that the rest of the scenes from the conversation were left out.

'A lot of the conversations I had about modern dating on the show were never aired, but I was very open about sexuality and being a mixed-race woman in modern dating.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's a successful singer with an edgy sense of style.

And, Jade Thirlwall oozed sex appeal as she showed off her toned pins in a black mini dress and heels for sizzling social media snaps, which she shared to Instagram on Tuesday night.

The Little Mix stunner, 28, slipped into a short-sleeved polo-shirt dress which featured chunky diamante embellishments.

Stunning: Jade Thirlwall, 28, oozed sex appeal as she showed off her toned pins in a black mini dress for sizzling social media snaps, which she shared to Instagram on Tuesday night

Jade's asymmetric frock boasted a high-low hemline and silver chains woven through the edges.

The brunette beauty showed off her intricate leg tattoo and boosted her height with a pair of strappy black wedges.

Jade accessorised with a silver embellished chain necklace while styling her tresses into a textured ponytail.

The Little Mix star captioned her upload: 'Jade. 28. South Shields/London. Versatile. #KissMyUhOh.'

Beauty: The Little Mix star drew attention to her piercing eyes with heavy make-up, while styling her brunette tresses into a textured ponytail

Jade's stunning snaps come after she shared her hilarious reaction to being asked by pregnant bandmates Perrie Edwards and Leigh-Anne Pinnock when she is going to have a baby in a video posted via TikTok.



The star was seen out in a field as she looked to the camera in shock at the words: 'When all your mates are having babies and they ask when it's your turn.'

Seemingly unhappy with the line of questioning, Jade then took off on a run through a field and zigzagged away from the camera.

Amusing: The Little Mix star was recently seen out in a field, running away at the words: 'When all your mates are having babies and they ask when it's your turn'

In the caption she amusingly wrote: 'Don't mind me, running away from life brb.'

Leigh-Anne and her footballer fiancé Andre Gray revealed that they are set to welcome a baby into the world in May.

And then just six days later Perrie - who is expecting her first child with her footballer beau Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain - announced her pregnancy.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They've been happily married since 2012.

And, Victoria Coren Mitchell, 48, and David Mitchell, 47, sweetly held hands at the press night for The Windsors: Endgame at The Prince Of Wales theatre in London's West End, on Tuesday.

The writer stunned in a red frock as she stepped out with her Peep Show comedian husband to watch the new production, which is based on the hit Channel Four sitcom The Windsors.

Cute: Victoria Coren Mitchell, 48, and David Mitchell, 47, sweetly held hands at the press night for The Windsors: Endgame at The Prince Of Wales theatre in London's West End, on Tuesday

Victoria looked sensational in the sleeveless red A-line gown, which featured a faux wrap-over neckline.

She boosted her height with a pair of textured black pointed stilettos and accessorised with a delicate gold necklace.

Victoria wore her golden tresses in a sleek, straight style and used a natural palette of make-up to highlight her pretty features.

David, meanwhile, looked sharp as he teamed an open-collared light blue polka dot shirt with navy trousers.

Gorgeous: The writer stunned in a red frock as she stepped out with her comedian husband to watch the new production, which is based on the hit Channel Four sitcom The Windsors

The Windsors: Endgame sees comedian Harry Enfield star as Prince Charles and follows 'the imagined escapades of the royal family'.

In the play, Prince William challenges his father for the crown, however his efforts are quickly obstructed by Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall.

Meanwhile, Victoria and David welcomed their only child, daughter Barbara, in May 2015 - with the comedian previously describing her as 'the best human being that has ever been born'.

He said of her, in a chat on The Jonathan Ross Show in 2018: 'Unfortunately, there is nothing like having a tiny child who's safety you are responsible for to make you worry.

'You really don't want the world to spin into the sun and explode. You thought you didn't want it before but you really don't want it [after having a child.]

'That is the real downside of parenthood, and I suppose any form of love, is it makes you fear more… I would say love is not a stress reduction exercise is it?

'What you want is a long period of bland contentment… I'm a family man. I've made bad choices and I am constantly worried.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Patricia 'Pat' Hitchcock has died at the age of 93.

The actress was director Alfred Hitchcock's only child and had roles in his movies including Strangers on a Train, Stage Fright and Psycho.

She passed away at home in Thousand Oaks, California, on Monday, her youngest daughter Katie Fiala told The Hollywood Reporter.

Screen legend: Patricia 'Pat' Hitchcock, who had roles in several of her director father Alfred's hit films, has died at the age of 93 (pictured in 2001)

Pat's biggest role in her father's films was in 1951's Strangers On A Train where she played Barbara Morton, the younger sister of Ruth Roman's character Anne Morton, who watches Bruno Antony (Robert Walker) strangle a woman at a party.

She'd previously played a classmate of Jane Wyman's character in 1950 movie Stage Fright and later briefly appeared in Psycho in 1960 as an office worker.

Pat, who studied at RADA in England and performed on Broadway as a teenager, also appeared in 10 episodes of CBS' Alfred Hitchcock Presents from 1955-60.

Roles: The actress starred as Barbara Morton in 1951 film Strangers On A Train (pictured on set of the movie with her father in 1951)

The late actress went on to appear on TV movies including The Life of Riley, My Little Margie and The Case of Thomas Pyke. While in the 70s she had roles in several shows such as Skateboard, and Ladies of the Corridor, according to Variety.

As well as starring in movies, Pat also worked on Broadway and starred in play Solitaire in 1942 and Violet in 1944. She also appeared in The Higher Ground in 1951.

Speaking about appearing in her father's films in 1984, she told The Washington Post that she'd be called in 'whenever they needed a maid with an English accent'.

She continued: 'I was brought up rather as an English child, so I knew what was expected, and I pretty much always did it. You didn't speak unless spoken to, but it didn't bother me or have any repercussions. I didn't know anything else.'

On camera: Her character Barbara, the younger sister of Ruth Roman's character Anne Morton, watched Bruno Antony (Robert Walker) strangle a woman at a party (pictured the scene)

Family: Pat and her parents - Alfred and Alma - had moved to the US in 1939, when she was 11, and she had spent two years at boarding school from the ages of eight to 10 (pictured in 1942)

Treading the boards: The actress also had several roles in theatre productions, including a part in Violet when she was a teenager (pictured in rehearsals for the comedy with dad Alfred)

Pat also revealed a little about how her father worked, adding that she wished her father had 'believed in nepotism. I’d have worked a lot more.'

She continued during the interview: 'But he never had anyone in his pictures unless he believed they were right for the part.'

Pat also discussed working with her famous father in 2004, saying that there wasn't anything 'unusual' about it.

According to THR, she told the TV Academy website The Interviews: An Oral History of Television: 'There wasn’t anything unusual about it. Just like with [any other actor], we would discuss the scene and do it. We didn’t try out stuff.'

Parts: Pat also briefly appeared in Psycho in 1960 as an office worker (pictured in the movie)

Working together: Pat discussed working with her famous father in 2004, saying that there wasn't anything 'unusual' about it (pictured together in an undated photograph)

Pat and her family had moved to the US in 1939, when she was 11, and she had spent two years at boarding school from the ages of eight to 10.

She went on to marry businessman Joseph O'Connell Jr in 1952 at St Patrick's Cathedral in New York and they had three children - daughters Mary, Tere and Katie.

After her marriage, Pat was an executive producer on documentary The Man on Lincoln's Nose, which was directed by Daniel Raim. This was released in 2000 and about late production designer Robert F. Boyle, who had worked with her father.

Professional: Pat, who studied at RADA in England, also appeared in 10 episodes of CBS' Alfred Hitchcock Presents from 1955-60 (pictured on the Strangers On A Train set in 1951)

Personal life: Pat married Joseph O'Connell Jr in 1952 and they had three children - daughters Mary, Tere and Katie (pictured with her family including Alfred and Alma in 1959)

Pat also co-wrote a book about her mother Alma Reville in the early 2000s called Alma Hitchcock: The Woman Behind the Man.

Alma, who died in 1982, worked as a film editor and screenwriter and was married to Alfred for 54 years.

In 2012, British screenwriter Sacha Gervasi directed biopic Hitchcock about the couple with Anthony Hopkins playing Alfred and Helen Mirren portraying Alma.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's been enjoying a sun-soaked family break to Greece.

And Millie Mackintosh gave fans a glimpse into her getaway on Wednesday as she shared a photo dump of the trip enjoying quality time with husband Hugo Taylor and their daughter Sienna.

The former Made in Chelsea star, 31, showed off her growing baby bump in several of the snaps as she posed in an off-the-shoulder gold maxi dress next to Hugo, 35.

Cute: Millie Mackintosh gave fans a glimpse into her Greek getaway on Wednesday as she shared a photo dump of the trip enjoying quality time with husband Hugo Taylor and daughter Sienna

Millie completed her perfect summer look with a red headband and dangly gold earrings as she gazed adoringly at Hugo in another snap during a sunset dinner.

On her Instagram Story Millie also posted pictures from a family beach day as she wore a yellow bikini while walking along the sand with her little one.

In another image Sienna looked adorable in a yellow and white swimsuit as she was doted on by dad Hugo while looking out to sea.

Adorable: On her Instagram Story Millie also posted pictures from a family beach day as she wore a yellow bikini while walking along the sand with her little one

Close: The former Made in Chelsea star, 31, showed off her growing baby bump in several of the snaps as she posed in an off-the-shoulder gold maxi dress next to Hugo, 35

It comes after Millie took to Instagram last month to detail her C-section recovery from the birth of her first child, Sienna, last year, while also confirming to fans that she is planning another abdominal birth.

Opening up to her 1.4 million followers, the great-great-granddaughter of the Quality Street founder looked radiant in a string of candid throwback photos of herself sporting maternity underwear, including adult nappies during her recovery.

Detailing her experience in length, the influencer penned: 'Picking back up on my c section post from last week, this week I wanted to talk about my recovery. Thank you for sharing all your birth stories, I was so moved reading your comments.'

Glowing: Millie showcased her growing bump in a strapless grey bikini as she topped up her tan in the sunshine

Incredible: She also put on a stylish display in the stripy gold dress as she posed next to a wooden horse

Parents: In another image Sienna looked adorable in a yellow and white swimsuit as she was doted on by dad Hugo while looking out to sea

'After I got home from hospital I tried to rest as much as possible. I was very fortunate that I had both Hugo and an amazing postnatal Doula called Paula (who used to be my nanny!) looking after us for the first three weeks which played a big part in my recovery.

'I didn’t leave the house for at least a week when I felt strong enough to go for a walk around the block.

'I slowly started increasing the length of my walks but got carried away I did too much and ended up in bed with cramps and with heavy bleeding.

Details: She accessorised her stylish going-out look with a brown and beige bag and red headband

Doting: Sienna sat on her mum's knee in one of the pictures as she tried on one of Hugo's big sun hats

'My advice is to listen to your body and take it very slowly, get as much help as you can so that you can rest and let your body heal.

'I spent the first few days wearing adult nappy pants (which I highly recommend) then moved on to big cotton knickers with an industrial sized pad, and slowly reduced this down to a panty liner.

In one of the snaps, Millie can be seen with bruises to her thigh and, in another, wearing a PICO dressing tucked into her pants.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She never fails to look sensational while out and about.

And Hailey Bieber was proving her style credentials yet again as she stepped out for dinner at celebrity hotspot Nobu in Malibu on Tuesday night.

The wife of Justin Bieber, 24, put on a leggy display in a little black dress which she teamed with an oversized grey and black checked blazer.

Beauty: Hailey Bieber put on a leggy display in a little black dress and oversized checked blazer as she stepped out for dinner at Nobu in LA on Tuesday night

The model completed her look with a pair of strappy black heels and carried a leather handbag with her full of all the essentials.

Hailey made sure to put safety first by donning a face mask as she headed home from the swanky eatery with a female companion.

She wore her new darker tresses in loose waves over her shoulders as she showed off her toned and tanned pins.

Details: The model completed her look with a pair of strappy black heels and carried a leather handbag with her full of all the essentials

It comes after recently Hailey and Justin enjoyed a vacation together, both sharing snaps on Instagram of the trip.

Justin, 27, captioned his slideshow, 'Road trip photo dump' as he offered fans a look into their travels as he shared nine smiley pictures.

And Hailey echoed her pop star husband's words in her own caption, writing, 'the last 10 days in a photo dump.'

Sweet: It comes after recently Hailey and Justin enjoyed a vacation together, both sharing snaps on Instagram of the trip

She posted a couple of the same photos that were shared by Justin as well as a few new shots.

The couple seemed to be having a great time together, definitely a different scene than during their travels to Las Vegas for UFC 264 last month.

In a viral video from fight night, Bieber was seen throwing his hand up into the air as he chatted with Hailey in a very animated clip.

While things appeared tense at first glance, witnesses said that he was just pumping with 'adrenaline' following a performance with Kid Laroi.

Relaxing: Hayley displayed her incredible physique in a zebra-print bikini as she lounged on a chaise with Justin, in one of the uploaded vacation snaps

'He was not yelling and we were there to witness what went down. He was all adrenaline,' a Twitter user wrote, while another said 'He wasn't mad at Hailey and he wasn't yelling at her.'

And she took to Instagram on July 14 to say her piece, as she shared a photo of the pair kissing after what she called an 'amazing' weekend surrounded by 'so much love.'

'Any other narrative floating around is beyond false. Don't feed into the negative bulls**t peeps,' she wrote.

Justin did however open up about having a 'really tough' first year of marriage in conversation with GQ back in April.

'The first year of marriage was really tough because there was a lot going back to the trauma. There was just a lack of trust.

'There was all these things that you don't want to admit to the person that you're with, because it's scary. You don't want to scare them off by saying, 'I'm scared.''
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Meryl Streep and Cher are missing out on the open air production of Mamma Mia! because it's too far to travel.

'If it were local to them, they'd definitely be coming,' said the show's Big Mamma, producer Judy Craymer, of the opening at stately home Harewood House in Leeds next Friday.

The performances 'under the stars' will mark the first time Mamma Mia!, one of the most successful musicals in theatre and film history, has been on stage since the pandemic forced shows to close 18 months ago.

'It's an endorphin rush — everyone's got those ABBA songs in their DNA somewhere,' insisted Craymer as she watched Sara Poyzer, who is playing Donna Sheridan, the single mum who spent years raising her daughter Sophie and launching a hotel on a Greek isle, perform Money Money Money with the cast.

'If it were local to them, [Meryl Streep and Cher] would definitely be coming,' said the show's Big Mamma, producer Judy Craymer, of the opening at stately home Harewood House in Leeds next Friday

Poyzer will lead the company at Harewood House, and then take the show to Dubai, before heading off on a UK tour.

Mamma Mia! outdoors will be a monumental event, with a rock 'n' roll stage 20m wide — twice as big as most proscenium stages, according to associate producer Nick Grace, who showed me diagrams of the site in the grounds of the 18th-century grand pile in West Yorkshire. There is space for families to self-distance as they picnic and watch the show on stage, with the action also playing on two mammoth video screens.

There's a food and drink village with a tavern, and a kilometre of festooned lights, 'so if you didn't get to Greece for your holidays, you could go to Leeds instead,' joked Anthony Van Laast, who has choreographed Mamma Mia! (and the two films) throughout its 22-year run.

The performances 'under the stars' will mark the first time Mamma Mia!, one of the most successful musicals in theatre and film history, has been on stage since the pandemic forced shows to close 18 months ago

Poyzer will lead the company at Harewood House, and then take the show to Dubai, before heading off on a UK tou

Sara Poyzer (Donna Sheridan) and cast at Mamma Mia Tour Rehearsals in London

Van Laast and associate director Steven Paling are tasked with ensuring the outdoor show — a full production; not a concert — is captured intact by cameras for the video screens at Harewood House.

'I think people think you just throw it on,' Craymer marvelled, of preparations for the show. But it's a huge operation with a rock tour vibe: cameras, lights, sets, cast, crew, costumes . . .

'Just getting everything up to Leeds . . .' Craymer trailed off, with a sigh and mock wipe of her brow. It certainly is all systems go on the Mamma Mia! front. While the Harewood House ensemble are being put through their paces down in London (at the New Wimbledon Theatre) before heading north next week, the mother ship production at the West End's Novello Theatre is also preparing to re-open.

Lucy May Barker (Sophie Sheridan) at Mamma Mia Tour Rehearsals in London on August 4

Lucy May Barker (Sophie Sheridan) and Toby Miles (Sky) at Mamma Mia Tour Rehearsals in London

Sara Poyzer (Donna Sheridan), Nicky Swift (Rosie), Toby Miles (Sky), Lucy May Barker (Sophie Sheridan) and Helen Anker (Tanya) at Mamma Mia Tour Rehearsals in London

And Meryl Streep and Cher are gearing up to appear — one way or another — in the third Mamma Mia! movie, which Craymer said was 'going through the creative procedure of development'.

Taking a break from rehearsal, Sara Poyzer, who has played Donna Sheridan in London and 33 UK and overseas venues over nine years, told me the first song the cast did when they returned to the boards two weeks ago was Thank You For The Music. 'There were a lot of tears,' she said.

Poyzer will be appearing in the show and tour alongside real life husband Richard Standing (as one of the three potential dads, Sam Carmichael).

The actress said the events of the past 18 months had added resonance to many of the ABBA numbers. When she and daughter Sophie (Lucy May Barker), performed Slipping Through my Fingers it felt 'really poignant'.

They're all working in a big bubble. 'There are so many Covid safety rules — that everyone's happily adhered to!' she told me. 'We want to get this show on.'

A sentiment echoed throughout the entertainment world.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Someone was humming For The First Time In Forever in the cafe at the Jerwood Space, where the musical Frozen (from which the number hails — as if you didn't know!) was in its final week of rehearsals before transferring to the refurbished Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, for technical run-throughs.

The song seemed appropriate. The last face-to-face (not virtual) interviews I did, back in March last year, were with Samantha Barks and Stephanie McKeon.

They play the show's stars, sisters Elsa and Anna, whose once close relationship is torn apart when Elsa exiles herself, terrified her deep-freezing powers are getting out of control.

McKeon, who sings the song in the show, told me she is already wondering how she'll get through the first preview on August 27 without being overcome. 'It's going to be emotional!' she said.

Someone was humming For The First Time In Forever in a cafe where the musical Frozen was in its final week of rehearsals. Pictured: Stephanie McKeon, Craig Gallivan and Samantha Barks

Samantha Barks and Stephanie McKeon (pictured with Obioma Ugoala) play the stars, sisters Elsa and Anna, whose once close relationship is torn apart when Elsa exiles herself

Barks says living alone in her flat early in the pandemic helped her to understand Elsa's isolation in her ice palace. 'I've had a lot of practice,' she said, drily.

Eighteen months on, Barks and McKeon seem more sister-like, often finishing each other's sentences.

'We've been chatting away non-stop since we were cast,' McKeon said.

Thomas Schumacher, the globe-trotting president of Disney Theatrical Productions (he's had to quarantine FIVE times since we last met) noted that the Frozen tale has been changed by Covid, too.

Elsa, Anna and the people of Arendelle are all frozen in place in the story. 'What is happening to the characters, has happened to the audience,' he observed.

Upstairs in the rehearsal room, director Michael Grandage and choreographer Rob Ashford preside over a run-through of new song, I Can't Lose You.

Barks (pictured) says living alone in her flat early in the pandemic helped her to understand Elsa's isolation in her ice palace

The musical - the biggest new show to open this year - will be the flagship production. Pictured: Stephanie McKeon, Obioma Ugoala, Samantha Barks and Oliver Ormson

Written by Kristen Anderson Lopez and Robert Lopez, it's a duet for Barks and McKeon, sung when Anna finally reaches her estranged sister.

It's just one of many ways in which the West End's Frozen will be different from the iterations of the show I saw in Denver four years ago, and on Broadway in early 2018.

'It's not a blueprint of what we did in America,' Grandage agreed. Designer Christopher Oram has built a sprawling staircase and a bridge, for Elsa's icy monument. 'There's a new ice palace, for God's sake!' he cried. 'And new icicles!!'

The musical — the biggest new show to open this year — will be the flagship production; more awesome than its namesakes in Australia, Japan and the U.S.

During the rehearsal, my eye kept being drawn to Craig Gallivan, who plays Olaf (Do You Want To Build A Snowman?), perhaps because he had a large snowman puppet strapped to his person.

Gallivan and his wife have an 18-month-old son, Jasper, and Gallivan said when he nursed him to sleep 'it was a good way of conditioning the muscles in my back' for the physical demands of carrying Olaf.

Lurking in the wings was Oliver Ormson, who plays dastardly Hans. 'He's a prince and a villain. I tick two boxes,' Ormson said, with the hint of a regal (yet wicked) smile.

Eighteen months on, Barks and McKeon (both pictured during rehearsals) seem more sister-like, often finishing each other's sentences

McKeon (pictured) , who sings the song in the show, said she is already wondering how she'll get through the first preview on August 27 without being overcome

Obioma Ugoala was kitted out in a fur-lined gilet as Kristoff, the iceman who helps Anna search for Elsa. He was with Ashley Birchall and Mikayla, who share the role of Sven the reindeer.

I was transfixed, watching them contort their limbs so they could climb inside the massive puppet creature designed by Michael Curry. (Sven was on the verge of being dropped because they couldn't figure out how to make him move, until Curry hit on the idea of a sort of Trojan reindeer).

Grandage noticed me looking agog at the array of belts, wires and pulleys attached to the two actors.

'Aren't we all trying not to give up the child in us?' Grandage commented. Which is why, he added, Frozen is 'not for children only'.

AFTER GODZILLA, REBECCA PROVES SHE'S... THE HALL OF HORRORS!

As if a brush with Godzilla wasn't terrifying enough, actress Rebecca Hall threw herself into battling the paranormal — which was even more scary.

And by then she had a baby daughter and has told how she shook off 'the demons' from the horror movie, so she wouldn't take the 'terror' home with her.

The acclaimed actress, who starred in Parade's End on TV with Benedict Cumberbatch, as well as recent blockbuster Godzilla vs. Kong, faces vivid psychological trauma in The Night House, directed by David Bruckner.

As if a brush with Godzilla wasn't terrifying enough, actress Rebecca Hall (pictured) threw herself into battling the paranormal — which was even more scary

In The Night House, Beth's grief following her husband's death plunges her into a series of terrifying nightmares, where she imagines what might have led him to kill himself

She plays Beth, a woman 'who loses her mind' after her husband commits suicide.

Hall, 39, told me she liked the idea of 'one woman in a house, alone, wrestling with her demons'; particularly given Beth is 'in an alcoholic stupor at the time'.

'Instead of running away, screaming, she runs straight into it, which makes her utterly reckless — and really terrifying to watch.'

She described Beth, as 'heroic, witty, dark, strange and real'. But admirable as she found her, she did not want her toddler, now three, to be exposed to any aspect of this person.

'She was the fence against bringing any of the difficulties of shooting that movie home,' she recalled of the time she and her daughter spent on location in the Finger Lakes region of Upstate New York, an area overflowing with vineyards.

'You can't take what Beth was going through into your own house,' she said during a Zoom call from NY where she lives with husband Morgan Spector, who played FBI agent Dante Allen in Homeland.

The couple met when they played lovers in the Broadway production of Sophie Treadwell's play Machinal in 2014.

The acclaimed actress, who starred in Parade's End on TV with Benedict Cumberbatch, faces vivid psychological trauma in The Night House (pictured), directed by David Bruckner

In The Night House, Beth's grief following her husband's death plunges her into a series of terrifying nightmares, where she imagines what might have led him to kill himself.

'If he's capable of killing himself, what was he not capable of doing?' Hall commented, after we agreed not to give anything away.

It's not all scary stuff. The film is laced with dark humour, especially in scenes set at the school where Beth teaches. She and co-star Sarah Goldberg have some good moments, too.

Hall doesn't watch many horror pictures, but she's made a few, including The Awakening and The Gift.

'It's a genre that appeals to me as an actor, because I think there's a streak in me that's always trying to push further into extreme danger.'

She said she had no personal experience of the paranormal, though she recognised the 'enduring allure' it holds for many.

The acclaimed actress has starred in Parade's End on TV with Benedict Cumberbatch, as well as recent blockbuster Godzilla vs. Kong (pictured)

The Night House will premiere at next month's Edinburgh International Film Festival before opening in cinemas on August 20. Pictured: Rebecca Hall in March 2020

'There's something about going into a room full of strangers, and all screaming together in the dark. That can end up being cathartic, because we all have anxieties to purge.'

Hall has been busy behind the camera, too. She directed a film called Passing, based on Nella Larsen's 1929 novella about a young black woman passing for white, starring Ruth Negga, Tessa Thompson and Andre Holland.

The movie, bought by Netflix at Sundance, will feature at many of the autumn film festivals, and could be an awards contender.

The Night House will premiere at next month's Edinburgh International Film Festival before opening in cinemas on August 20.

CINDERS STILL A SLOW BURN

Believe it or not, there are other big shows on in the West End right now — and not just Cinderella, which has had the sort of bad luck evil stepsisters dream of.

Take the breathtaking Anything Goes at the Barbican, with Sutton Foster making the kind of de-lovely debut in this rollicking delight that will be talked about for years.

She's supported by Robert Lindsay and Felicity Kendal, giving masterclasses in effortless comic ingenuity. Joseph, at the London Palladium, is a delicious parable of fun — an extravaganza for all the family.

Believe it or not, there are other big shows on in the West End right now - and not just Cinderella (pictured), which has had the sort of bad luck evil stepsisters dream of

Cinderella (scenes left and right) is on an enforced hiatus, thanks (partly) to the pingdemic, and its cast will receive little in the way of wages during the shutdown

Cinderella (scene pictured) is a Marmite show: some love it, some hate it. Let's hope there are plenty of the former, so it can recoup its multimillion-pound costs

And Hairspray, at the ENO, is another unmissable treat. At the time of writing, those shows were playing to packed houses.

Cinderella, meanwhile, is on an enforced hiatus, thanks (partly) to the pingdemic, and its cast will receive little in the way of wages during the shutdown.

They will resume work in under a fortnight for two weeks of rehearsals, before opening cold at the Gillian Lynne Theatre — in front of theatre critics — on August 18.

Judging by what I've seen and heard, it's a Marmite show: some love it, some hate it. Let's hope there are plenty of the former, so it can recoup its multimillion-pound costs.

Kristin Scott Thomas has begun casting her directorial debut film The Sea Change, based on Elizabeth Jane Howard's 1959 novel about an eminent playwright with a wandering eye, and his wife.

The couple are haunted by the death, 14 years before, of their two-year-old daughter. But things change when, on holiday on a Greek island, a young woman enters their lives.

The award-winning star has been wanting to direct the film for years. No word yet as to whether she'll appear in it, too. Shooting is set to start in 2022.

WATCH OUT FOR

Rachel Brosnahan, as a U.S. spook who helps turn a British businessman (Benedict Cumberbatch) into a Cold War secret agent in director Dominic Cooke's film The Courier, in cinemas from August 13.

Brosnahan, who stars as The Marvelous Mrs Maisel on Amazon Prime, told me she'd been eager to work with Cumberbatch ('Is there anything that man can't do?) and to film in the UK.

Rachel Brosnahan (pictured) stars as a U.S. spook who helps turn a British businessman (Benedict Cumberbatch) into a Cold War secret agent in Dominic Cooke's film The Courier

Brosnahan, who stars as The Marvelous Mrs Maisel on Amazon Prime, said she'd been eager to work with Cumberbatch (both pictured) and to film in the UK

Her mother is from Leeds but now resides in the States with Brosnahan's American father.

As a child, she liked staying with her English cousins and watching our telly. 'A lot of Anne Robinson in The Weakest Link,' she said.

Camille Griffin, whose film Silent Night, starring Keira Knightley, Roman Griffin Davis, Matthew Goode, Lily-Rose Depp, Annabelle Wallis, Kirby Howell-Baptiste, Sope Dirisu, Holly Aird, Rufus Jones, Dora Davis and Davida McKenzie, will have its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival in September.

Camille Griffin's film Silent Night, starring Keira Knightley, Roman Griffin Davis and Lily-Rose Depp (all pictured), will premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival in September

In the story, friends and family gather to exchange presents on a festive occasion. But there's a dark 'surprise' in store. Pictured: Keira Knightley, Hardy Griffin Davis and Roman Griffin Davis

Just one problem. In the story, friends and family gather in a country pile to exchange presents on a seemingly festive occasion.

But there's a dark 'surprise' in store... which is the film's whole point. And alas, the good citizens of Toronto can't keep a secret.

Deborah Lukumuena and Souheila Yacoub, who star in director Anais Volpe's tale of thespian heartbreak, The Braves, shown at the Cannes Film Festival.

They play (with gusto) Parisian actors and friends who are trying out for a new play.

I liked Lukumuena swatting away some man with, 'Get lost, I'm done with you!' Reminded me of a lady who chucked my belongings from a third-floor window when she was done with me (back in my youth).

Deborah Lukumuena and Souheila Yacoub (both pictured) star in director Anais Volpe's tale of thespian heartbreak, The Braves, shown at the Cannes Film Festival
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Emilia Jones was nine when she made her professional stage debut in the musical Shrek, with the show’s star Amanda Holden watching over her like a benevolent fairy godmother.

A decade on, she’s the star of a Hollywood film, giving a performance that will put her into the thick of the upcoming awards season competition.

London-born Jones appears with Oscar winner Marlee Matlin, playing her mother, in Coda — a picture that has already garnered her acclaim ahead of its opening here next week.

She plays Ruby Rossi, a teen who is the only hearing member of a deaf family.

Not only did Jones have to master American Sign Language (ASL) for the role, she also had to skipper a fishing boat — and take singing lessons.

Emilia Jones (pictured this year) was nine when she made her professional stage debut in the musical Shrek, with the show’s star Amanda Holden watching over her like a benevolent fairy godmother

The first time Emilia bonded with her screen family — Matlin as mum Jackie; Troy Kotsur, playing dad Frank and Daniel Durant as brother Leo — it was on the high seas off the Massachusetts coast. At four in the morning.

‘The first time I met them was on a fishing boat,’ she told me. Director Sian Heder (co-writer and producer on Netflix hit Orange Is The New Black) was striving for authenticity and insisted her stars went and caught fish for real...at the crack of dawn.

As an animal lover, Emilia said she found the experience upsetting. ‘I’d rescue a fish and the real fishermen would turn around, shake their heads and say: “That’s money”.’

It didn’t take her long to find her sea legs, though; and soon, she was grading cod like an old hand. The crew taught her to check the lobsters, for females carrying eggs. They were thrown back into the briny, which made her happy.

London-born Jones appears with Oscar winner Marlee Matlin, playing her mother, in Coda — a picture that has already garnered her acclaim ahead of its opening here next week

Emilia was less sure about the singing side of the role. In the film, Ruby joins the school choir club as a way of getting a breather from her family.

And while Jones can sing — ‘I sang in Shrek,’ she said; ‘I’m singing around the house, and I was in the choir at school’, she’d never had any training. ‘Which was daunting.

‘I was 17 when I shot this movie. I was a little bit nervous, and that’s the same as Ruby. She’s not very confident when she sings — she’s confident when she signs. I related to her in that respect.’

For her audition, Emilia performed Fleetwood Mac’s gentle ballad Landslide, accompanying herself on guitar.

However, when she arrived for her first singing lesson, in between shooting Locke And Key for Netflix (she’s been filming the second and third seasons back-to-back in Canada) she was given belters by Etta James and Aretha Franklin to master.

Aled Jones, Emilia Jones, Lucas Jones and Claire Fossett at 'Elf the Musical' in November 2015

The training has certainly paid off. Jones’s portrait of a young woman trying to gain independence from a family she adores is one of the year’s best. The Sundance Film Festival awarded Coda its top prize back in January, with the judges singling out the power of Emilia’s acting for praise And it was also voted best film at Sundance Film Festival: London this week.

Watch out for... Benedict Cumberbatch, who plays the title role in The Electrical Life Of Louis Wain, which also stars Claire Foy, Andrea Riseborough and Toby Jones, and features voice-over narration by Olivia Colman. The film is directed by Will Sharpe, who also shares screen-writing credits with Simon Stephenson. It’s about Wain, the English artist (who died in 1939, aged 78) known for his humorous drawings and paintings of cats and kittens. Wain had been president of the National Cat Club of Great Britain and a member of Our Dumb Friends League. Those who have seen the picture tell me it’s terrific. It will have its first screenings at the Telluride Film Festival and the Toronto International Film Festival, early next month, which suggest it’s going to be an awards season contender. Advertisement

There are many superb moments in the picture, but the one that has stuck with me is when Ruby sings Joni Mitchell’s Both Sides Now for a university panel, and as she performs the number, begins to sign the lyrics to her family, who have crept up to the balcony to watch.

She said her dad has seen the film several times, and been moved to tears on each occasion. Her father happens to be Aled Jones, who found fame as a gifted boy soprano and later as a TV presenter, recording artist and concert performer.

But despite coming from ‘a musical household’ — during lockdown, she and her dad (once they were allowed to leave the house) went on drives ‘where we sang together’ — Emilia never considered a career in that field. ‘My heart was always in acting.’

Coda, it seems, was the first time she realised she might be able to do both. ‘I just never thought I would do a film where I would sing,’ she laughed.

Her dad did not interfere with her singing lessons. ‘He left it to the teachers. He was happy that I had the opportunity to sing — and he was happy that I was getting more confident.’

Both her parents — Aled and her mum Claire Fossett Jones — are proud ‘that I took on this big film on my own’, she told me, in a video call from Los Angeles.

She reckons she inherited the strength and determination to do that from her parents. ‘My mum is quite shy but I don’t think she would ever give up on anything,’ she said. ‘She was in the circus when she was younger. She did the trapeze — she had to be strong to do that.

‘And my dad worked from an early age. We have that in common.’

Once she wraps on Locke And Key next month, she moves, almost immediately, to shooting the film adaptation of Kristen Roupenian’s short story, Cat Person. The piece went viral when it was published in The New Yorker in December 2017.

Emilia will play Margo, a 20-year-old student — ‘a very strong, confident girl...she’s pretty and she knows it’ — who becomes involved with an older man, Robert (played by Nicholas Braun — cousin Greg from Succession).

‘Cat Person touches on the grey area of consent,’ she said, adding: ‘everybody has a Cat Person story.’ Including her mother; and herself.

‘It’s different to anything I’ve done before,’ she said. ‘I think it’s exciting because as you grow from a kid, suddenly the roles get a little bit bigger and they’re more interesting — and more challenging.’

Coda will be in cinemas and on AppleTV+ from August 13.

Emma Corrin, acclaimed for her portrayal of Princess Diana in The Crown, took her final bow this week in Anna X, Joseph Charlton’s scorching play about a young woman who inveigles her way into the high stakes world of international art dealing and dot com finance.

The drama was the final part of producer Sonia Friedman’s Arts Council England-backed Re:Emerge season at the Harold Pinter Theatre.

I caught up with the show on Monday night, and not only was I gripped by director Daniel Raggett’s production, I was struck by the youthful audience.

Emma Corrin, acclaimed for her portrayal of Princess Diana in The Crown, took her final bow this week in Anna X, Joseph Charlton’s scorching play about a young woman who inveigles her way into the high stakes world of international art dealing and dot com finance

‘The season played to over 90 per cent of available capacity and brought in an exciting new, diverse audience,’ Friedman, who set up Re:Emerge with director Ian Rickson, told me, adding ‘it’s essential I build on this experience and momentum’.

There are plans for Re:Emerge to, er, re-emerge with a new season of works from up and coming artists.

‘I have a gut feeling that brand new audiences and brand new artists are going to want to meet,’ Friedman said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Kylie Jenner celebrated turning 24 on Tuesday, with the billionaire makeup mogul taking to Instagram to show off her voluptuous figure in a slinky green dress, as well as her famous pout.

'Cheers to 24,' the entrepreneur captioned the series of photos, where she looked barely recognizable to how she first appeared as a young star on Keeping Up with the Kardashians.

While many fans rushed to wish Kylie happy returns, some marveled at just how different the star looks with one Instagram user simply commenting: 'You have changed so much.'

My how you've changed! Kylie Jenner celebrated turning 24 on Tuesday with a series of sultry snaps on Instagram wearing a slinky green dress (right, pictured in 2011)

Sister Kim Kardashian also posted a series of throwback snaps on Tuesday to celebrate Kylie's big day.

'Happy Birthday Ky!!!' Kim wrote. 'I love you so much! You will always be my baby sis and I'm here for you no matter what!'

In them, the youngster looks a million miles away from the glamorous figure that is shown to 256million followers on Instagram.

Kylie has consistently shocked fans with her changing appearance, and has admitted to having had fillers put in her lips when she was just 15 years old, saying at the time: 'It's just an insecurity of mine and it's what I wanted to do.'

Green with envy? The young star showed off her voluptuous figure for her birthday, which looks noticeably different from how she appeared in 2014 (right)

Changing shape: Viewers of KUWTK have been astounded at how the reality star's appearance has changed over the years

Slinky: Kylie showed off her figure in a tight-fitting green dress for the special occasion, and looked remarkably different from how she has appeared previously (right, pictured in 2014)

The young star went on to build a billion dollar business on her pout, which she dramatically enhanced over the years with fillers and over-lining lip liner.

The billionaire first appeared on screens as a fresh-faced 10-year-old and KUWTK viewers have long suggested her visage has altered dramatically over the years.

Amid media speculation Kylie originally denied getting injections, crediting carefully applied lip liner for accentuating her pout.

Like a whole new person: Kylie has been open about the fact she has used fillers and makeup trickery to change her looks - pictured left this week, and right in 2011

Celebrations: Kylie tied her birthday to a special 24K collection of her Kylie Cosmetic range in this gold-themed shoot

Come May 2015, however, the reality star came clean and admitted to getting fillers.

In 2017 during an episode of Life of Kylie, the mother-of-one opened up about her decision to get the procedure, noting: 'I was 15 and I was insecure about my lips ... I [had] really small lips,'

'It was like one of my first kisses and a guy was like, 'I didn't think you would be a good kisser because you have such small lips,'' she said, adding that she 'took that really hard'.

She continued, 'Just when a guy you like says that, I don't know, it just really affected me - I just didn't feel desirable or pretty.'

From the vault: Kim Kardashian shared previously unseen snaps of her and Kylie to mark the occasion

Shocked face! Kylie looked unrecognizable in the snap shared by her sister Kim

Throwbacks: Sister Kim posted a series of throwback snaps on Tuesday to celebrate Kylie's big day

Snaps: Kylie has often set tongues wagging with her ever-changing appearance

However, despite admitting to lip filler, she has categorically denied she has had plastic surgery on Twitter.

The reality star wrote: 'These plastic surgery rumours hurt my feelings to be honest and are kinda insulting.'

A plastic surgeon previously told MailOnline that he believes Kylie's face is the work of plastic surgery, in particular her 'thin nose' which he believed has been altered.

Alex Karidis, from the Karidis Clinic claimed her changed nose could be down to rhinoplasty, and said: 'Her nose appears thinner, particularly at the tip.'

Keeping up with Kylie! Kylie Jenner's fans couldn't help but comment on her changing appearance after she appeared on the trailer for the final season of KUWTK earlier this year (pictured left in 2010 and right recently)

Life through a lens: The billionaire first appeared on screens as a fresh-faced 10-year-old and viewers have long suggested her visage has altered dramatically over the years (pictured)

‹ Slide me › No knife here! The make-up mogul has always denied going under the knife to achieve her sculpted visage and instead credited fillers and make-up trickery (pictured left 2011 and right 2020)

However, Kylie has always denied undergoing any other surgery on her face despite constant rumours surrounding the shape of her eyes, cheekbones and chin.

In 2015 the Keeping Up With The Kardashians star addressed the ongoing speculation on her website.

She wrote on her website: 'No, people - I haven't gotten breast implants. Everyone is obsessed with that. Truth is, as I've gotten older, I've gained 15 pounds and my body has changed; I've definitely filled out.

'I just use the Bombshell by Victoria's Secret. It's life-changing. I've gotten all my sisters on it and all my friends...Clearly, it's like 10 times bigger - no contouring, no nothing.

Dramatic look: The young star has gone on to build a billion dollar business on her pout, which she dramatically enhanced over the years with fillers and over-lining lip liner

Changing things up: Amid media speculation Kylie originally denied getting injections, crediting carefully applied lip liner for accentuating her pout

'This is all padding. I think it makes your breast look great and girlie. This is it. No breast implants. No surgery. Nothing. It's amazing. So if you guys want this look, here's my secret.'

She added: 'Working with some of the best makeup artists has taught me a lot of amazing tricks to making me feel more confident and I can't wait to share them with you guys.

'I swear there are things you can do to work on problem areas without having to think about plastic surgery. (Contouring has changed my life!)'.

‹ Slide me › Speculation: Top plastic surgeon Mark Ho-Asjoe also previously told Closer magazine that he believes she has had more work done than she claims and this is 'ageing her' (pictured in 2017, left, and 2014, right)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Blue's Duncan James left viewers in shock over his new look as he appeared on Monday's episode of Celebrity MasterChef.

The singer-turned-actor, 43, previously confessed he feared getting trolled after 'gaining weight and having Botox' ahead of his stint on the show.

Gone were the blond highlights from his pop hey day and Duncan was sporting a trim beard. Some fans struggled to recognise the pop star with his new look.

'Had to Google to confirm it was him!' Blue's Duncan James, 43, looked unrecognisable as he appeared on Celebrity MasterChef on Monday (right, pictured in 2003)

Fans of the show took to Twitter to share their opinion on the new look, with one saying: 'Anyone else find it hard to recognise Duncan James tonight on @MasterChefUK ....?'

Another wrote: 'I had to take a second look at Duncan James on Masterchef I can't tell exactly what work he's had done but he definitely looks different.'

One viewer penned 'Catching up with Masterchef. Had to rely on Google to confirm that was actually Duncan James'.

Blue - which also featured Antony Costa, Lee Ryan and Simon Webbe - formed in 2000, with all four members quickly becoming household names.

Unrecognisable: On Monday night's episode many viewers had to do a double take to figure out who he was, because his appearance has changed that much

The comments come after Duncan assumed he would be trolled over his change in looks, ahead of his appearance on the programme.

Speaking on Friday's Good Morning Britain, he insisted that 'something has to change' as he detailed the online abuse he's received and called for social media to have stricter verification processes before people can create accounts.

He admitted: 'It's terrible actually. Probably after MasterChef I'm gonna get a load of abuse because I had a bit more weight on there, and had a bit of Botox before I went in…'

Shocked: Fans were left baffled by Duncan's new look, with one even having to Google the star to confirm it was still in

While pinching between his eyebrows, the actor added: 'So I have got a bit of the old eyebrow thing going on because it hadn't settled.

'So one thing I've learned is, never go on national television with fresh Botox!'

Duncan asserted: 'Online trolling is disgusting. Personally I believe that verification is needed [to have a social media account].

'If you are going to say something you'll have to own what you say… If you went on television and say it you'd get crucified – something has to change!

'I have daughter who's 16 and she's had trolling in her life, it's not nice for anybody.'

In a more upbeat part of the conversation, Duncan touched upon the idea of a Blue reunion for their 20th anniversary, which he's still hopeful for.

Premonition: The comments come after Duncan assumed he would be trolled over his change in looks, ahead of his appearance on the programme

He said: 'It's been a really weird year, well it has for everyone, but for Blue especially. We had our 20th anniversary in May, but we obviously couldn't celebrate.

'Lee lives in Spain at the moment and has just had a baby, Simon has had a baby, there's a bit of a baby bloom in Blue at the moment.

'Just trying to get us all together has been literally impossible, unfortunately so we'll just have to see what happens.

'Covid has put dampener on everything. Hopefully it [a Blue reunion] will happen, we'll just have to see.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The new series of Strictly Come Dancing has already been thrown into chaos after professional dancer Nadiya Bychkova tested positive for coronavirus.

The celebrity line-up, so far including the likes of McFly's Tom Fletcher, GBBO's John Whaite, AJ Odudu, Dan Walker, Katie McGlynn, Rhys Stephenson, Sara Davies and Robert Webb, have been released by the BBC over the past week.

But now bosses are panicking after Ukrainian-Slovenian dancer Nadiya, 31, contracted the virus during the first week of filming, meaning many of the cast and crew have to isolate for 10 days, according to The Sun.

Pandemic: The new series of Strictly Come Dancing has already been thrown into chaos after professional dancer Nadiya Bychkova tested positive for coronavirus

A source told the publication: 'This isn't exactly the dream start, obviously BBC bosses are panicking.

'They are taking every caution to be Covid secure, and keep everyone safe, but can't control everything, Nadiya tested positive during one of the first meet-ups, during the studio rig.

'Thankfully none of the celebs have started training yet, but it still means anyone who came into contact with her has been told they must isolate.'

Covid: But now bosses are panicking after Ukrainian-Slovenian dancer Nadiya, 31, contracted the virus during the first week of filming (pictured last week)

Keep dancing: The celebrity line-up, so far including Corrie's Katie McGlynn (left) and Dan Walker (right), has been announced over the past week

The Strictly insider added the Covid scare has heightened fear among bosses that other dancers and celebrities could test positive when the rehearsals start later this month.

The source said the BBC could put 'yet more measures and precautions in place' for the cast's safety and to ensure the show goes ahead without a hitch.

A representative for Strictly Come Dancing declined to comment when contacted by MailOnline.

Nadiya joined the show in 2017 and partnered with EastEnders actor Davood Ghadami, and Blue's Lee Ryan the following year before being paired with footballer David James.

She was a backing dancer last year. Strictly was famously disrupted in 2020 thanks to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

Boxer Nicola Adams and her dance partner Katya Jones were forced to withdraw from the competition after Katya tested positive for coronavirus, while YouTuber HRVY narrowly avoided being axed from the show, after he received a positive test result days before the series started.

Tough: Last series Boxer Nicola Adams and her dance partner Katya Jones were forced to withdraw from the competition after Katya tested positive for coronavirus

Near miss: YouTuber HRVY (pictured with Janette Manrara) narrowly avoided being axed from the show, after he received a positive test result days before the series started

But it seems things are back to normal in 2021 - apart from one or two factors still deemed too tricky to navigate amid the global health crisis.

Show boss Sarah James has told The Mirror: 'We're so thrilled that Strictly will be returning for a full-length series this year, and know how much viewers are looking forward to getting their full Strictly fix and seeing the return of much-loved specials.

'We are all so sad that we won't be able to get to Blackpool this year but can't wait to be back dancing at the one and only Blackpool Tower Ballroom in the future.'

The Blackpool episode ordinarily takes place near the end of the series, but was axed last year with restrictions throwing up logistical difficulties on the production.

Still a no-go: Meanwhile, Blackpool has been axed AGAIN due to the ongoing pandemic

But 2021 will include the show's themed weeks - such as movie week, musicals week and Halloween week.

Last year, these were scrapped, proving too complicated to manage amid the pandemic.

The show's Christmas special will also be back, with the show set to start in its usual early-autumn time slot, rather than in October, like last year.

It's said rather than a fewer number of celebs, the full 15 will be taking part again, having cut this to 12 last series.

There are also plans to reinstate the live audience too - another aspect disallowed last season.

'The full fix!' But Strictly will bring back ALL themed weeks, a live audience and the usual 15 celeb contestants [pictured Oti Mabuse and Kelvin Fletcher during Halloween Week 2019]

Isolation will remain in place for the professional dancers. This will see them sent to a hotel near the Strictly studios in Hertfordshire several weeks ahead of the show's return.

The celebs - who will start to be gradually revealed at the end of the summer - will also not have the usual three-week gap between being paired up with their pros and dancing for the first time on live TV.

This has been reduced to one week thanks to logistical factors.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@TOWIE bosses have been accused of acting 'irresponsibly' after cruelly axing 10 young cast members 'without warning' despite telling newbies 'you'll be a star.'

The devastated group were sacked ahead of the start of the 29th series in hastily arranged meetings last month, which many wrongly believed were storyline consultations.

MailOnline can reveal the brutal cull left the cast 'distraught' after they were sold a dream by TV bosses and are now facing financial hardship in incredibly tough economic times.

'They showed no remorse': TOWIE bosses have been accused of acting 'irresponsibly' after cruelly axing 10 young cast members including Chloe Meadows (pictured) 'without warning'

A talent management source told MailOnline: 'It has been a challenging two years for most people financially, this was their career and TOWIE effectively sacked a bunch of youngsters from their jobs and for what reason?

'There was no problem with anyone on the show, they could have given them another six months or the chance to look for other opportunities, but to just fire them all overnight was irresponsible.

'The cast believed they were meeting producers for a catch-up ahead of filming resuming in August, so everyone was ready and excited with their updates – but without warning they were booted off the show.'

'It was brutal': The devastated group, which included Ella Rae Wise (pictured), were sacked ahead of the start of the 29th series in hastily arranged meetings last month

An axed cast member, who cannot be named for legal reasons, said: 'Everyone was dressed up ready to meet the new executives to talk about their storylines because that's what we were told but it turned out to be a completely different conversation.

'The entire cast were phoning each other asking "am I sacked? Am I sacked?" The way it was done, they showed no remorse and didn't take our feelings into account. It was brutal, like a massacre. Some people were really upset and crying.

'Producers recruited a load of youngsters and thought they were going to make it work but now they've chucked them all off. One newbie was told "you're going to be star" and was reassured they'd be on the next series, but it was all short-lived.'

'Challenging': MailOnline can reveal the brutal cull left the cast 'distraught' after they were sold a dream by TV bosses and are now facing financial hardship in tough economic times (pictured: Courtney Green)

Axed: Last month, TOWIE confirmed future series will 'follow a smaller group of cast members and show more of their personal passions and professions' (pictured: Clelia Theodorou)

Last month, TOWIE confirmed future series will 'follow a smaller group of cast members and show more of their personal passions and professions.'

In a statement posted on social media the show said: 'Those who won't appear on screen next series will always be part of the TOWIE family and we wholeheartedly thank them for sharing their lives with us.'

Stars including Courtney Green, 26, Chloe Meadows, 28, and Clelia Theodorou, 26, as well as Nicole Bass, 30, Kelsey Stratford, 20, and Ella Rae Wise, 21, were dropped.

Harry Lee, 26, Harry Derbidge, 27, Rem Larue, 27, and Tom McDonnell, 26, will also not be returning following the cull.

A TOWIE spokesperson said: 'As always the welfare of past and present TOWIE cast is of paramount importance to us and we continue to offer our robust welfare and psychological support.

'In addition to this, we are providing access to a number of advisory services to offer further support including; financial management training, social media management, career advice and life coaching.'

'It was all short-lived': Amber Turner (pictured far left) remains on the show, while close friends Chloe Meadows (middle) and Courtney Green (far right) have been axed in the latest cull

In 2019, TOWIE bosses cast a 'new era' of stars such as Ella and Kelsey to make the show more appealing to younger generations.

Chloe Brockett, 20, is now the only signing from two years ago that remains on the show alongside veterans Chloe Sims, 39, Pete Wicks, 32, and Amy Childs, 31.

A former cast member said: 'They're saying they want to closely follow the lives of cast but at the same time want it to be 'high drama' like Love Island. In truth, they don't know what they're doing.

Moving forward: In 2019, TOWIE bosses cast a 'new era' of stars such as Ella and Kelsey Stratford (pictured) to make the show more appealing to younger generations

'The cast have been silenced by their contracts so are scared to speak about how they've been treated. We're not allowed to talk about how we feel or what we've gone through.

'Over the years so many people have been thrown on and off the show. Cast members aren't allowed to be who they want to be; they're forced to repress their personalities for the purposes of the show.

'They want you to be who they want you to be and if you are, you're their favourites, and you'll get all the storylines and be involved in the drama.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Beyoncé looks sensational on the cover of September's issue of Harper's BAZAAR - and has opened up in a candid chat about dieting, body image and her mental health.

Posing in a sparkling bejeweled top for one of the stunning snaps, the singer, who turns 40 next month, sizzles for an array of looks as she commands attention in the editorial, boldly stating that she is learning to 'break the cycle of poor health and neglect'.

She said: 'In the past, I spent too much time on diets, I'm learning to break the cycle of poor health and neglect.

Bold, Beautiful, Bey! Beyoncé looks sensational on the cover of September's issue of Harper's Bazaar in a sparkling bejeweled top - and has opened up in a candid chat about dieting, body image and her mental health

'My health, the way I feel when I wake up in the morning, my peace of mind, the number of times I smile, what I'm feeding my mind and my body - those are the things that I've been focusing on.

'Mental health is self-care too. Focusing my energy on my body and taking note of the subtle signs that it gives me. Your body tells you everything you need to know, but I've had to learn to listen.

'I think like many women, I have felt the pressure of being the backbone of my family and my company and didn't realize how much that takes a toll on my mental and physical well-being.

'I have not always made myself a priority. I've personally struggled with insomnia from touring for more than half of my life.

'It can be easy to lose yourself very quickly in this industry. It takes your spirit and light, then spits you out. I've fought to protect my sanity and my privacy.'

Raw: The singer, 39, sizzles for an array of looks as she commands attention in the editorial, bolding stating that she is learning to 'break the cycle of poor health and neglect'

Then and now: Beyoncé - pictured, left, in 2003, and right, in this 2021 shoot - has admitted that she would diet 'unhealthily'

Beyoncé has built her company, Parkwood Entertainment, into a media conglomerate, launching a fashion line, IVY PARK, alongside it.

The mother of three - who shares nine-year-old Blue Ivy and four-year-old twins Rumi and Sir, with husband Jay-Z - is the face of Tiffany & Co. with her husband.

On the changing world of celebrity culture and how to protect her inner self, the Crazy In Love chanteuse said: 'Throughout my career, I've been intentional about setting boundaries between my stage persona and my personal life. My family and friends often forget the side of me that is the beast in stilettos until they are watching me perform.

'It can be easy to lose yourself very quickly in this industry. I've seen it countless times, not only with celebrities but also producers, directors, executives, etc. It's not for everyone.

Queenly: 'I think like many women, I have felt the pressure of being the backbone of my family and my company and didn't realize how much that takes a toll on my mental and physical well-being,' she told the publication

Majestic: 'I have not always made myself a priority. I've personally struggled with insomnia from touring for more than half of my life,' she added

She said: 'It can be easy to lose yourself very quickly in this industry. It takes your spirit and light, then spits you out. I've fought to protect my sanity and my privacy'

'Before I started, I decided that I'd only pursue this career if my self-worth was dependent on more than celebrity success. I've surrounded myself with honest people who I admire, who have their own lives and dreams and are not dependent on me. People I can grow and learn from and vice versa.

'In this business, so much of your life does not belong to you unless you fight for it. I've fought to protect my sanity and my privacy because the quality of my life depended on it. A lot of who I am is reserved for the people I love and trust.'

On how the women in her life have influenced her, she said: 'My closest friends are brilliant women who run companies, are entrepreneurs, mothers, wives, and close family.

'[Destiny's Child co-stars] Kelly [Rowland] and Michelle [Williams] are still my best friends. I gravitate toward strong, grounded women like my incredible sister, Solange. She is full of wisdom, and she is the dopest person I know.'

'I watched my mother nurture and heal those women in her salon, not just by making them look and feel beautiful but by talking with them, listening to them, and connecting with them.

BFFs: '[Destiny's Child co-stars] Michelle [Williams] and Kelly [Rowland] are still my best friends. I gravitate toward strong, grounded women,' she said

On the changing world of celebrity culture and how to protect her inner self, the Crazy In Love chanteuse said: 'My family and friends often forget the side of me that is the beast in stilettos until they are watching me perform'

On how the women in her life have influenced her, she said: 'My closest friends are brilliant women who run companies, are entrepreneurs, mothers, wives, and close family'

'I've seen how much Black women's emotions are attached to our hair and beauty. The beauty industry does not always understand these emotions and what we need. I want to build a community where women of all races can communicate and share some of those secrets, so we can continue to support and take care of each other.

'I want to give women a space to feel their own strength and tell their stories. That is power.'

On the inspiration behind her new IVY PARK collection, the Signs songstress explained: 'This collection is a mixture of my childhood growing up in Texas and a bit of American history.

'I grew up going to the Houston rodeo every year. It was this amazing diverse and multicultural experience where there was something for every member of the family, including great performances, Houston-style fried Snickers, and fried turkey legs.'

Beyoncé is in the midst of recording new music, much to fans' delight.

Cover girl: The singer features on a variety of different covers for the September issue

'With all the isolation and injustice over the past year, I think we are all ready to escape, travel, love, and laugh again,' she said, referencing the pandemic. 'I feel a renaissance emerging, and I want to be part of nurturing that escape in any way possible.

'I've been in the studio for a year and a half. Sometimes it takes a year for me to personally search through thousands of sounds to find just the right kick or snare. One chorus can have up to 200 stacked harmonies.

'Still, there's nothing like the amount of love, passion, and healing that I feel in the recording studio. After 31 years, it feels just as exciting as it did when I was nine years old. Yes, the music is coming!'

On what she hopes the next decade will bring: 'My wish is for my 40s to be fun and full of freedom. I want to feel the same freedom I feel on stage every day of my life. I want to explore aspects of myself I haven't had time to discover and to enjoy my husband and my children.

Out now: Check out the full portfolio, which runs in 24 editions of Harper's BAZAAR around the world

'I want to travel without working. I want this next decade to be about celebration, joy, and giving and receiving love. I want to give all the love I have to the people who love me back.'

'I want to continue to work to dismantle systemic imbalances. I want to continue to turn these industries upside down. I plan to create businesses outside of music. I have learned that I have to keep on dreaming.

'I want to show that you can have fun and have purpose, be respectful and speak your mind. You can be both elegant and a provocateur. You can be curvy and still be a fashion icon. I wish this freedom for every person.

'I have paid my dues and followed every rule for decades, so now I can break the rules that need to be broken. My wish for the future is to continue to do everything everyone thinks I can't do.'

Check out the full portfolio, which runs in 24 editions of Harper's BAZAAR around the world, on newsstands now.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Love Island bosses have thrown in another male bombshell who wants to lure Millie Court away from Liam Reardon, just days after she forgave his cheating.

The new Islander will be waiting for the girls after they return from a challenge in Tuesday's show, and already plans to sweep Millie, 24, off her feet.

His arrival comes less than two weeks before the final of the ITV2 dating series, with everything still to play for when it comes to scooping the £50,000 prize.

'Heads could be turned': Love Island have thrown in another male bombshell who wants to lure Millie Court (pictured) away from Liam Reardon, just days after she forgave his cheating

A TV insider told MailOnline: 'Producers are doing everything they can to maintain the excitement of the last few weeks following Casa Amor.

'Some of the couples seem settled in their relationships, but with bombshells still coming in, heads could be turned.'

Millie and Liam's romance was rocked in Casa Amor after the Welshman's head was turned by Lillie Haynes, 22, who he passionately kissed during the 'lads' holiday.'

In recent days, Millie has forgiven Liam for betraying her, but the new male suitor that makes his entrance in tonight's show could still tempt her away.

Lured away?: The new Islander will be waiting for the girls after they return from a challenge in Tuesday's show, and already plans to sweep Millie, who's coupled up with Liam, off her feet

Ignorance is bliss: Liam is all smiles in images taken during Tuesday's Sex Gods challenge before the cast return to the villa and are met with the mystery new arrival

MailOnline understands if all fails with Millie, the new recruit also fancies Kaz Kamwi, 26, and Mary Bedford, 21.

New Islanders Priya Gopaldas, 23, and Aaron Simpson, 24, are the latest contestants to arrive at the villa, after making their entrances on Monday's show.

Medical student Priya was keen to get to know Teddy Soares, 26, following his 'split' from Faye Winter, 26, but he made it clear he wasn't interested.

Meanwhile, footballer Aaron, hit it off with Mary and the couple even share their first kiss on Tuesday's show.

Tonight's episode will see the male Islanders put their strength to the test in a Sex Gods challenge, where they climb Mount Olympus, and kiss their respective partners.

Liam is all smiles in images taken during the game before the cast return to the villa and are met with the mystery new arrival.

New couple?: Priya Gopaldas arrived at the Love Island villa on Monday's episode and already appears to be hitting off with Irishman Matt MacNabb in scenes from tonight's show

Elsewhere in tonight's episode, Faye finally backs down from her recent outburst against Teddy and appears to apologise for shouting and swearing at him.

Faye was left raging after she saw a clip of Teddy telling Casa Amor bombshell Clarisse Juliette, 24, he found her 'sexually attractive', causing her to breakup their relationship, and tell him to f*** off on multiple occasions.

Despite Faye's over the top reaction, Teddy kept his cool and remained loyal when taken on a date by Priya, insisting his head and heart was still elsewhere.

Speaking to Millie and Chloe, Faye admits: 'I feel bad, I feel like s*** that I blew up the way I did and I am sorry for what I done and there's no excuse for it.

'There's no excuse for the way I just flew out, off the handle. But, I just want to move forward with it.'

'I feel like s***': Elsewhere in tonight's episode, Faye finally backs down from her recent outburst against Teddy and appears to apologise for shouting and swearing at him

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Christina Ricci has surprised fans by revealing that she is pregnant with her second child, and has gone public with her new romance with celebrated hairstylist Mark Hampton.

The happy news comes just months after the actress was granted a restraining order against estranged husband James Heerdegen, amid allegations of domestic violence.

Ricci, 41, made the announcement that she is expecting a baby on Tuesday with a sonogram picture posted to her Instagram account, along with the caption, 'Life keeps getting better.'

Her hairstylist and boyfriend Hampton implied he is the father of the child by posting his own series of sonogram snaps with a similar caption. Hampton then referred to himself as the 'daddy' replying to one well-wisher: 'daddy shark do do do do do do.'

Surprise! Christina Ricci, 41, reveals she's having a baby... one year after filing for divorce from husband James Heerdegen

Ricci and Hampton appear to have got close this past year, working on a number of fashion shoots together. Often, Ricci has left a series of heart emojis under pictures of herself that Hampton has posted.

She also dropped a hint with a birthday tribute to the hairstylist in July, commenting: 'favorite person, gorgeous human, bringer of all things happy, magical and good. I love you ... this next year is going to be the best one yet.'

Hampton - a hairstylist and makeup artist - is an industry professional who has worked with A-List talent and big name brands like Banana Republic and Hugo Boss.

Expanding her brood: The star is already mother to son Freddie Heerdegen - who was born in 2014 - and who she shares with her ex James (pictured above last year)

Father figure: Hairstylist Mark Hampton declared himself to be the 'daddy' in an Instagram comment on Tuesday, as he also shared the happy news

He was congratulated on his post by British supermodel Jourdan Dunn. Last year, he worked with Elon Musk's girlfriend Grimes, doing her hair and makeup for a V Magazine fashion shoot, and described her as being a 'super sweet heart!'

Hampton also styled Oscar-nominated actress Carey Mulligan's hair in February last year for the cover of Heroine magazine and previously worked with the Olsen twins.

His impressive work includes editorials for Vogue, Dazed and Confused, Elle and Q Magazine, and has worked on fashion shows for Miu Miu, Marc Jacobs, Prada, Louis Vuitton, and Calvin Klein.

He's the daddy! Mark replied to a well wisher on his own pics of the sonogram, with the message 'daddy shark'

His and hers: Mark posted a similar sonogram snap to Christina's and made sure to tag the actress on Tuesday

Meanwhile, Ricci is already mother to six-year-old son Frederick 'Freddie' Heerdegen - who was born in 2014 - and who she shares with her ex James.

In April this year, Ricci and her estranged husband reached a custody arrangement after their contentious split prompted accusations of abuse from both sides.

The arrangement was submitted to the Los Angeles County Superior Court in May, according to reports at the time.

The agreement favored Ricci, allowing the actress custody of their son after she relocates to Vancouver, Canada to film a new project, with Heerdegen getting visitation rights.

Who is Christina Ricci's new man Mark Hampton? Christina Ricci appears to be in a new romance with celebrated hairstylist Mark Hampton, after the pair both confirmed they are expecting a child together on Tuesday. The hairstylist first made a name for himself in London, where he began his career at the age of 17, and qualified just before he reached the age of 21. As well as fashion, Mark has also worked extensively in the music industry styling hair on videos for artists including Kate Nash, Calvin Harris, Ladyhawke and La Roux. Professional: Mark Hampton seen in action as a hairstylist Last year, he worked with Elon Musk's girlfriend Grimes, doing her hair and makeup for a V Magazine fashion shoot, and described her as being a 'super sweet heart!' Hampton also styled Oscar-nominated actress Carey Mulligan's hair in February last year for the cover of Heroine magazine and previously worked with the Olsen twins. His impressive work includes editorials for Vogue, Dazed and Confused, Elle and Q Magazine, and has worked on fashion shows for Miu Miu, Marc Jacobs, Prada, Louis Vuitton, and Calvin Klein. Advertisement

Ricci also agreed to pay 'reasonable costs for travel and accommodations,' which include 'economy airfare' for her ex. She will also get to choose where he stays during his visitation trips.

The Addams Family star was granted a restraining order against Heerdegen in January. He attempted to obtain his own restraining order later that month but was denied.

Heerdegen made shocking accusations while filing for a temporary restraining order, claiming his ex abuses alcohol and prescription drugs, making her a danger to their young son.

He also claimed he had to check their son's bottles of breast milk for fear of it being contaminated with alcohol she drank the night before.

His filing came just days after Ricci accused her estranged husband of physically abusing her.

She said she had to hide knives in the house because she feared Heerdegen could kill her after he allegedly said he would only feel sorry for her if she was 'dismembered into small pieces'.

A judge granted Ricci a domestic violence restraining order against Heerdegen in early January, six months after she filed for divorce.

Ricci and Heerdegen were married on October 26, 2013, they welcomed their son together the following year.

In 2017, Ricci talked about how becoming a mother changed her.

'Marriage shows you your flaws in how you deal with things, and having a child forces you to grow up at the speed of light,' she told Net-a-Porter's digital magazine The Edit.

'I'm a completely different person than I was before I had my child.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They delighted Friends fans all over the world in May when they revealed they had been 'crushing hard' on one another during filming on the hit show's early seasons.

And although Jennifer Aniston and David Schwimmer had sparked speculation they are becoming each other's 'lobsters' in real life, it now seems they really are on a break and not seeing if there's any romance, years after 'crushing' on the hit show.

It had been reported the duo were 'growing close' after the recent Friends special 'stirred up feelings', 17 years after Ross Geller and Rachel Green's romantic reunion.

However on Wednesday, a representative for David, 54, told HuffPost UK that reports of a romance with his former co-star, 52, are not true.

On a break! David Schwimmer has denied speculation he and Jennifer Aniston are becoming each other's 'lobsters' in real life, amid reports they are 'growing close' again, 17 years after Ross Geller and Rachel Green's romantic reunion (pictured in May at the Friends reunion)

It was reported by a Closer Magazine that David and Jennifer were 'spending time together once again' after the reunion special 'stirred up feelings'.

A source said: 'After the reunion, it became clear that reminiscing over the past had stirred up feelings for both of them and that chemistry they'd always had to bury was still there.

'They began texting immediately after filming and, just last month, David flew from his home in New York to see Jen in LA.'

It was claimed the pair have been spending time at Jennifer's home, where she has treated David to dinners, with the source adding: 'They were also spotted drinking wine, deep in conversation, as they walked around one of Jen’s favourite vineyards in Santa Barbara, where it was clear there was lots of chemistry between them.'

However this has now been denied by David's representative. MailOnline has also contacted representatives for Aniston and Schwimmer for comment.

It's always been you, Rach: Jennifer, 52, and David, 54, were said to be 'spending time together once again' after the reunion special 'stirred up feelings', according to Closer Magazine (pictured on the show in 1995)

Amid the reports of the duo potentially becoming an item, thousands of Friends fans shared their excitement over the idea and urged them to get together.

Writing on Twitter, one fan penned: 'I really hope the rumour about Jennifer Aniston and David Schwimmer dating is true!!'

While another added: 'If Jennifer Aniston and David Schwimmer are actually together my whole life will be complete.'

This comes after Jennifer and David confessed that they had crushes on each other when filming began on Friends in 1994 - with the revelation coming during the HBO Max reunion special

'I mean, the first season, I had a major crush on Jen. At some point, we were crushing hard on each other,' David revealed.

I didn't get a cat! A source said: 'They began texting immediately after filming and, just last month, David flew from his home in New York to see Jen in LA' (pictured 1995)

David explained: 'But it was like two ships passing, because one of us was always in a relationship and we never crossed that boundary.

Matt LeBlanc, who played Joey Tribbiani, jokingly said: 'Bulls**t.'

Jennifer said that she had a conversation with Ross prior to their character's first kiss.

'Honestly, I remember saying one time to David, 'It's going to be such a bummer if the first time you and I actually kiss is going to be on national television,' Jennifer said. '

Jennifer noted: 'Sure enough, first time we kissed was in that coffee shop. So we just channeled all of our adoration and love for each other into Ross and Rachel.'

David and Jennifer also spent time together during breaks from rehearsal, with David recalling that they would 'cuddle on the couch.'

'We would spoon and fall asleep on the couch,' Jennifer said.

Reaction: Thousands of devoted Friends fans shared their excitement over the potential real life romance, with some gushing their 'lives would be made' if the rumours were true

Candid: This comes after Jennifer and David confessed that they had crushes on each other when filming began on Friends in 1994 - with the revelation coming during the HBO Max reunion special

During the reunion special, footage of their characters snuggling aired, with David adding: 'How did not everyone know we were crushing on each other?'

However, Courteney Cox, Matthew Perry both said they 'knew' about David and Jennifer's attraction to each other.

In the end, David said it 'was a situation we couldn't do anything about,' with Courteney adding that it was for the best: 'How great though, ultimately. Because if you had [acted on it] and it didn't work out, it would have not been as great [on the show].'

The Friends cast had an 'unspoken rule' not to date one another.

Although Jennifer, David, Matt, Matthew and Courteney all saw their sitcom alter egos hook up with one another at various times on the show, the group - along with castmate Lisa Kudrow - insisted their chemistry never spilled over into real life because they were determined not to 'mess with' the bond they had on screen.

Matthew said: 'There was a rule, it was really important to the six of us, that we kept a friendship. Hooking up could have caused a strangeness that might mess with things. And we are really good friends to this day.'

When were you under me? David explained: 'But it was like two ships passing, because one of us was always in a relationship and we never crossed that boundary' (pictured 1996)

David added: 'We didn't want to jeopardize any of the great relationships and friendships we had established. It was kind of an unspoken rule.'

Ross and Rachel's on-off romance kept viewers hooked for ten seasons, culminating in their iconic reunion in the 'I got off the plane' finale scene.

The first season of the show saw Ross harbour unrequited feelings for his school crush Rachel, who was blissfully unaware until the season one finale when Chandler let slip while Ross was in China.

She rushed to meet him at the airport to tell him her feelings but he had found a new girlfriend - Julie - in the space of a week.

Rachel then got drunk and admitted she was 'over' Ross in a voicemail, which he heard the next morning.

Friends reunited: The cast was seen together at the Friends reunion in May: Matthew Perry, Matt LeBlanc, Jennifer, Courteney Cox, Jennifer Aniston and David

The pair then shared the most legendary TV kiss of all time in the coffee shop, cementing their place in TV history.

After some false starts, the pair dated before famously 'going on a break' - with Ross sleeping with 'the girl from the copy place' in the interim.

Following the briefest of reunions, their relationship ended once again in season four with Ross then proposing to Brit Emily Waltham within weeks - before Rachel realised she was still in love with him.

Their fairytale wedding in London was gatecrashed by Rachel, who decided not to tell Ross she loved him after all, but the hapless paleontologist was the master of his own destruction when he said during the vows 'I Ross, take thee Rachel.'

On-screen soulmates: Ross and Rachel's on-off romance kept viewers hooked for ten seasons, culminating in their iconic reunion in the 'I got off the plane' finale scene (pictured 1996)

What is it with those names? Following the briefest of reunions, their relationship ended once again in season four with Ross then proposing to Brit Emily Waltham within weeks - with Ross memorably saying 'I Ross, take thee Rachel' during the vows

Family: The pair had a one-night stand in season seven, with Rachel giving birth to Emma in season eight

Although the pair remained friends and frequently showed their love for one another - as well as drunkenly marrying in Vegas and welcoming daughter Emma after a one-night stand in season eight - their reunion didn't come until the show's finale.

Following a one-night stand before Rachel's move to Paris - Ross rushed to the airport to declare his love for her, but returned home alone after Rachel rebuffed him.

However, Rachel then realised she still loved Ross too, rushing back to his apartment and giving fans the ultimate Roschel reunion.

She got off the plane! Roschel was finally reborn in the show's finale episode in season 10

They were on a break: The former sitcom stars recently chose some of their favorite moments from the early seasons of Friends - with Ross donning a sweater emblazoned with the pair's first kiss

In June Howard Stern asked the actress during his SiriusXM show if she and David ever 'banged.'

The Morning Show star, who had Friends vets Courteney Cox and Lisa Kudrow by her side while chatting with Stern, shared that they never did. 'I would proudly say I banged Schwimmer if that happened but no,' said the beauty.

'We were in relationships and it was always never the right time and it wouldn't have worked,' shared the blonde.

Iconic: The Friends cast had an 'unspoken rule' not to date one another

'The beauty of that was that whatever feelings we had we just literally channeled everything into Ross and Rachel and I think that's maybe why it resonated the way it did,' added the We're The Millers star.

'But no, we never, on my life [got together]. And Courteney and Lisa would know if it did because they would've heard about it. They can vouch for me,' she said as Cox, 57, added it was 'true.'

'Howard's not going to believe me,' Aniston then replied. 'No, I would proudly say I banged Schwimmer if that happened. But no.'

Jennifer also said of David: 'He was lovely, David was great.'

Her take: Aniston added, 'Honestly, I remember saying one time to David, "It's going to be such a bummer if the first time you and I actually kiss is going to be on national television." Sure enough, first time we kissed was in that coffee shop'

His ex: Schwimmer was married to Zoe Buckman from 2010 until they split in 2017; the share daughter Chloe. Seen in 2016

Jennifer and David's strong bond was evidenced once again just last week when they modelled a new merch collection for charity.

The former sitcom stars chose some of their favorite moments from the early seasons of Friends for the range - with Ross and Rachel's first kiss and the moment Ross finds out about Rachel's crush on him picked by the stars for the attire.

Jennifer also spoke recently about how David had jetted to LA and how she was able to meet his daughter Cleo, 10, for the first time, who he shares with ex-wife Zoe Buckman.

Jennifer was previously married to Brad Pitt from 2000-2005 and Justin Theroux from 2015-2017.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They fell for each other while working on her film Don't Worry Darling last year.

And Harry Styles and Olivia Wilde appeared inseparable once more on Monday after a quick trip to a gym.

The Booksmart director, 37, and Watermelon Sugar singer, 27, were dressed down following their workout together.

Gym trip: Olivia Wilde and Harry Styles started their week off with a workout together on Monday in Santa Monica

It seemed the couple was settled into a routine together, looking completely at ease during the outing.

Olivia had that post-exercise glow as she headed to the car rocking a Purple Rain tee shirt and black leggings with a racing stripe down the side along with white and orange sneakers.

Her hair was up in a messy ponytail, still tousled from the gym.

Making sure she was hydrated, Wilde carried a gallon of water along with another smaller bottle. Sunglasses completed her look and a blue backpack.

Hand off: The couple seemed at ease with one another

Sporty: Olivia had that post-exercise glow as she headed to the car rocking a Purple Rain tee shirt and black leggings

Meanwhile, Harry was clad in a his regular clothes, donning a vintage tee shirt, ripped jeans, retro white sunnies, checkered Vans slip-ons and a ball cap instead of workout wear.

He approached the car first, reaching in to hand his girlfriend over a pair of shoes.

Yesterday the couple were seen on a loved-up stroll through Los Angeles while Wilde's ex Jason Sudeikis spent time with their daughter Daisy, four.

While it emerged it November 2020 that Jason and Olivia had separated after seven years together, Page Six previously reported that her relationship with Harry started as early as October 2020.

Fashion: Harry was clad in a his regular clothes, donning a vintage tee shirt, ripped jeans, retro white sunnies, checkered Vans slip-ons and a ball cap instead of workout wear

The outlet reported in January that Jason was upset to learn Olivia's relationship with Harry dated back to October 2020.

Insiders told the site that her involvement with Harry was the primary reason for the break-up.

'Olivia and Jason were having issues, like any other couple, but Jason loves Olivia — he completely adores her, and that's what makes this so sad. He's always been committed to making their family work,' the source told the site in January.

In June, a source claimed to PageSix that Jason is 'still heartbroken' over the saga.

'Jason is heartbroken about Olivia and Harry's relationship,' a source claimed to the outlet. 'They're going from strength to strength, and he's still massively upset and, to be honest, is still a little angry.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Faye Winter and Teddy Soares rekindled their romance during Tuesday's Love Island, after the blonde made a grovelling apology.

The 26-year-old, said she had 'no excuses' for the way she spoke to Teddy, 26, during their heated row which was sparked from the Movie Night challenge.

Faye - who is thought to have said 'f**k' 57 times in the now infamous argument -explained: 'Seeing what I saw on screen, I was hurt. For me to react like that, I obviously do care about you. I would love to show you that I'm not done and continue with you on this journey.'

Back on: Faye and Teddy rekindled their romance during Tuesday's Love Island, with the bombshell telling him: 'I am really sorry for the way I spoke to you. There's no excuse'

Despite Teddy hinting to Faye that she has plenty of work to do, saying: 'I want to know that you actually want it,' the pair shared a kiss and confirmed their romance is back on as their fellow islanders cheered.

Faye became enraged during Sunday's episode after hidden clips were aired to the villa that revealed the 'sexual attraction' comments Teddy made to former islander Clarisse Juliette in Casa Amor.

Speaking with the girls before Tuesday's 'make or break' conversation with Teddy, Faye admitted she was feeling 'nervous' and it wasn't going to be easy to say sorry, but knew that she had 'done wrong' and that there was 'no excuse' for how she reacted after the challenge.

Making up: Despite Teddy hinting to Faye that she has plenty of work to do, saying: 'I want to know that you actually want it,' the pair shared a kiss and confirmed their romance is back on

'There would be no point in me staying here if it wasn't for Teddy,' she said while talking to the villa's girls.

She added: 'Although I lost my head and I went about it completely the wrong way, I wouldn't have been myself if I didn't do that.

'I've obviously thought about it hard for the last couple of days and I do want to be sorry and I do want to make it work with him.'

Faye told Teddy: 'I would love to show you that I'm not done and be able to continue with you on this journey'

Cautious: Proceeding with caution, Teddy said to Faye: 'I want to know that you actually want it'

She concluded: 'I've now got to grovel myself, which is fine, because I know what I want.'

However Faye did tell Millie: 'I can't say that I'm never going to fire up again.'

Thinking things over some more in the Beach Hut before finally pulling Teddy, Faye added: 'At the end of the day I am sorry. I never think about ''future Faye''. Actually, I sabotage her every day just by being a k**b.'

Celebration: Faye and Teddy's fellow islanders whooped and cheered as they watched them lock lips

Faye admitted: 'I've now got to grovel myself, which is fine, because I know what I want. Being a girlfriend now doesn't sound so scary'

However many fans were not impressed that Teddy had decided to give his relationship with Faye another go, and rushed to Twitter in the wake of their reconciliation to share their disproval.

One social media user branded Teddy 'a doormat', while another asked: 'How is Teddy taking back Faye after the way she talked to him?'

A third person tweeted that Faye was acting like 'a brat' as another branded her apology 'fake.'

A fourth person noted: 'I'm sorry but Faye and Teddy's relationship seems toxic and he seems too nice to end.'

Not happy: Many fans were not impressed that Teddy had decided to give his relationship with Faye another go

Elsewhere, Aaron sought help from the other islanders to organise a cute brunch for Mary, determined to show her that not all footballers are 'like that' after she told him about her previous bad experiences with other football players on their date.

After sharing a kiss with the athlete, Mary gushed: 'I'm so happy that Aaron was so cute. I think that's the sweetest thing I think anyone has ever done for me.'

But Tuesday's biggest bombshell came in the form of brand new islander Brett, who was waiting for the girls when they returned home from Tuesday's challenge, telling Chloe and Priya: 'You can come and say hello if you like.'

Love Island continues at 9pm on ITV2 on Wednesday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Molly-Mae Hague hit back at speculation she had split from boyfriend Tommy Fury after fans claimed they've 'been quiet' on social media.

The Love Island, 22, took to Instagram on Tuesday for a Q&A when a fan asked: 'Are you and Tommy okay? Been quiet on here lately.'

Her fans' concerns come after her boxer beau left their holiday in Santorini to prepare for the Jake Paul fight in the USA.

Rumour has it: Molly-Mae Hague has squashed rumours that her and Tommy Fury have split after fans claimed they've 'been quiet'

Reassuring all was well between the couple, who have been dating since the 2019 series of Love Island, Molly-Mae told her worried follower: 'Of course we are OK!'

'Just because we don't post a selfie together on stories for a few weeks doesn't mean things are bad.'

She revealed: 'We are both soooo busy. He's in training camp currently also which is super serious stuff.'

Taking down rumours: The influencer took down rumours on Instagram, responding with: 'Of course we are OK!'

Close: On Wednesday Molly-Mae also took to her Instagram to share a picture of her beau holding her teddy bear Ellie Belly

'No date nights and messing around.' We have really early nights and a very set routine that I also try and follow in order to support him,' she clarified.

Molly-Mae, who has just returned from work trips in Ibiza and Greece, added: 'I love him so much. So proud of him.'

Tommy is billed to make his US debut on the Jake Paul vs Tyron Woodley event on 29th August - although he won't be fighting the ex-Disney Channel star.

Instead, the boxer, 24, will be the undercard of the Paul vs Woodley fight.

The event comes as the YouTuber shared an alleged private Instagram DM from Tommy's partner Molly-Mae.

The 'screenshot', from October 2018, read: 'Might be coming to America later this year and have always been a fan of your videos. Maybe you can show me around?'

But former Islander Molly snapped back, insisting the screenshot was fake.

Busy: 'We are both soooo busy. He's in training camp currently also which is super serious stuff' she told her fans.

She tweeted in May: 'Times must be hard when you’re having to fake a DM…. Photoshop is scary.'

Tommy responded, and plans to exact his revenge. He told Sky Sports: 'I'm thick-skinned. I'm a professional athlete. These boys ain't. These boys play games on the internet and run around for a living.'

'I fight hard for a living. I will let my fists do the talking. For every bad thing he has said, he will get a swift right hand for it.

'I will break every bone in his face. You don't bring people's loved ones into it. It's a fight. It's nothing to do with them, leave them out of it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Emma Corrin proudly posed with a rainbow flag in Manchester on Tuesday - four months after appearing to announce she is 'queer'.

The Crown actress, 25, who added 'they' to her chosen pronouns back in July, looked stylish in a pinstripe blazer, paired with a flat cap and shades as she posed outside The Lowry.

She will star in play Anna X at the iconic theatre from Wednesday, August 11 to Saturday, August.

Snap: Emma Corrin proudly posed with a rainbow flag in Manchester on Tuesday - four months after appearing to announce she is 'queer'

She captioned the snap: 'Yooo Manchester, let's go' while promoting her performance.

Emma stars in the production as a socialite called Anna. The show is inspired by the Anna Sorokin case - a Russian-born fraudster who pretended to be a wealthy German heiress in order to defraud banks, hotels, and wealthy acquaintances.

Anna was only released from prison in March this year.

In June, Emma marked the end of pride month by sporting a rainbow jumper while out and about in London. Months earlier, back in April Emma appeared to announce that she is 'queer'.

Acclaimed: She will star in play Anna X at the iconic theatre from Wednesday, August 11 to Saturday, August (pictured last month)

The Crown actress took to Instagram as she shared a picture from her new spread in Pop magazine where she was clad in a wedding dress and veil.

She simply captioned the image: 'ur fave queer bride'.

Emma has kept tight-lipped on any talk surrounding her sexuality and dating life.

Back in October, she was asked by Stella magazine if there was a 'boyfriend on the scene', and replied: 'I'd rather navigate this on my own. It's nicer to feel like I'm taking care of me.'

Caption: Back in April Emma appeared to announce that she is 'queer'

MailOnline contacted Emma's representatives for comment.

Emma soared into the spotlight last year with her breakout role as Princess Diana in Netflix's The Crown. The British star plays the late Royal in the fourth series of the drama, in a role which has won her widespread critical acclaim.

Reflecting on the release of the fourth series, Emma has now revealed she had to have 'tunnel vision' in order for her to stay grounded.

Pronouns: Emma changed her pronouns to she/they on her Instagram bio - meaning she is happy to be addressed by either

The acting talent said things 'got a bit crazy' when her season of The Crown dropped on Netflix and she feels it is extremely important for her, in situations like that, to come home and 'drown out' the success and frenzy surrounding her.

'Stuff got a bit crazy when the show came out. I had to have a bit of tunnel vision... you do your job, you come home, and then like try and drown out the rest,' she told the Daily Telegraph.

'I think it’s a really important mindset to have, especially if stuff starts quickly and you’re young. Because the rest of it is scary.'

Despite the glitz and glamour that come with her success, Emma insisted that her life is very 'unglamorous' compare to the showbiz events she is usually seen attending.

Breakout role: Emma soared into the spotlight last year with her breakout role as Princess Diana in Netflix's The Crown

'I cannot express how unglamorous it is,' she teased of her life away from the camera.

' I live with flatmates that I’ve lived with for five years who have nine-to-five jobs. We all go to work, come home, cook dinner and there’s no shenanigans. You’re still trying to sort out weird rashes and trying to book doctor’s appointments or being like, "oh f***, I forgot to buy butter."'

Speaking about playing the role of Princess Diana previously, Emma said she was "terrified" to take on the iconic royal.

'I remember when I got the part, I did feel that insane sense of responsibility, also playing Diana as well, it's kind of terrifying,' she confessed.

Emma admitted that she wasn't supposed to play the Princess of Wales at first and was hired on set to help other actresses.

'It was a mental process, but I'll try to keep it short. I was sort of working, jobbing, trying to earn money in London and also, manically running around auditioning for anything that I could,' she explained.

Emma was originally drafted in by those casting the fourth series to help with the chemistry reads they were holding for those auditioning for the role of Camilla Parker-Bowles.

Camilla is played by Emerald Fennell in the series, while Josh O'Connor stars as Prince Charles, Olivia Colman as Queen Elizabeth and Gillian Anderson as former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He plays Reverend Will Davenport in ITV's 1950s crime-fighting series.

And on Monday, Tom Brittney, 30, directed Grantchester for first time as he took charge of the show's seventh series during filming, in the village of Grantchester near Cambridge.

The actor, who is making his directing debut, was joined on set by Robson Green, 56, who plays Detective Geordie Keating and actress Tessa Peake-Jones, 64, who plays Mrs Sylvia Maguire.

Debut: On Monday, Tom Brittney, 30, directed Grantchester for first time as he took charge of the show's seventh series during filming, in the village of Grantchester near Cambridge

Tom was seen checking the scenes as filming continued on the new series by the pretty village church in Grantchester.

He looked pleased to be back on set of the popular drama as he was spotted filming a scene and even took a selfie outside.

Tom was dressed in a 3-piece suit with a clerical collar and a white gown over the top while filming scenes in church.

Robson looked equally dapper in a double breasted slate grey suit and tie, which he wore with a crisp white shirt.

Star: Tom was joined on set by Robson Green, 56, who plays Detective Geordie Keating

Multi-talented: Tom plays Reverend Will Davenport in the 1950s crime-fighting series

Loving it: Tom appeared happy to be at the helm of the show, making his directorial debut

In a statement, Executive Producer Emma Kingsman-Lloyd previously said of filming amid the pandemic: 'In these difficult times we are delighted to be able to film another series of our beloved Grantchester.

'The cast and crew have worked tirelessly to bring the series to the screen and we know the audience are very excited to see what Will, Geordie and the Grantchester family have in store for them.'

The series is adapted from the Grantchester Mysteries novels by James Runcie and was developed for television by Daisy Coulam.

Taking it easy: Robson sat on a fold-up chair as he took a break on set in the church's graveyard

Happy days: Robson flashed a wide smile as he chatted to the show's make-up artist

Grantchester's fourth series saw the departure of lead actor James Norton, who played Reverend Sidney Chambers, with Tom taking over as the village's new crime-solving vicar.

James departed in 2019, and Tom's Reverend Davenport now leads the cast.

Grantchester season six is expected to air later this year, while series seven is currently being filmed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kate Garraway has admitted she feels like she 'failed' her children as she struggled to juggle homeschooling and looking after her husband Derek Draper as he recovered from Covid.

The presenter, 54, - who shares children Darcey, 15, and Billy, 12, with Derek, 53, - said she found it 'very challenging' due to dealing with her 'very specific set of circumstances' at the time.

During a chat about the recent A-Level results on Wednesday's Good Morning Britain, she said: 'We all know that it's been almost impossible for youngsters to deal with this.

Hard: Kate Garraway has admitted she feels like she 'failed' her children as she struggled to juggle homeschooling and looking after husband Derek Draper as he recovered from Covid

'I know that I have frankly failed my children in supporting them in their homeschooling.

'I know I had very specific set of circumstances going on for the bulk of the time, but I found it very difficult to get online and help them to work their way through the system.

'And, you know, it was very, very challenging.'

Family: The presenter, 54, - who shares children Darcey, 15, and Billy, 12, (pictured) with Derek-, said she found it 'very challenging' due to dealing with her 'very specific set of circumstances' at the time

Honest: During a chat about the recent A-Level results on Wednesday's Good Morning Britain, she said: 'We all know that it's been almost impossible for youngsters to deal with this'

Kate has been by her husband Derek's side during his recovery from coronavirus after he contracted the illness last March which left him hospitalised.

Last week it was revealed that she has found his return from hospital this year 'bittersweet', according to close friend and television presenter Clare Nasir, 51.

She said that Kate 'can never switch off from what's happening' and has a lot on her plate being a presenter, mother, carer and wife.

Tough: Last week it was revealed that Kate (pictured) has found Derek's return from hospital this year 'bittersweet', according to close friend and television presenter Clare Nasir, 51

Kate recently enjoyed her first night out since Derek became seriously unwell as she attended the West End opening of Wonderville at the Palace Theatre.

Clare told Closer: 'Kate has been incredible throughout this - even more so since Derek has been home. She now basically does four jobs - presenter, mum, wife and carer.

'She's on the go all the time, and has been physically and mentally pushed to the extreme this last year and a half. So a chance to go out to the theatre - something she and the kids love - was wonderful for her.

'However, it was bittersweet, as Kate can never switch off from what's happening. I know she would have had a hotline to the house at all times and her focus would have been on Derek.'

Illness: Derek was released from the hospital in March this year after being first diagnosed in March 2020 and he is considered to be the longest surviving Covid-19 patient in the country

Difficult: Speaking recently at the West End event, Kate said of Derek: 'It was very strange leaving him tonight to come out' (pictured in 2019)

A representative for Kate has been contacted by MailOnline for a comment.

Speaking recently at the West End event, Kate said: 'It's our first time out since February 2020 so we are really excited, and this is a date that has sprung up because it was going to happen a few weeks ago and then it didn't happen and then we just thought, 'Let's go for it' – so very exciting.

'It was very strange leaving him tonight to come out because he is a big fan of magic, but it is not possible at the moment so we just said next time and see him when we get back.'

It comes after on Monday Kate warned 'there are MORE long Covid symptoms emerging.'

Clare told Closer: 'Kate has been incredible throughout this - even more so since Derek has been home' (Clare and Kate are pictured together in 2014)

Oh no! It comes after last Monday Kate warned 'there are MORE long Covid symptoms emerging'

She gave GMB viewers an update on her husband Derek's road to recovery, admitting: 'All the time there are more issues!'

Derek, 53, is still recovering at home from his lengthy battle with the illness which previously proved near-fatal and his left his body ravaged, and Kate has now revealed that 'more symptoms are presenting'.

What is Long Covid? Long Covid - also known as post-Covid-19 syndrome - is when Covid symptoms continue beyond the period of infection. Among the long list of symptoms are fatigue, chest tightness, dizziness, heart palpitations and problems with memory or concentration. Research published by the Department of Health last month suggested that up to two-million people in the UK may have had Long Covid. According to the NHS, the chances of having long-term symptoms does not seem to be linked to how ill you are when you first get COVID-19. However, the study last month showed that prevalence of Long Covid increased with age and was higher among women. Advertisement

Kate's co-host Ben Shephard, 46, asserted: 'Long Covid is a very real issue for a lot of people who have caught the virus.'

And Dr Amir Khan agreed, confirming: 'It is very real. It's estimated two million people across the UK are suffering from Long Covid.

'And symptoms can include extreme fatigue, brain fog, problems with vision problems with pain, difficulty breathing, palpitations, chest pain, all sorts of things.'

Kate added: 'And that's only the ones we know, isn't it Dr Khan? Because more and more are emerging of different bits of the body that have damage.

'I know Derek is an extreme example, but there are more Long Covid symptoms emerging. All the time there are more issues. Initially it was exhaustion but more are presenting.'

Dr Khan agreed: 'Yes that's absolutely right and the symptoms can be mild in some people and severe in others.

'It's thought it is caused by this over immune response to the virus that create these antibodies long after the virus is cleared, these antibodies then star attacking normal tissue which gives you these symptoms.

'Treatment options are still being discovered ... and while we're waiting there isn't much we can do because we don't really know what the treatments are yet so it's really really tough.'

He added: 'Lewis Hamilton, I'm really sorry he is suffering from Long covid but someone so prominent talking about it does show how even the healthiest of people can get Covid and suffer these long Covid symptoms.'

Meanwhile, Kate's husband Derek was released from the hospital in March this year after being first diagnosed in March 2020.

Awful: Dr Amir Khan explained of long Covid: 'It is very real. It's estimated two million people across the UK are suffering from Long Covid'

The virus wreaked havoc throughout his entire body, resulting in kidney failure, liver and pancreatic damage.

On more than one occasion his heart stopped beating, he battled bacterial pneumonia and fought multiple infections which punctured holes in his lungs.

He is considered to be the longest surviving Covid-19 patient in the country. The former lobbyist continues to recover from the illness at their London home.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Matilda 'Tilly' Ramsay is the ninth celebrity contestant confirmed for the new series of Strictly Come Dancing.

The CBBC presenter - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and her famous father also made a cameo as he recorded a clip to show to her.

In the video, Gordon, 54, cheekily warned Tilly, 19, not to date any of the dancers, while Tilly admitted she was 'terrified' of the challenge that lies ahead.

Strictly Come Dancing 2021: Gordon Ramsay's daughter Tilly, 19, is the NINTH contestant announced - as her dad warns her not to date any of the dancers!

Tilly revealed she'll be fitting in her appearance on the show around her studies, as she starts university in September, but said she's 'excited for the challenge' of making it all work.

Speaking on the show, Tilly said of the show: 'It's slightly terrifying. Obviously my mum and dad knew.

'I've tried dancing when I was younger, ballet and stuff, but I wasn't very good so I moved to football camp.

'Remembering choreography terrifies me. I'm looking forward to the glitz and the glamour, and learning something new - that's always fun.'

Proud parent: The CBBC presenter - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning (pictured together in a throwback)

This Morning hosts Eammon Holmes and Ruth Langsford then surprised Tilly with a video message from her parents, in which dad Gordon said: 'Wishing you all the very best. Proud of you girl.'

Tilly's mum Tana then quipped, 'Glad it's her and not you [Gordon]. Tilly you're incredibly brave. Good luck,' before Gordon jumped in to warn: 'And don't date those dancers!'

Tilly often shares dancing videos with her dad on TikTok and said she believes Gordon secretly wants to take part in Strictly, but he would be 'too scared' to go through with it.

She said: 'I think he does, but I think he'd be too scared to. Trust me when I say he's not the best dancer. Sorry, dad!"

Speaking on the show, Tilly said of the show: 'It's slightly terrifying. Obviously my mum and dad knew'

Tilly said in a statement: 'I’m so excited and grateful to be joining the Strictly family! I’m always up for fun new challenges and this will be my biggest adventure yet!

'I’m going to put my heart and soul into this and can’t wait to get my dancing shoes on and show my Dad how it’s really done! Bring on the glitz, glamour and sequins!'

After the announcement, Gordon took to Instagram to gush: ' So proud of this one @tillyramsay youngest dancer ever ! good luck darling❤️ @bbcstrictly'.

Sweet: This Morning hosts Eammon Holmes and Ruth Langsford then surprised Tilly with a video message from her parents, in which dad Gordon said: 'Wishing you all the very best'

Chef, social media influencer and TV presenter Tilly has over 9.5 million followers on TikTok, where she regularly posts funny videos of herself and dad Gordon.

She presented Matilda and the Ramsay Bunch on CBBC, which saw her cooking and having adventures along with her family, for which she received three Children’s BAFTA nominations.

In 2017 she published her first cookery book, inspired by the show, titled: Matilda & The Ramsay Bunch: Tilly's Kitchen Takeover.

Tilly and her Dad also hosted a regular cooking item on This Morning, Big Chef Little Chef.

Tilly said: 'Remembering choreography terrifies me. I'm looking forward to the glitz and the glamour, and learning something new - that's always fun'

Multi-tasker: Chef, social media influencer and TV presenter Tilly has over 9.5 million followers on TikTok, where she regularly posts funny videos of herself and dad Gordon

Moments after Tilly was announced, Greg Wise was unveiled as the tenth celebrity contestant.

The Sense and Sensibility actor, 55, was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and revealed he finally decided to sign up to honour the five year anniversary of his sister Clare's death from cancer.

Speaking about his motivation, Greg - who is married to Emma Thompson - explained: 'Clare was a huge disco diva and we sent her out of this life in a disco ball coffin to banging 80s music.'

New contestant: Emma Thompson's husband Greg Wise has also signed up to Strictly in honour of his late sister who loved the show so much she was buried in a glitterball coffin

He continued: 'She's prodding me massively to do it. Clare will enjoy watching her little brother do it. She'll be sitting on my left or right shoulder depending on how well I'm doing

Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013 and started a witty and heartfelt blog detailing her battle with the disease.

She was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015 the disease dug into her bones and she was told it was incurable. There were tumours in her arms, ribs, spine and skull.

Greg cancelled a family holiday in Greece and moved into his sister Clare’s London flat in the final three months of her life, in order to be her full-time carer, before her death in 2016 aged 51.

Tragic: Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013, was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015 the disease dug into her bones and she was told it was incurable (pictured in 2013)

On the night she died Greg wiped her face, told her he loved her and gave her permission to go when she wanted. She died one minute later, holding his hand.

Greg said in a statement: 'My beautiful sister was a huge disco queen. She left our world almost exactly 5 years ago in a glitter ball coffin.

'This is for her. My gorgeous Diva sis, who would have been insane with excitement that her little bro was doing this. I will channel her, as her bro can’t dance - but I’m thrilled to be dipping my toes, knees, hips and arms into this wonderful world, and hope to make her proud, and obviously make her laugh...”

Cute couple: Greg added that his wife Emma Thompson was 'stupidly excited' that he would be appearing on the show

Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown, Cranford, Walking on Sunshine and his breakout role in Sense and Sensibility.

Greg also wrote box-office hit film Last Christmas with his wife, Emma, and the book Not That Kind of Love with his late sister Clare Wise.

He added that Emma was 'stupidly excited' that he would be appearing on the show.

Speaking on This Morning, he continued: 'It's going to be so important having her there. She's done three films back-to-back this year, so she's exhausted now anyway.

Motivated: Speaking about his motivation, Greg explained, 'Clare was a huge disco diva and we sent her out of this life in a disco ball coffin to banging 80s music'

Nerves: He also admitted he is 'more nervous' about having the spotlight on him - due to him being a part of the dance show - than he is about taking to the dance floor

He also admitted he is 'more nervous' about having the spotlight on him - due to him being a part of the dance show - than he is about taking to the dance floor and strutting his stuff.

When it was suggested there would be a lot of attention on him during his Strictly stint, he said: 'Yeah, which is one of the things I'm slightly more nervous about than the actual dance steps.

'But it's about being out there and exposing yourself as someone who can't dance, and learning.'

One to watch: Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown (pictured) Cranford and his breakout role in Sense and Sensibility

It comes after Katie McGlynn and Dan Walker were confirmed as contestants on Strictly.

The former Corrie star, 28, and journalist, 44, were announced as being the seventh and eighth stars set to compete on the hit show during Tuesday's BBC Breakfast.

They will join Dragons' Den star Sara Davies, Rhys Stephenson, AJ Odudu, GBBO's John Whaite, Robert Webb and Tom Fletcher in the impressive line-up.

Joining the show! Katie McGlynn (pictured) and Dan Walker were confirmed as celebrity contestants on the 2021 Strictly Come Dancing line-up on Tuesday

Katie said: 'It's been so hard keeping it a secret, but I can finally say that I'm getting ready to shake my shimmy and become part of the Strictly family!

'I'm really not a dancer, but I'm so excited to learn a new skill on this crazy journey and cannot wait to slip into some sequins along the way.

'Although I do get to have so much fun as an actress, a lot of my roles have involved quite serious and challenging storylines, so I'm fully ready to let my hair down and do something different, even if it is completely outside of my comfort zone.

'I can't promise that I'll be the best, but I'm going to give it 110 per cent on the dance floor! As long as I don't fall over I'll be happy.'

Star-studded! Journalist Dan, 44, is the eighth star confirmed to take part in the show

New challenges: Dan's part in the competition comes after he announced he was stepping down as presenter of Football Focus (pictured on the show) following 12 years at the helm

Katie is best known for her role as Sinead Tinker in Coronation Street, for which she was BAFTA nominated and won a National Television Award for Best Serial Drama Performance in 2020.

The actress was also a regular in Waterloo Road, appeared in BBC One dramas The Syndicate and Moving On and currently stars in Hollyoaks as mysterious newcomer Becky Quentin.

While Dan, who recently quit Football Focus after 12 years at the helm, appeared via video for the big reveal as he's on holiday after presenting the Olympics in Tokyo.

He said: 'I only told my kids last weekend so they're not very happy with me either, hardly anyone has been in the circle. I'm very sorry I was told it would make great telly if I didn't tell you Louise! [his co-presenter, Minchin]'

Exciting news: Dan appeared via video, much to the surprise of Katie and his BBC Breakfast co-hosts, for the big reveal because he's on holiday after presenting the Olympics in Tokyo

Dan continued: 'My 20 years of contemporary dance training are helpful! I'm one of those people I've danced at three weddings and two school discos.

'I'm enjoying the experience when it starts of actually learning to dance. I'll be honest I'm not making room on any shelves in my house for the glitterball.'

And turning his attention to a pro partner and getting on the dancefloor, Dan said: 'I will accept anyone if they will accept me!

'I'm 6ft 6 so the question often asked is can anyone that tall look half decent on the television when trying to dance, just anyone who is tall enough, and doesn't mind the odd stray elbow in the back.'

The TV host also chatted about his pal Shirley Ballas, adding: 'Shirley is always a pro isn't she? We did a Comic Relief thing together, and she was really upset so I did a Paso Doble thing with one of the rugs and it really made her laugh.

Bring it on: Katie admitted that she's 'really not a dancer, but I'm so excited to learn a new skill'

Tragic: Katie is best known for her role as Sinead Tinker in Corrie, for which she was BAFTA nominated and won a National Television Award for Best Serial Drama Performance in 2020

Up for a challenge: Looking ahead to the competition, Dan joked that he's 'not making room on any shelves in my house for the glitterball'

Unexpected: Dan didn't tell his BBC Breakfast co-host Louise Minchin about his Strictly gig

'It won't affect our friendship as I hope this won't affect our friendship Louise.'

However it seems like Dan's real judges might be his children, with him revealing their reactions: 'My children said this, one said "oh this is exciting", another one said "don't dance with your mouth open", and the third said "don't go out in week one".

'It's just going to be, as you well know you need a bit of fun and we've been sat on our sofa for the past year and dealing with some horrible stories so I think it will be nice for our kids to be able to watch something that's not a matter of life and death.'

Dan added: 'Last Christmas I sat down with the children and they said "dad, we'd love you to do some TV we'd like to watch, Saturday Mashup and Strictly", hopefully I won't embarrass them too much!

'It has the magic to make everybody smile': Katie also praised Strictly for 'pulling everybody' together with its 2020 series during the pandemic

It's all feathers and sequins from now! Katie was revealed to much fanfare, with dancers creating a dramatic entrance for the actress

Stunning: Katie rocked a green and white wrap dress styled with summery white heels for the announcement on Tuesday

All smiles: She could not hide her excitement after leaving the London studios following the big reveal

'I have no idea where the tiny bit of talent will take, I'm just going to enjoy it, have a bit of fun, my phone is full of people who are very angry I never told them about this!'

Katie, who didn't know a second announcement was happening, then added: 'I'm so excited. I think last year everybody pulled together for Strictly and it was a kind of a blessing, and I think this year it has the magic to make everybody smile.'

The latest announcements come after Sara Davies was revealed as being set to compete - joking that she can't wait to see the 'impact of training on her mum tum'.

The Dragons' Den star, 37, could not hide her excitement as she was confirmed to be a celebrity contestant and chatted on Good Morning Britain on Monday.

Speaking about the show, Sara said: 'My Mam and Dad are going to be so excited. I'm really nervous because so far the producers keep asking me if I can dance.

Joining the line-up! Sara Davies was revealed as the sixth contestant set to compete in this year's Strictly Come Dancing on Monday

'Truth be told – I haven't got a clue! I've not danced since I did ballet lessons when I was little. The business world has taught me that tenacity, drive and determination deliver results, I hope that I can bring that to the dancefloor.

'And I'm excited to see the impact of all those hours of training on my mum tum.'

Sara was the youngest ever dragon on the panel of entrepreneurs on BBC show Dragons' Den, when she joined in 2019.

A businesswoman, her company Crafter's Companion, which she started as a student, now employs almost 250 people worldwide and has earned her the affectionate nickname of the Crafting Queen.

She is the recipient of over 30 business awards and, in 2016, she was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) for services to the economy.

From the boardroom to the ballroom! The Dragons' Den star, 37, (pictured on the show) admitted she's not too confident about her dancing skills but is excited for the challenge

Got any tips? Kate, who has also competed on Strictly, reassured Sara that she didn't have much dancing experience before taking part either

While chatting to GMB's Kate Garraway on Monday, Sara also revealed that she's always wanted to try out her dancing skills on Strictly since being a 'little girl'.

Sara added: 'It just looks like the most amazing experience but it always felt like a pipe dream. Then I joined Dragons' Den and Deborah [Meaden] had done it and I didn't dare to dream, but hoped one day maybe.'

The businesswoman also discussed plans for a live studio audience being able to watch the stars compete in the 2021 Strictly series.

Sara said she's hoping that small family bubbles will come watch, gushing that it 'will make my parents life' as they'd be so excited to see her dance on the show.

Speaking about the plans for an audience, Sara revealed: 'I really hope so.

'We're still waiting for a lot of the plans, but I believe they are going to be allowed a small studio audience. So maybe family bubbles. I just want my mum and dad to be able to come and watch. It will make their life.'

Keep dancing! CBBC presenter Rhys Stephenson was recently announced as the fifth star on the line-up

Taking to Instagram Rhys wrote: 'IT'S HAPPENING, Strictly 2021!!! I'm shaking! I can't wait to get started on this iconic show'

It comes after CBBC presenter Rhys Stephenson, 27, was announced as the fifth celebrity to take part in the new series of Strictly Come Dancing.

Rhys said he is 'buzzing' to be a part of Strictly and 'can't wait' to start rehearsals for the show, set to air this autumn.

The presenter revealed his signing on Newsround on Friday and said: 'I have dreamt about being on this show, and I know for a fact that it is going to exceed every expectation.

'I cannot wait to experience it all: the costumes, the orchestra, even Craig's glare. I am ready.'

As well as presenting CBBC live, Rhys as also presented some of the biggest shows across the CBBC slate, including Blue Peter and Saturday Mash-Up!, and appeared on The Dengineers and Newsround.

Outside of presenting, Rhys is an ambassador for Place2Be, a charity which provides mental health services in schools.

Making history: Great British Bake Off winner John will be one-half of the show's first all-male partnership

Yay! After the announcement, he took to Instagram to tearfully celebrate the news: 'Oh my god, you guys, I'm actually crying real tears because of how nice you're all being'

Sharing his news on Instagram, the presenter wrote: 'IT'S HAPPENING, Strictly 2021!!! I'm shaking! I can't wait to get started on this iconic show, I want it all, the sequins, the costumes, Craig's glare, BRING IT.'

Elsewhere in line-up news, Great British Bake Off winner John has revealed he will be one-half of the show's first all-male partnership.

After much controversy during the show's 17 year run over the prospect of a same-sex pairing, Strictly is finally addressing the call for change with John delightedly praising the 'great step forward in representation and inclusion'.

He said: 'What's exciting for me, is that I'm going to be one half of the first all-male partnership, which is a great step forward in representation and inclusion.'

John later took to Instagram to thank fans for their support, as he broke down in tears while talking into the camera.

John went on: 'I'm so grateful, excited, and nervous to be joining the Strictly family...

'I've been wearing sequins and jazzy attire since I was three years old and can't wait to hurl myself, full throttle, around the most glamorous dance floor on earth...

'Whoever it is I'm paired with, I hope they are up for a challenge as I want our routines to include lots of spectacular lifts!'

After the announcement, he took to Instagram to tearfully celebrate the news: 'Oh my god, you guys, there's so many nice messages already and I've only just come off air and I'm actually crying real tears because of how nice you're all being....

'I'm so excited to be on Strictly, it's a dream come true and it's even more of a dream to be doing the first all-male partnership and I hope that there are kids watching who look up and think, 'It's okay to be who you are'.

'So thanks for all the messages, I'm going back to bed, lots of love!'

John won the third series of The Great British Bake Off, in 2012, at the age of 23. John has presented various TV shows and currently has a weekly cooking segment on Steph's Packed Lunch.

He has written for a variety of newspaper and magazines on the topics of food and mental health, and has published five cookery books. John also runs his own cookery school, John Whaite's Kitchen.

Back then: John won the third series of The Great British Bake Off, in 2012, at the age of 23 (pictured in 2016)

John used his GBBO fame for good, when he won the show and began fighting for LGBTQ rights. He appeared on the cover of the UK gay culture magazine Attitude with his now husband-to-be, Paul Atkins, to whom he became engaged in 2017.

He spoke about his experience of coming out, saying: 'I didn't really know any gay people because it was still a bit of a touchy subject, especially being a working class northern lad – it wasn't often discussed...

'But I really admired my friends at drama who were all very 'fabulous darling' and they really helped me through it. I definitely want to marry Paul (my partner of five years – not Paul Hollywood!) because I adore him and respect him so much...

'I know I don't want to be with anyone else and I have tested what else is out there! When it comes to cake, I'll be making lots of our families' favourites!'

Tough: John spoke of how post-GBBO fame impacted him after going on a downward spiral and even speaking of the behaviour of BBC in his woes

John spoke of how post-GBBO fame impacted him after going on a downward spiral and even speaking of the behaviour of BBC in his woes.

He said: 'Some days I'd wish I had never been on the show, because in reality, it totally derailed me from a steady lifepath. I could blame the production company or the BBC.

'It would be simple to point the finger and say they gave me no advice on how to manage the transience of the industry, or how to comprehend the temporariness of my appeal.

'They didn't, and perhaps in the wake of reality TV star meltdowns and suicides, there should be a serious reform of the way contributors are prepared for, and guided through, their post-show life.

'But I don't think it would have made an ounce of difference even if they had. Addiction to the razzle dazzle came naturally to the youthful me...

Line-up: It comes after the first three names have been announced for Strictly Come Dancing 2021 [pictured McFly's Tom Fletcher (L) and presenter AJ Odudu (R)]

Starring role: Peep Show actor Robert Webb is also taking to the floor

'What I failed to remember though, was that age-old mantra: be careful what you wish for. Because as the next batch of Bake Off stars emerged, my appeal shrank. Year on year, the working days became fewer and financial offers were smaller.

'The life to which I had become accustomed slowly dissolved. With more days alone at home, waiting by the phone like an anxious 1980s teenager urging their crush to call, my already depressed state of mind worsened...

'I drank more than I should have and posted unwisely on Instagram and Twitter. If I knew then what I knew now, would I do it all again? Absolutely. But I'd approach it so differently.'

Last week, the first three names were announced for this year's show.

McFly pop star Tom, Peep Show actor Robert and presenter AJ were revealed on Wednesday's edition of The One Show, with the rest of the names set to be drip-fed to fans over the next couple of weeks.

Big shoes to fill! Tom's McFly bandmate Harry Judd won Strictly n 2011 [L] while Robert squeezed into a shiny leotard to take the title of Let's Dance For Comic Relief in 2009 [R]

Music and dancing: Tom is on quarter of boy band McFly [pictured last week with Dougie Poynter and Danny Jones]

Tom, 36, has big shoes to fill on Strictly. His McFly bandmate Harry Judd won the show in 2011. And Tom's wife Giovanna Fletcher is the reigning champion of I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here!

Robert, 48, is sure to feel the pressure too, after he squeezed into a shiny leotard to take the title of Let's Dance For Comic Relief in 2009, performing What A Feeling from '80s film Flashdance, beating the likes of Keith Lemon and Paddy McGuinness to the title.

2021 has been a busy year for AJ, 33, who has featured on 14 TV shows, including Cooking With The Stars and Celebrity Karaoke Club. She has appeared as a panelist on Strictly Come Dancing: It Takes Two in the past, too.

The three contestants were unveiled one by one with The One Show presenter Alex Jones revealing they were given the code names of Buzz Lightyear (Tom), Spoongebob Squarepants (Robert) and Marge Simpson (AJ).

Excited: Tom was the first celebrity announced and said: 'I'm so pleased the news is out it's been so hard keeping it secret'

Cackling: Tom also shared his sister's hilarious reaction to the news on Instagram, where it seemed she was beside herself with laughter

The veteran dance show was famously disrupted in 2020 thanks to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

But it seems things are back to normal in 2021 - apart from one or two factors still deemed too tricky to navigate amid the global health crisis.

Show boss Sarah James told The Mirror: 'We're so thrilled that Strictly will be returning for a full-length series this year, and know how much viewers are looking forward to getting their full Strictly fix and seeing the return of much-loved specials.

'We are all so sad that we won't be able to get to Blackpool this year but can't wait to be back dancing at the one and only Blackpool Tower Ballroom in the future.'

The Blackpool episode ordinarily takes place near the end of the series, but was axed last year with restrictions throwing up logistical difficulties on the production.

'Undertone of terror': Robert was the next star announced, along with a hilarious clip of his 2009 Comic Relief performance

Overjoyed: AJ was the third contestant announced and told how she kept her participation in the series a secret from her mother Florence, who was watching at home

But 2021 will include the show's themed weeks - such as movie week, musicals week and Halloween week.

Last year, these were scrapped, proving too complicated to manage amid the pandemic. The show's Christmas special will also be back, with the show set to start in its usual early-autumn time slot, rather than in October, like last year.

It's said rather than a fewer number of celebs, the full 15 will be taking part again, having cut this to 12 last series.

Still a no-go: Blackpool has been axed AGAIN due to the ongoing pandemic

There are also plans to reinstate the live audience too - another aspect disallowed last season.

Isolation will remain in place for the professional dancers. This will see them sent to a hotel near the Strictly studios in Hertfordshire several weeks ahead of the show's return.

The celebs will also not have the usual three-week gap between being paired up with their pros and dancing for the first time on live TV. This has been reduced to one week thanks to logistical factors.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jane Seymour was spotted filming her latest project in a dressing gown and slippers on Wednesday in Bray, Ireland.

The Hollywood actress, 70, was snapped on location outside a house in an orange silk robe and furry slippers - seen locked in a passionate embrace with her co-star Stuart Graham on the front step.

She wore her blonde locks loosely around her shoulders and sported a wash of stage make-up.

Filming: Jane Seymour was spotted filming her latest project in a dressing gown and slippers on Wednesday in Bray, Ireland

Jane and Stuart are shooting Harry Wild - with Jane commencing filming in June, just weeks after suffering an injury.

Jane suffered a hairline fracture on her left kneecap in May and had to also wear a leg brace in the following weeks to help her in her recovery.

She seems back to normal now though, not even a hint of discomfort on her face as she strolled around the set.

Jane's fall happened on the set of Harry Wild - with Jane keeping fans updated on how she's been recovering.

Mwah! She was also seen in the doorway of the house, kissing fellow actor, Stuart Graham

Casual glam: The Hollywood actress, 70, was snapped on location outside a house in an orange silk robe and furry slippers

On location: She wore her blonde locks loosely around her shoulders and sported a wash of stage make-up

The actress explained on Instagram: 'I've been taking extra care of my knee. Rest and patience is the cure!

'Thankfully ballet has enabled me to almost not limp on set. Although it hurts, it's getting better everyday!

'Thank you to everyone who reached out with such kind messages. Keep smiling! #HarryWild @acorn_tv. [sic]'.

Project: The pair are shooting Harry Wild - with Jane commencing filming in June, just weeks after suffering an injury

Recovery: Jane suffered a hairline fracture on her left kneecap in May and had to also wear a leg brace in the following weeks to help her in her recovery

Jane had shared details about her 'really painful' injury at the time, with the actress revealing she had injured her left kneecap after filming a thrilling scene that involved her running across a bridge.

The star explained she 'fell pretty badly' and proudly added that she still managed to 'finish the scene' and hasn't missed a 'minute of work' since.

Jane captioned the Instagram video, which was shot from her trailer on set, with: 'I thought I'd break the news to you all, I fell pretty badly on set about a week ago. [injured emoji].

'I've got lots of hairline fractures on my kneecap. Got lucky comparatively! In spite of it, I managed to finish the scene and work all week… trying not to hobble. [crying emoji] This is acting! #HarryWild @acorn_tv.'

Back to normal: There was not even a hint of discomfort on her face as she strolled around the set

Pucker up: She and Stuart looked lovingly into each other's eyes

In the video, Jane panned the camera onto her leg brace as she spoke to the camera and revealed that she also has crutches to help her during recovery, she said: 'So I was set the other day...

'I had to run across a bridge and look for a guy that was being tortured. I fell, so I'm in a leg brace and I've got crutches. I have not missed a minute's work and I have now been renamed to hop-a-long and hop-a-long keeps trying to hop a long.

'But I did apparently smash my kneecap, so it's really painful, I'm not allowed to move it for two to three weeks.

'I'm acting above the kneecap and I have a wonderful double for below the kneecap!'

'Keep smiling!' Jane's fall happened on the set of Harry Wild - with Jane keeping fans updated on how she's been recovering

Harry Wild is due for release next year.

The actress will both star and co-executive produce the show for Acorn TV, a streaming service from AMC that focuses on British content.

In the eight-part series, Jane is set to play retired English professor Harriet 'Harry' Wild, who finds herself recovering from a mugging at the home of her son, who works as a police detective.

While staying at her son's house, she becomes entwined in a murder investigation that he is working on.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sophie Anderton has finally married her beau Count Kaz Balinski-Jundzill after having to postpone their wedding three times during the pandemic.

The former It-Girl and model, 44, who first shot to fame as the face of Gossard bras in the 1990s, tied the knot with the Polish aristocrat, 52, in Ireland.

Speaking with The Daily Mail's Richard Eden last Friday, Sophie said: 'Yesterday, I married my best friend, soulmate and lifetime partner in crime.

Congratulations! Sophie Anderton has finally married her beau Count Kaz Balinski-Jundzill (pictured together) after having to postpone their wedding three times during the pandemic

'I cannot believe after so many obstacles and date changes, I am officially Mrs Kaz Balinksi.'

Kaz, who works in the oil business, owns a 1,500-acre estate, Glendalough House, in County Wicklow.

Sophie and Kaz had to postpone their nuptials twice last year due to Covid — and then again at the end of July when one of Kaz's four children fell ill.

One of Kaz's children is actress Ella Balinska, 24, who he shares with TV chef ex-wife, Lorraine Pascale. Ella starred in the 2019 Charlie's Angels film.

Newlyweds: The model, 44, tied the knot with the Polish aristocrat, 52, in Ireland, where he owns a 1,500-acre estate Glendalough House in County Wicklow (pictured in 2020)

Throwback: Sophie shot to fame as the face of Gossard bras and was often seen out in the 90s and 00s (pictured at the Top Of The Pops Awards in Manchester in 2002)

The happy newlyweds have been together for more than four years, with Sophie often gushing about their relationship.

In 2018 she shared her excitement about the future and told blog Beautiful Thinking: 'I'm really looking forward to getting married and having children. I've been waiting for someone to be an amazing father to my children, and it was so worth the wait'.

While in February 2020, before having to push her nuptials back to 2021, Sophie also shared some of her plans with The Daily Mail's Sebastian Shakespeare

Family: Count Kaz has four children, including actress Ella Balinska, 24, who he shares with TV chef ex-wife, Lorraine Pascale (pictured together in an undated snap)

Budding actress: Ella starred in the 2019 Charlie's Angels film (pictured in July 2021)

She said: 'We feel our life together is moving forwards after the standstill of the past eight months. It will only be a civil wedding in February — a very small affair.

'But we'll have a big blessing ceremony in the summer that Kaz's children can attend and all my family and friends who are all around the world.'

And speaking about relocating to Ireland, Sophie added: 'The best thing I ever did was get out of London — much as I love London. I've now got the mountains.'

Since being in the spotlight Sophie has transformed her lifestyle and now prioritises her health and wellness following her highly publicised battle with drink and drugs.

Loved-up: Sophie and Kaz have been together for more than four years, with Sophie often gushing about their relationship (pictured in February, when they had hoped to get married)

Changes: Sophie now prioritises her health and wellness following her highly publicised battle with drink and drugs (pictured left in 1998 and right in 1997 in London)

Speaking to The Daily Mail in 2015, the media personality dismissed her past as 'light years from where I am now.'

She explained: 'I was very unhappy [in my 20s]. I had no control over who I was or how I looked.

'I was a model but at some point modelling became only one part of what was required of us, and suddenly to be successful we had to be celebrities.

'It’s not something that came naturally. I was terrible at being famous.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Fury has shared a sweet video of her newborn daughter Athena in hospital, after the tot was re-admitted to intensive care.

The mother-of-six, 31, took to her Instagram stories on Wednesday morning to film her little girl, where she revealed that she has a 'big day today'.

It comes as her boxer husband Tyson raised over £30,000 for children's charity Alder Hey Family House Trust who run the Ronald McDonald House in Liverpool.

Baby girl: Paris Fury has shared a sweet video of her newborn daughter Athena in hospital, after the tot was re-admitted to intensive care

The sweet clip sees little Athena lying in her cot with what appears to be a breathing aid attached while her mother films her.

Captioning her video, Paris penned: 'My beautiful baby girl this morning. More awake now and sucking her dummy.'

She added: 'She has a big day today, please God it goes well', alluding to a possible medical procedure for the tot.

Devoted parents: It follows her boxer husband Tyson's announcement that Athena was back in ICU just hours after she had initially come off the ventilator (pictured with Paris in May)

It follows Tyson, 32, successfully raising over £30,000 for the children's charity Alder Hey Family House Trust, whom he credits for supporting him and his family during this difficult time.

Taking to Twitter on Tuesday, Tyson thanked his followers for their fundraising efforts and told how they had raised £27,000 in just 5 hours.

He wrote: 'When the power of social media is utilised for good it’s beautiful to witness. We’ve raised over £27k in 5 hours @RMHCUK

'Thank you all. Please continue to support this cause, raise awareness for an independent charity that depends on donations.'

However, at the time of writing, the amount had actually soared, with the total currently standing at £32,154.

Newest addition: The mother-of-six, 31, took to her Instagram stories on Wednesday morning to film her little girl, where she revealed that she has a 'big day today'

Getting there: Captioning her video, Paris penned: 'My beautiful baby girl this morning. More awake now and sucking her dummy'

It comes after Tyson revealed that his newborn daughter was back in intensive care, just hours after she came off the ventilator following her first ICU admission.

The boxer, whose daughter was born on Sunday, took to Instagram on Tuesday to share a snap of his baby girl where he announced the news.

Alongside the photo of a sleeping Athena in which she's hooked up to various wires, the father-of-six, penned: 'Baby Athena is back on icu, please keep her in your prayers'

Amazing! It comes as her boxer husband Tyson raised over £30,000 for children's charity Alder Hey Family House Trust who run the Ronald McDonald House in Liverpool

In February Paris revealed that her daughter was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition.

Speaking on Loose Women after announcing her pregnancy, she said: 'I usually have a condition that makes the babies come a bit earlier so it will probably be the beginning of August, which is better for me, the last few weeks are terrible!'

Tyson's wife Paris previously shared the first snap of their baby daughter on Monday following the tot's first admission to intensive care which saw have a ventilator to help with her breathing.

Poor baby: It comes after Tyson, 32, revealed that his newborn daughter was back in intensive care, just hours after she came off the ventilator following her first ICU admission

Taking to her Instagram stories, the mother-of-six, 31, uploaded the adorable snap of her baby girl wrapped up in a blanket shortly after she came off the ventilator.

Captioning the image, Paris gave an update on Athena's health, writing: 'Thank God she's doing well and thank you for all your messages, thoughts and prayers.

The sweet image saw little Athena asleep in a white baby grow, while wrapped up warm in a blanket featuring a bubby swinging on a swing adorned with pink flowers.

Condition: In February Paris revealed that her daughter was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition

Candid: Speaking on Loose Women after announcing her pregnancy, she said: 'I usually have a condition that makes the babies come a bit earlier so it will probably be the beginning of August, which is better for me, the last few weeks are terrible!'

It follows Tyson previously revealing that his newborn baby daughter is 'off the ventilator'.

The boxer's wife Paris gave birth to Athena on Sunday, and on Monday morning, Tyson took to Instagram to update his fans on the health of their sixth child, writing: 'The baby is in a stable position and doing well - hopefully she comes out of ICU today.'

Hours later, the world-famous athlete shared a clip of himself cradling his newborn, telling his Instagram followers: 'Hi guys, the baby's doing fantastic, a lot, lot better.

Little one: Tyson's wife Paris previously shared the first snap of their baby daughter on Monday following the tot's first admission to intensive care which saw have a ventilator to help with her breathing

Update: Captioning the image, Paris gave an update on Athena's health, writing: 'Thank God she's doing well and thank you for all your messages, thoughts and prayers'

'She's off the ventilator, she's doing really good, look, she's lovely.'

Tyson revealed earlier in the day that he is raising money for the Ronald McDonald House charity, which provides 'home from home' accommodation for families with children in Liverpool's Alder Hey Children's Hospital.

Standing next to his father in an Instagram video, he explained he wants to raise money for the charity due to 'the fantastic job they do on a daily basis'.

Incredible news: Tyson previously revealed his newborn baby daughter Athena is 'off the ventilator' in a new Instagram clip shared on Monday

Intensive care: Tyson's update comes hours after the world-famous boxer revealed his newborn baby daughter Athena (pictured) was in intensive care

Tyson has remained at Alder Hey hospital since the arrival of his sixth child and explained in a clip shared on Monday that he will be auctioning two signed WBC belts and offering a meet and greet to a randomly selected GoFundMe donor.

Standing next to his father John in the hospital's carpark, Tyson told his followers in a short clip: 'Hi this is Tyson Fury aka the Gypsy King. I'm just here with my dad at the children's hospital.

'They do a fantastic job on a daily basis. We've got two WBC belts here that I'm going to sign personally and we're going to put them up for charity to raise some money for the hospital.'

Fundraising: Tyson revealed he's raising money for the Ronald McDonald House charity which provides accommodation for families with children in hospital on Monday

He concluded: 'Whoever wins - I'll pick a winner at random - I will do a personal meet and greet to whoever wins these belts and I'll personally sign them to you.'

It comes hours after Tyson revealed his newborn baby daughter is in intensive care.

The day before, Tyson wrote: 'Please can everyone pray for my baby girl who was born this morning. Athena Fury born 8/8/21.'

Tyson said: 'Hi this is Tyson Fury aka the Gypsy King. I'm just here with my dad at the children's hospital'

He added: 'They do a fantastic job on a daily basis. We've got two WBC belts here that I'm going to sign personally and we're going to put them up for charity to raise some money'

Health update: Tyson revealed his newborn baby Athena is in intensive care but 'stable' as he continued to ask people to keep her in their prayers on Instagram on Monday

The birth of their baby girl comes after Paris endured a lengthy two-day labour.

The new mother-of-six took to Instagram to re-share a video on Saturday that her husband took of them both eating what appeared to be spicy food - in an attempt to speed on the birth of Athena.

Her caption read: 'He is dangerous with a camera think he's bored now we nearly at the end of day 2 in here and still no little girly'.

New baby: Paris, 31, gave birth to their sixth child together on Sunday - a girl named Athena (Pictured days before giving birth)

Congratulations: Tyson announced the news on Instagram, where he asked his followers to pray for their little girl

Lengthy labour: The arrival of their baby girl comes after Paris endured a lengthy two-day labour

Tyson could be heard in the background saying: 'Just thought I'd take this opportunity to share with you our little date in the labour ward'.

Paris also posted a photo of herself on her Stories from Friday when she arrived in hospital.

The expectant mother posed in a black Calvin Klein T-Shirt alongside an array of what looked like a Louis Vuitton duffle bag and small suitcase, as well as a Harrods shopper behind her.

Designer mother-to-be: The expectant mother posed in a black Calvin Klein T-Shirt alongside what looked like a Louis Vuitton duffle bag and small suitcase, as well as a Harrods shopper

She captioned the pre-birth pic: 'Landed here yesterday morning'.

Paris then posted a video of her husband in the labour ward watching a game of boxing whilst they waited for the arrival of their little one.

The couple are already parents to Venezuela, 10, Prince John James, eight, Prince Tyson II, four, Valencia, three, and Prince Adonis Amaziah, 16 months.

The couple announced they were expecting their sixth child together in February.

Tyson shared the happy news on boxing correspondent Gareth A Davies' YouTube series.

Tyson revealed the news while gushing about his family values, telling Davies: 'Paris is pregnant again and the Lord has blessed us definitely with another child and I'm very thankful.

'Got a beautiful wife, beautiful kids, they're all healthy. That's the most important thing, you know, your health and your family.

Big family: They are already parents to Venezuela, 11, Prince John James, eight, Prince Tyson II, four, Valencia, three, and Prince Adonis Amaziah, 12 months

'Nothing else really matters. Your job, your money, your wealth, your career, none of that really matters because you can get another job, you can start snooker or you can go make more money.

'It doesn't really matter but the one thing you can't get back is your family. You can't get back time lost and that's the crazy thing about it all.'

The proud dad, who is the highest-paid fighter of 2020 with £46million in earnings, also spoke about how he and Paris are raising their children to understand the value of money.

'For me it's very important to stay close to my grassroots as I've got a lot of kids coming up, I've got five kids, very important for them to know the value of money,' he explained.

Parents: Tyson first announced the pregnancy boxing correspondent Gareth A Davies' YouTube series (pictured with Paris in March 2020)

'It's very important for them to know how to earn money. So, if they see me splashing out all the time and living a move stars' lifestyle they grow up thinking that's the only way they can live.

'To earn from a normal job, £200-300-a-week, however much they're going to get, they might think that's no good if they've been spoiled rotten by multimillionaire parents.

'So I don't do that. My kids don't go to private school, I don't have any private education, they just go to normal school, everyone does normal stuff.'

Paris, who shares a sprawling family home with Tyson and their children in Morecambe, has been forging ahead with her own career over the past year, landing a role as a panellist on Loose Women last year.

It's a girl! In March, the blogger revealed the gender of her baby after having a celebration with her family at their abode

Romance: The couple met at a wedding when Paris was 15 and Tyson was 17, but didn't start dating until after being re-introduced a year later after Paris' 16th birthday

Family: The proud dad, who is the highest-paid fighter of 2020 with £46million in earnings, also spoke about how he and Paris are raising their children to understand the value of money

In March the couple revealed they were having a girl after having a celebration at their abode.

Paris took to Instagram to share the news as she uploaded an image of the sportsman and their children covered in pink confetti.

Captioning the heart-warming image, Paris wrote: 'It's a girl... We are due another little princess, god willing come summer we will have 3 girls and 3 boys. So blessed.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She welcomed her third child with fiancé Scott Sinclair just five months ago.

And Helen Flanagan, 31, doted on baby son Charlie during a belated birthday dinner at San Carlo restaurant in Manchester, on Tuesday evening.

The former Coronation Street actress looked sensational in a sleek black ensemble, and shared photos of the outing to her Instagram.

Sweet: Helen Flanagan, 31, doted on baby son Charlie during a belated birthday dinner at San Carlo restaurant in Manchester, on Tuesday evening

Helen showed off her slim frame in in a form-fitting black body with cap sleeves, which she teamed with leather look trousers.

The TV star boosted her height in strappy stilettos which allowed her red pedicure to be on display.

The mother-of-three carried her belongings in a cream YSL cross-body bag and wrapped her blonde tresses up with a clamp.

Helen, who welcomed her third child with her footballer fiancé Scott back in March, looked down lovingly at her son in one of the snaps shared to her Instagram.

Glam: The former Coronation Street actress looked sensational in a sleek black ensemble, and shared photos of the outing to her Instagram

Baby boy: She welcomed her third child with fiancé Scott Sinclair just five months ago

The birthday celebrations with her son come after Helen revealed that she wouldn't rule out having a fourth child, despite health complications in her last pregnancy.

The former Coronation Street star told the Mirror: 'I wouldn't rule out another. I've always said in my head I wanted four.'

Despite her last pregnancy causing her to remain bed-bound, Helen is keen to further grow her family with her fiancé Scott.

'When you feel so dreadful, you do think, "No way, I will absolutely never have another baby", but as soon as Charlie arrived I just thought, "You're so worth it,'' Helen told the platform.

Helen, already shares three children with her Preston North End footballer beau: Matilda, six, Delilah, three, and their baby Charlie.

Gorgeous: The next day, Helen shared a stunning set of photographs of herself clad in a pretty pink rose print dress

Helen suffered badly with hyperemesis gravidarum during her last pregnancy.

Sharing her experience with the extreme morning sickness, Helen explained on Instagram: 'It got worse with each pregnancy. It was worth everything but it was horrendous.

'As soon as I found out I was pregnant with Charlie, I said to my mum I hope I don't get Hyperemesis. I hope I'm OK.

'I had to live with my mum and dad for three, four months. I couldn't look after them. Now I'm not pregnant I feel like a normal mum again, I have loads of energy which is lovely.'

Helen added: 'I had medication that worked with Delilah but I was just immune with Charlie. You're constantly sick but it makes you feel low as well, you're so on your own.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kate Ferdinand has shared unseen snaps of husband Rio's rarely seen twin sisters as she wished them a happy 20th birthday.

Taking to Instagram on Tuesday, the former TOWIE star, 30, uploaded two images of herself with her sisters-in-law as they cuddled up for fun photos.

Captioning her post, she penned: 'Happy 20th birthday to my two special sisters. Love you both so much.'

Family: Kate Ferdinand has shared unseen snaps of husband Rio's rarely seen twin sisters as she wished them a happy 20th birthday

Remy and Anya are Rio's younger sisters from his father's side and are both performers, with the girls often sharing videos and images of their performances on their joint social media page.

In one image, mother-of-one Kate wows in a plunging green crop top paired with a matching blazer and skirt, while Rio's sisters look glamorous in red and black ensembles respectively.

While a second pictures sees all three ladies dressed to impress in all black outfits as they flashed dazzling smiles for the camera while holding their drinks.

Close: Taking to Instagram on Tuesday, the former TOWIE star, 30, uploaded two images of herself with her sisters-in-law as they cuddled up for fun photos (pictured with Rio last month)

Since her relationship with Rio began, Kate has grown close to his family, who also include a sister Chloe and another brother from his father's side.

While he also has a half sister, Sian and half brother, Jeremiah, from his mother's remarriage.

Fellow footballer Anton Ferdinand is his brother from their parents Julian and Janice's marriage. Janice sadly passed away from cancer in 2017.

All together now: Since her relationship with Rio began, Kate has grown close to his family, who also include a sister Chloe and another brother from his father's side

It comes after Kate sizzled as she slipped into a very busty black bikini while enjoying time on a boat on a sun soaked family getaway on Sunday.

The beauty set pulses racing in the racy ensemble as it showcased her amazing figure, with the idyllic blue skies and sea as the backdrop.

Kate looked every inch the beach beauty by donning a straw fedora and oversized black sunglasses, before cuddling up to Rio on the boat.

Wow: It comes after Kate sizzled as she slipped into a very busty black bikini while enjoying time on a boat on a sun soaked family getaway on Sunday

Beach beauty: She captioned the racy snap: 'Happiest at sea' with a wave emoji

She glowed as she shrugged a snake print shawl round her shoulders and arms.

Kate's mid length straight blonde tresses looked stunning as they blew in the summer breeze.

She captioned the post: 'Happiest at sea' with a wave emoji.

Meanwhile, Rio shared a snap of the couple lounging on the sun deck of the boat, as he wore a black linen shirt open and sported a pair of shades.

Cute: Meanwhile, Rio shared a snap of the couple lounging on the sun deck of the boat, as he wore a black linen shirt open and sported a pair of shades

The former footballer captioned the image: 'Chill time with my [heart] And photobombed by this little one.'

The post comes after she made her return to Instagram on Friday by posting a slew of snaps from the holiday.

She shared a series of photographs and videos from their time away, where they enjoyed luxury boat days, watching dolphins and relaxing poolside drinks.

Kate looked sensational in a snap alongside her footballer beau, in which she wore a burnt orange maxi skirt and coordinating crop top.

Holiday time: On Friday, Kate gave fans a glimpse into her idyllic family holiday with husband Rio and their kids, as she returned to social media

Why so quiet? Alongside her upload Kate explained why she has been quieter than usual on Instagram for a little while

Gorgeous: Within her post she included a heartwarming snap of herself and eight-month-old son Cree spending time together

Fun in the sun: Kate also included faceless shots of husband Rio's three children; Sons Lorenz, 14, Tate, 12, (pictured) and daughter Tia, 10

Within her post she included a heartwarming snap of herself and eight-month-old son Cree spending time together, as well as faceless shots of husband Rio's three children; Lorenz, 14, Tate, 12, and Tia, 10.

Kate explained alongside her upload: 'I've been pretty quiet on here, sometimes I just find it all a bit much!

'Needed to switch off and enjoy some special time with my favourite people …..'

Twinning: Kate and Tia wore matching 'Happy Birthday Tate' tote bags and shell anklets

Windswept: Rio took a couple's selfie while enjoying a boat ride with his wife
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Frankie Bridge looked stunning in a sweeping rainbow dress as she took in the views of Bermuda on Tuesday.

The maxi dress fell around the singer, 32, in vibrant hues, featuring a square neckline with thin straps and signature Inca trim.

Showing off her tanned back, Frankie posed on a deck in front of the blue waters, her brunette locks tied back in a bun, gold hoops in her ears.

Radiant: Frankie Bridge looked stunning in a sweeping rainbow dress as she took in the views of Bermuda on Tuesday

She then sat at the water's edge with her son Carter, five, sharing a tender moment.

'I just need you and some sunsets,' she captioned the snap.

She's away with her husband Wayne, Carter, and their older son Parker, seven.

Wayne was also seen with Carter enjoying some father-son time in the sunshine.

'I just need you and some sunsets': She then sat at the water's edge with her son Carter, five, sharing a tender moment

She's away with her husband Wayne, Carter, and their older son Parker, seven

Wayne was also seen with Carter enjoying some father-son time in the sunshine

Frankie revealed that it took her two days to decide whether to post a video in her bikini on a recent episode of Loose Women, as the panel discussed the idea of 'bikini fear'.

Alongside Kaye Adams, Janet Street-Porter and Brenda Edwards, Frankie got on to the topic of bikini posting after television personality Scarlett Moffatt shared a swimwear selfie on Instagram.

Scarlett, 30, told her followers it's taken her years to gain confidence with her body, which triggered the singer to speak about her own thoughts on sharing bikini content.

Frankie shared a funny video recently of her and her sister preparing to jump into the water during their latest getaway to Bermuda, where they were both in bikinis.

'It took me two days to decide whether to post it,' the former Saturday star admitted to her Loose Women panellists.

She continued: 'The only reason I thought to post it was because I thought it was funny. I'm usually the wimpy sister and I was being brave for once.

Unsure: Frankie revealed that it took her two days to decide whether to post a video in her bikini on a recent episode of Loose Women

Jump! She and the panel discussed the idea of 'bikini fear'

'The thought of people seeing me in a bikini put me off it.'

Frankie, who was formerly a member of S Club 8, also divulged that she wouldn't have 'given it a second thought' putting on a bikini when she was younger, but there is 'such a pressure' in today's society.

Janet, 74, didn't hold back from expressing her opinion on Scarlett's bikini snap.

'I don't know why she posted it - does she feel the need to? I don't need to see that, I admire her anyway,' she said.

The broadcaster feared that there will be a backlash following the post.

Confidence: The discussion surrounding 'bikini fear' was triggered by Scarlett Moffatt's swimwear selfie, which Janet Street-Porter voiced her opinion on

Positive: Frankie believed that Scarlett's post would help others who may be struggling with their body confidence, whereas Janet feared that the media personality could see a backlash

However Frankie was of the belief that it will help some people out there who may also be struggling with their body confidence.

Scarlett penned her post: 'This shouldn’t be a big deal but it is and I’m actually crying whilst writing this. It’s took me so many years to gain confidence with my body. I’ve let it down at times and missed out on holidays and nights out because I’ve not liked what I’ve seen in the mirror.

'But hey after 5 years of not daring to wear a bikini I’m actually doing it! So I hope this gives you the confidence to buy that dress, that bikini, not miss out just because your body doesn’t fit into a certain category (because let me tell you all these things are made up nobody is too slim, too curvy, too athletic, too many stretch marks, too much cellulite) LIVE YOUR BEST LIFE.

'Also massive thank you to @sandals_uk this is our first full day in Antigua and I’m already loving life ☀️'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Keeping Up with the Kardashians alum Kylie Jenner celebrated her 24th birthday with an intimate sushi dinner at her $36.5M Holmby Hills mansion on Tuesday night.

The Calabasas socialite's half-sisters Khloé and Kourtney Kardashian got the party started and were the first members of the clan to show off their looks for the bash.

Kylie's festivities kicked off with two kinds of cocktails and a celebratory toast alongside Khloé, Kourtney, Kim Kardashian, and their momager Kris Jenner.

Happy Kylie day! Keeping Up with the Kardashians alum Kylie Jenner (L) hosted her 24th birthday with an intimate sushi dinner at her $36.5M Holmby Hills mansion on Tuesday night

Smile! The Calabasas socialite's big half-sisters Khloé (L) and Kourtney (R) Kardashian got the party started and were the first members of the clan to show off their looks for the bash

Aside from family, Jenner's guests included her on-again boyfriend Travis Scott, her former assistant Victoria Villarroel, and her best friend Anastasia Karanikolaou.

The Kylie Skin CEO recently rekindled her on/off romance with the 29-year-old rapper-designer Travis after splitting in 2019.

Kylie and Travis (born Jacques Webster) are the proud parents of three-year-old daughter Stormi. However, the eight-time Grammy nominee continues to reside in his own $23.5M Brentwood mansion.

Cheers! Kylie's festivities kicked off with two kinds of cocktails and a celebratory toast alongside Khloé, Kourtney, Kim Kardashian, and their momager Kris Jenner

Sneak peek: Aside from family, Jenner's guests included her babydaddy Travis Scott, her former assistant Victoria Villarroel, and her BFF Anastasia Karanikolaou

Fun times: Khloe revealed that she brought daughter True round for the earlier part of the festivities as they messed around with a green goblin filter

One of the plates of sushi included a decadent dash of gold leaf - perhaps an ode to the Kylie Cosmetics CEO's 24k Birthday Collection, which dropped Tuesday.

Kourtney then showed off the desserts as she Instastoried a yummy emoji over a plate of three scoops of green ice-cream.

The tight family all Instastoried glimpses of the party décor, like the candlelit path surrounding her swimming pool and the palm trees and bushes covered in Christmas lights.

On December 10, the Jenner-Kardashian clan signed a new multi-year global content deal with Hulu/Star, which starts streaming in late 2021.

Fancy fish: One of the plates of sushi included a decadent dash of gold leaf - perhaps an ode to the Kylie Cosmetics CEO's 24k Birthday Collection, which dropped Tuesday

Priorities! Kourtney Instastoried a yummy emoji over a plate of three scoops of green ice-cream

Atmosphere: The tight family all Instastoried glimpses of the party décor, like the candlelit path surrounding her swimming pool and the palm trees and bushes covered in Christmas lights

Earlier in the day, Kylie kicked off her birthday celebrations

in a wholesome manner as she held a painting party with her friends, hosted by Timree Gold of Paint Club.

Each participant had their very own miniature easel, as well as brushes, a plate to dispense their paint on to, and water glasses to wash their brushes off in.

Artsy: Earlier in the day, Kylie kicked off her birthday celebrations in a wholesome manner as she held a painting party with her friends , hosted by Timree Gold of Paint Club

Making memories: Several of Kylie's closest pals, including former assistant Victoria Villarroel and BFF Stassie Karanikolaou, shared snaps and videos from the painting party to their own Instagram Stories

Though she didn't show off her final product, Kylie was eager to showcase some of her friends' impressive paintings via Instagram Story video.

Several of Kylie's closest pals, including former assistant Victoria Villarroel and BFF Stassie Karanikolaou, shared snaps and videos from the painting party to their own Instagram Stories.

Victoria and Stassie each unveiled their finished products to their respective followings, while Yris Palmer captured a brief clip of her daughter honing her artistry skills.

Yum: She also let her more than 250 million Instagram followers get a glimpse at the luscious spread of food she served at her festivities

She also let her more than 250 million Instagram followers get a glimpse at the luscious spread of food she served at her festivities.

The mouthwatering breakfast buffet included sweet items like pancakes with syrup as well as savory treats such as sausages.

Kylie's hand could be spotted over a pan full of delectable-looking cinnamon buns as she asked someone: 'Is this hot?'

Scaled down: Kylie's celebrations were far more low-key than the Kardashian-Jenner's typically outlandish parties after she came under fire for hosting an extravagant party for daughter Stormi's third birthday in February

While Kylie still treated her guests to a lavish day of celebrations, it was a far more low-key affair than the Kardashian-Jenner's typically outlandish parties.

The beauty mogul's scaled back festivities came after she came under fire for hosting an extravagant party for daughter Stormi's third birthday in February.

Kylie spared no expenses for the castle-themed event at her Beverly Hills home which was aptly titled '3rd Times A Charm,' but online critics couldn't help but notice the lack of concern for Covid from the Kardashian clan.

For the last few years, the little one has been treated to her own adventure land, Stormi World, which included amusement rides, balloon animals and, of course, her own merchandise.

While this year's festivities weren't as public with hundreds of friends and family, followers were not pleased to see so many people packed in one room during a time when the state of California was still under strict lockdown orders due to coronavirus.

This is 24! Kylie's nearest and dearest wish her happy birthday with gushing tributes and cheeky throwbacks

Kylie Jenner turned 24-years-old on Tuesday.

And her mother Kris Jenner was the first to post a gushing birthday tribute to her youngest daughter.

The 65-year-old reality TV matriarch included an album of heartwarming throwback snaps showing herself with Kylie through the years. 'Happy Birthday to my littlest angel @kyliejenner!!!! I can’t believe how fast time goes by!!!' the momager wrote in her caption.

Baby mine: Kris Jenner posted a gushing birthday tribute on Tuesday to her youngest daughter Kylie as she turned 24

'If I close my eyes it still feels like yesterday you were riding ponies down the street and bringing home stray cats…. And playing with my makeup!!!!!!' she said in a nod to Kylie's global makeup empire.

'You have brought all of us so much joy!!! You are the most amazing mommy!!!!' added Kris, referring to Kylie sharing her daughter Stormi, three, with Travis Scott.

As her caption went on Kris hailed Kylie as 'The most amazing daughter, sister, friend, confidant and advisor and you are so wise beyond your years.'

Kris, who shares Kylie with her ex Caitlyn Jenner, spilled: 'You are so kind, generous beyond belief and so loyal, compassionate, and loving.'

Cute as a button: 'Happy Birthday to my littlest angel @kyliejenner!!!! I can’t believe how fast time goes by!!!' the momager wrote in her caption

Childhood memories: 'If I close my eyes it still feels like yesterday you were riding ponies down the street and bringing home stray cats…. And playing with my makeup!!!!!!' said Kris

So sweet: 'You have brought all of us so much joy!!! You are the most amazing mommy!!!!' added Kris, referring to Kylie sharing her daughter Stormi, three, with Travis Scott

She continued: You make every day extraordinary and your talent and creativity in everything you do amazes me… thank you for being an inspiration to so many …especially me. I love you so much and I am blessed to be your mommy.'

In one of her heart-melting pictures Kris could be seen as a young woman in the 1990s cradling the then infant Kylie.

A slew of pictures documented Kylie's childhood including one where she stood next to a fiberglass playhouse with her big sister Kendall.

The album followed Kylie into adulthood and even into motherhood as one of the selections showed her with little Stormi.

High praise: As her caption went on Kris hailed Kylie as 'The most amazing daughter, sister, friend, confidant and advisor and you are so wise beyond your years'

'Inspiration': She continued: 'You make every day extraordinary and your talent and creativity in everything you do amazes me…'

Kris made sure to pop in one snap of herself sandwiched between her eldest and youngest children - Kourtney Kardashian on one side, Kylie on the other.

One of the pictures was a flashback to Kylie's 22nd birthday which she rang in with her loved-ones on a luxury yacht sailing along the Amalfi Coast.

Another snap of Kris and Kylie was taken in a photo-booth at the 85th birthday party of Kris' mother Mary Jo 'MJ' Campbell.

Kylie was decked out in a leggy feathery ensemble while Kris was draped in a leopard-print frocked as they struck a playful pose on deck.

Side by side: A slew of pictures documented Kylie's childhood including one where she stood next to a fiberglass playhouse with her big sister Kendall

Trio: Kris made sure to pop in one snap of herself sandwiched between her eldest and youngest children - Kourtney Kardashian on one side, Kylie on the other

Last week in a YouTube video with her longtime makeup artist Ariel Tejada she said that although she was about to turn 24 she felt 'I'll forever be 19, I just will.'

In the video, which was made in aid of her new birthday cosmetics collection, she also revealed that her glam routine takes a staggering three and a half hours.

As the morning of her birthday wore on the tributes flooded in from Kylie's loved ones including Kendall who sent her wishes on Insta Stories.

Kendall posted a picture of herself and Kylie lounging on the beach and wrote: 'happy birthday to my baby sister!'

Lap of luxury: One of the pictures was a flashback to Kylie's 22nd birthday which she rang in with her loved-ones on a yacht sailing along the Amalfi Coast

Side by side: Another snap of Kris and Kylie was taken in a photo-booth at the 85th birthday party of Kris' mother Mary Jo 'MJ' Campbell

Travis, who has remained an amicable co-parenting relationship with Kylie in spite of their 2019 breakup, made his warm feelings felt as well.

He posted an old snap of them at a food truck to his Insta Stories and urged her: 'WAKE UP ITS YOOOO BDAAYYYYYY.'

Kylie's elder half-sister Kim Kardashian marked the occasion with a throwback snap of them sat on a private plane during the early days of their stardom.

'Happy birthday Ky!!! I love you so much! You will always be my baby sis and I'm here for you no matter what!' wrote Kim.

'Happy birthday to my baby sister!': As the morning of her birthday wore on the tributes flooded in from Kylie's loved ones including Kendall who sent her wishes on Insta Stories

'WAKE UP': Travis, who has remained an amicable co-parenting relationship with Kylie in spite of their 2019 breakup, made his warm feelings felt as well

'You will always be my baby sis': Kylie's elder half-sister Kim Kardashian marked the occasion with a throwback snap of them sat on a private plane during the early days of their stardom

Kourtney Kardashian shared a snap of her arms around her much younger half-sister, whom she called 'my magical tinkerbell,' writing: 'There's no one like you, one of a kind.'

At 42, the Poosh founder is 18 years older than the Kylie Cosmetics CEO as evidenced by this throwback snap she Instastoried.

Speaking of which, Jenner's half-sister Khloé Kardashian looked unrecognizable in the throwback she Instastoried of her taking a nap with baby Kylie.

Kourtney Kardashian shared a snap of her arms around her much younger half-sister, whom she called 'my magical tinkerbell,' writing: 'There's no one like you, one of a kind'

Evergreen! At 42, the Poosh founder is 18 years older than the Kylie Cosmetics CEO as evidenced by this throwback snap she Instastoried.

Wow! Speaking of which, Jenner's half-sister Khloé Kardashian looked unrecognizable in the throwback she Instastoried of her taking a nap with baby Kylie

'You are my sunshine, my only sunshine you make me happy when skies are gray. You'll never know dear, how much I love you please don't take my sunshine away,' the 37-year-old Good American co-founder wrote quoting the 1939 song.

'Happy birthday sweet Kylie! If only you knew how much I love you. If only you knew how I can't imagine a day without you. If only you knew how my world is better because you are my soulmate. One of them at least. Being your sister is one of my greatest honors. Your spirit and heart is pure glittering gold. You leave everyone better after meeting them.

'You leave everyone wanting more of your infectious gentle spirit. I sincerely thank god every single day for you and the rest of my family! There's nothing like our tribe. May you continue to be surrounded by blessings, love, health, happiness, and laughter! I will love you until the end of time my baby girl! Happy birthday baby girl!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Conor McGregor passionately kissed his stunning fiancée Dee Devlin during her birthday dinner date at Craig's in LA on Tuesday.

The UFC ace, 33, packed on the PDA with his longterm partner, 33, who he shares three children with, as they enjoyed quality time together.

Conor leaned in for a sweet kiss, before planting pecks on her neck and shoulder as they laughed together.

Cute: Conor McGregor passionately kissed his stunning fiancée Dee Devlin during her birthday dinner date at Craig's in LA on Tuesday

He said: 'Happy birthday baby, my queen. She's the best mummy in the world' with Dee exclaiming 'we're out tonight!'

Conor then said: 'Mummy and daddy are out tonight',

The couple are parents to Conor Jack Jr, four, Croia, two, and Rían, two months.

Conor also shared some sweet snaps of his sons, captioned: 'My boys. We say when we play.'

Laugh: The UFC ace, 33, packed on the PDA with his longterm partner, 33, who he shares three children with, as they enjoyed quality time together

The fighter's outing comes a month after he suffered a broken tibia during his fight with Dustin Porrier during the main event of UFC 264 at the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas.

The fight was the long-awaited rubber match, or trilogy match, with McGregor winning the first fight by TKO in the first round in September 2014.

Porrier won the second fight in January via TKO in the second round during UFC 257 in January, with the trilogy fight taking place last month.

Sweett: Conor also shared some sweet snaps of his sons Conor Jr, four and Rian, two months, captioned: 'My boys. We say when we play.

Porrier won by TKO after the doctor stopped the bout after the first round, after it was revealed that the fighter broke his tibia.

It's unclear when McGregor may be able to fight again, though his road to recovery is believed to be a long one.

The fighter also made headlines when it was revealed that his place in Beverly Hills is actually right next door to boxer Floyd Mayweather, who McGregor famously fought in 2017 in a bout that was billed the, 'Fight of the Century.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kim Kardashian famously caused a storm when she showed off North West's impressive art skills earlier this year - with critics claiming the eight-year-old couldn't possibly have painted it herself.

Yet it seems artistic flair runs in the family as Kylie Jenner also proved to be a dab hand with a paintbrush at her 24th birthday party on Tuesday.

The beauty mogul opted for a wholesome start to her day of celebrations as he joined friends for a relaxing group painting session, hosted by Timree Gold of Paint Club.

Let's celebrate! Kylie Jenner proved artistic flair runs in the family as she hosted a painting party for her 24th birthday on Tuesday... after scandal surrounding THAT North West picture

Artistic: Kim Kardashian famously caused a storm when she showed off North West's impressive art skills earlier this year - with critics claiming the eight-year-old didn't paint it

Each participant had their very own miniature easel, as well as brushes, a plate to dispense their paint on to, and water glasses to wash their brushes off in.

Though she didn't show off her final product, Kylie was eager to showcase some of her friends' impressive paintings via Instagram Story video.

Several of Kylie's closest pals, including former assistant Victoria Villarroel and BFF Stassie Karanikolaou, shared snaps and videos from the painting party to their own Instagram Stories.

Victoria and Stassie each unveiled their finished products to their respective followings, while Yris Palmer captured a brief clip of her daughter honing her artistry skills.

Artsy: Kylie and her birthday crew honed their art skills as they headed outdoors to partake in a relaxing group painting session

Impressive: Though she has yet to show off her final product, Kylie was eager to showcase some of her friends' impressive paintings via Instagram Story video

Kylie's painting party was not attended by her niece North, despite being known for her impressive art skills.

Back in February, Kim spoke out to defend her daughter, after fans didn't believe North had painted the artwork that Kim shared online.

The artistic landscape was compared by some to an artwork that famed TV artist Bob Ross would have created.

Making memories: Several of Kylie's closest pals, including former assistant Victoria Villarroel and BFF Stassie Karanikolaou, shared snaps and videos from the painting party to their own Instagram Stories

Done! Kylie's best friend Stassie proudly showed off her finished product

Nice! Victoria snapped a photo of another party attendee showcasing their artistry

Kim was quick to hit back at critics, posting on her Instagram Stories: 'My daughter and her best friend have been taking a serious oil painting class where their talents and creativity are being encouraged and nurtured.'

The reality star had shared a photo of the painting to her Instagram stories earlier with the caption: 'My little artist North'.

Yet it seems North had the last laugh, as according to reports from TMZ, the tot ended up being given an invitation to visit the Bob Ross Experience in Muncie, Indiana.

Smile! Later in the night, Kylie's half-sisters Khloé (L) and Kourtney (R) Kardashian got the party started and were the first members of the clan to show off their looks for the bash

Following her painting party, Kylie hosted an intimate sushi dinner at her $36.5M Holmby Hills mansion.

The Calabasas socialite's half-sisters Khloé and Kourtney Kardashian got the party started and were the first members of the clan to show off their looks for the bash.

Kylie's festivities kicked off with two kinds of cocktails and a celebratory toast alongside Khloé, Kourtney, Kim, and their momager Kris Jenner.

Cheers! Kylie's festivities kicked off with two kinds of cocktails and a celebratory toast alongside Khloé, Kourtney, Kim Kardashian, and their momager Kris Jenner
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vogue Williams took some time off from looking after the kids on her family holiday to recline in the sunshine on Tuesday.

Vogue, 35, stretched out and struck a pose in a creamy one-piece swimsuit on a day bed, flaunting her lithe tanned limbs.

Her blonde mane whipped up atop her head, she added shades to the look as she perched on the edge of the bed.

Pose: Vogue Williams took some time off from looking after the kids on her family holiday to recline in the sunshine on Tuesday

In a snap from the weekend, she twinned with her 12-month-old daughter Gigi in a neon-pink bikini.

The model took to Instagram to share the sweet matching snap with her little one, which she captioned: 'Holiday mode on…'

The mother-of-two showed off her impressive figure in the bright ensemble, which featured a bow-style, ruffle strapless top and low-waisted briefs.

Vogue styled her caramel tresses in a high bun on top of her head, and shielded her eyes from the summer sun with a pair of sunglasses.

Relax: Vogue, 35, stretched out and struck a pose in a creamy one-piece swimsuit on a day bed, flaunting her lithe tanned limbs

Doting mum: Vogue is mum to Theodore, two, and Gigi, 12 months

Her youngest looked adorable in a coordinating bright swimsuit, as she was held on her hip by her loving mum.

Earlier, the media personality took to her Instagram story to share a photo of Gigi, who she shares with her husband Spencer Matthews, sat on an airplane seat with a toy plane in her hand.

The infant sat independently en route to their unnamed holiday location in a bright yellow jumper, as she appeared to grip a croissant in the other hand.

Twinning: Vogue was every bit the doting mother on Sunday as she twinned with her 12-month-old daughter Gigi in a neon-pink bikini

Caption: The model took to Instagram to share the sweet matching snap with her little one, which she captioned: 'Holiday mode on…'

The Irish native is also mum to Theodore, two, who she earlier filmed jumping into the swimming pool with hand-in-hand.

Vogue and her husband Spencer spoke on their podcast, Spencer & Vogue, when they revealed their unusual nickname for their daughter: 'fat maggot'.

Vogue said: 'I know, every parent loves their plump little fat daughter. We call ours the fat maggot.'

Explaining the name, Spencer said he likened his daughter to the insect and revealed he believes she will turn into a butterfly.

En route: Earlier, the media personality took to her Instagram story to share a photo of Gigi, who she shares with her husband Spencer Matthews, sat on an airplane seat en route to an unnamed holiday location

He said: 'And she's so sweet, she crawls around like a little maggot consuming anything she can get her hands on.'

'Becoming plumper, and rounder, until one day, even though she's not a caterpillar, she'll turn into a beautiful Maggotfly, a butterfly, yeah.'

Discussing their other child, son Theodore, Spencer said that he 'drives you up the walls'.

Sweet: Vogue and her husband Spencer spoke on their podcast, Spencer & Vogue, when they revealed their unusual nickname for their daughter, 'fat maggot'

He said: 'He's quite spoilt, he just whinges all the time and without drawing attention to the fact that I spent many months in Africa doing incredibly lovely charity work, none of those kids cried none of them.

'Of course if they hurt themselves they might cry but I have spent time with loads and loads of two to ten-year-olds in Africa and they have nothing they never cry.'

'Theodore cries in his mountain of toys because he can't find something.'

Vogue then offered an explanation as to her son's behaviour and said: 'I don't think you understand that is what a two-year-old does and the problem with Theodore was we were away and everyone kept giving him TV which he's not allowed and he turns into the moodiest little naughty boy and that is why.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They have been locked in an ongoing feud since Oasis split up 12 years ago.

But Noel and Liam Gallagher have put aside their differences as they both worked on a new documentary film on the band's iconic Knebworth shows in 1996.

Speaking about the project where both brothers serve as executive producers, Noel told The Sun : 'There’s lots me and Liam will never agree on, and with Oasis we both have the chance to say no to anything, but doing this was a no-brainer.'

Film: Noel (far right) and Liam Gallagher (centre) have put aside their differences as they both worked on a new documentary film on the band's iconic Knebworth shows in 1996 (pictured in 1996)

The Oasis Knebworth 1996 film sees the band taking to the stage in front of 250,000 fans and later discussing the event, predicting it will never be repeated.

Noel told how 30 cameras captured every moment of the shows but the band ended up forgetting about the footage after their American tour 'imploded' because both Liam and Noel missed shows and they later went straight into recording a new album.

He said: 'We were going to do the film of it then and if you remember the timescale we left Knebworth, went to America and that tour imploded, it all went t**s up and when we came back, like idiots, the first thing we did was go back in the studio and made a new record.'

Noel said the documentary reflects a 'by-gone era' before the internet when people would not film concerts on their phones.

Brothers: Noel said: 'There’s lots me and Liam will never agree on, and with Oasis we both have the chance to say no to anything, but doing this was a no-brainer'

The rocker has since tried to have smaller gigs with no mobile phones but thinks it wouldn't be possible at larger shows.

Noel previously told how he believes Liam was at his peak with the band during the Knebworth shows.

He told The Sun: 'I have to say, listening to the audio on that, we were on fire. Liam was at his absolutely f*****g peak and I've since realised Oasis was at its best when he was at his best.

'And when he started to deteriorate, the band started to go downhill. In my own view, the singles were always great.

Documentary: The Oasis Knebworth 1996 film sees the band taking to the stage in front of 250,000 fans and later discussing the event, predicting it will never be repeated

'The albums started to tail off a bit but when you see this thing, Liam's at his absolute. It was great looking back on it and I could actually see what all the f*****g fuss was about.'

It comes after Noel seemingly solidified his stance on ever returning to Oasis.

The rocker told MR PORTER: 'You don't really understand unless you've really been in it. Once you've quit, there is no going back. There's no point in going back.

'Bands are weird, you start off as young men and end up going all the way through to being middle-aged dads and all that goes with it.'

Noel decided to leave Oasis after Liam contracted laryngitis ahead of V Festival in August 2009, with the band cancelling the gig.

Footage: Noel told how 30 cameras captured every moment of the shows but the band ended up forgetting about the footage after their American tour 'imploded'

Noel issued a statement, blaming his brother for the cancellation, but cited Liam having a hangover as the reason.

Liam then sued Noel, demanding an apology, which he did - after which he quit the band, saying, 'I simply could not go on working with Liam a day longer'.

Both brothers went on to form new bands after this, and have been embroiled in a public feud ever since.

Elaborating on whether Oasis would have been a stadium band had they started out now, Noel said: 'It would be mad to think that the first two records [Definitely Maybe and (What's The Story) Morning Glory] would not transcend into a different era.

'So, I'd probably say yes, we'd be as big. But we were going for three years before we got signed, and we might not have made it to three years.

'Now, somebody could film you at a gig and go, "Nah, they're s**t", so we wouldn't have been given time to develop.

'Would we have got our foot in the door? Maybe not. But would we have been as successful? In any era, I think 'Don't Look Back In Anger' and 'Live Forever' are going to be pretty special tunes.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nick Knowles has revealed that learning to declutter and ditching 85% of his belongings left him feeling 'empowered'.

The former DIY SOS star, 58, downsized from a large London house to a small Cotswolds cottage in 2019, and said he has no regrets about ditching his belongings.

The presenter, who is reportedly dating mother-of-two Katie Dadzie, 31, added that the change helped 'make room for the important things in life'.

Cleaning out his closet: Nick Knowles, 58, reveals he feels 'empowered' and has made room for the 'important things in life' after decluttering and downsizing

So life-changing was his decluttering journey that the star is now fronting a new Channel 5 show, Nick Knowles’ Big House Clearout.

Speaking about his experience, Nick told The Mirror: 'While it feels uncomfortable to start with, once you get on a roll with it, weirdly it becomes strangely empowering.

'When I did it, I got a bit carried away with it.'

He also discussed the benefits of country living, such as 'planting a vegetable garden that my little six-year-old boy and I can grow sweetcorn and peas in.'

Nick shares son Eddie with ex-wife Jessica Moor.

New love: Nick's new show comes as the presenter is reportedly in the 'early days' of a romance with Katie Dadzie, 31, after meeting her at his children's playgroup (Katie, pictured)

Nick’s new show comes after it was revealed Rhod Gilbert is set to replace him as the presenter for the charity special of DIY SOS.

The comedian is joining DIY SOS: The Big Build to raise money for this year's Children in Need.

While Nick was in trouble with BBC bosses earlier this year after he appeared in a Shreddies commercial - a breach of strict advertising rules set by the Beeb - it has been confirmed he will return to host the upcoming series of DIY SOS.

Nick's new show comes following reports that he is dating a mother-of-two, who is 27 years his junior.

The presenter, who split from his wife Jessica Rose Moor in 2016, is reportedly in the 'early days' of a romance with Katie, 31, after meeting her at his children's playgroup.

It comes after Nick revealed in February 2020 that he was single again after splitting from his girlfriend, PR guru Emily Hallinan, 27, insisting at the time it 'wasn't the end of the world' and announcing the news on Valentine's Day.

Having made something of a reputation for himself with his love of younger ladies, Nick was also romantically involved with TOWIE star and stuntwoman Pascal Craymer, 34, back in 2017.

New man: While Nick fronts his new programme, Rhod Gilbert is set to replace him as the presenter for the charity special of DIY SOS (pictured in 2019)

According to The Sun, Nick and Katie made their public debut as a couple at a restaurant in Bath last week, after being friends for several years.

The presenter allegedly met his new girlfriend at a playgroup attended by his youngest son Eddie, seven. A source said: 'Nick and Katie have known each other for a couple of years, but it's always been platonic.

'They actually met through their youngest offspring and went on a few playdates as pals, before romance blossomed. Katie is a beautiful woman, fiercely independent and just Nick's type.

'They've met one another's friends and, although it's early days, everyone is hopeful this might be for keeps.'

Coupled up: According to The Sun, Nick and Katie made their public debut as a couple at a restaurant in Bath last week, after being friends for several years

In February 2020 Nick confirmed that he was single again following his split from girlfriend Emily.

He wrote on Instagram: 'Happy Valentine's. And if you're single like me don't worry, we don't have to join in everything every year. I missed national prune day too. Because it's not the end of the world to be single for a while.'

The pair reportedly began dating in 2019, after exchanging a series of messages about a work opportunity on Twitter, with Nick telling Emily to get in touch.

Old flame: It comes after Nick revealed that he was single again after splitting from his girlfriend, PR guru Emily Hallinan, 27, insisting at the time it 'wasn't the end of the world (Nick and Emily pictured in 2019)

They had been spotted together several times since, once in London's West End where they went to see musical Everybody's Talking About Jamie, days after Nick was pictured kissing a mystery blonde in the back of a black cab.

A source told The Sun at the time that the pair looked cosy during the West End show, saying: 'They arrived pretty incognito but were definitely on a date inside.

'She was cosying up to him during the show and they shared a couple of tender moments during the emotional parts.' The source added: 'It didn't appear to be a serious relationship but it's clear that they were into each other.'

Nick's Extensive Dating Life Nick and Suzi Perry in 2003 1995-2000: Gillian Knowles Nick had two children with his first wife before their split in 2000. They share son Charlie, 27, and daughter Tuesday, 26. UNKNOWN: Paula Beckett-Vass Little is known of his romance with beauty therapist Paula, although the couple share son Tyrian-J, 23. 2000-2003: Suzi Perry The two presenters met on the set of BBC's City Hospital soon after his split from his first wife and went on to date for three years. 2009-2016: Jessica Rose Moor Nick began dating Jessica in 2009 before they tied the knot in 2012 and welcomed their son Eddie in 2014. Nick and Jessica in 2013 They split in 2016 - initially amicably, as he supported her through her battle with cervical cancer. Following her recovery, they debated reuniting but split for good in December 2016. Things later turned nasty, with a war of words between the pair. Jessica accused the star of abuse in an explosive open letter on Twitter. They also became locked in financial wars when she asked for more money to provide for their son which led to further heartache for the pair however they later resolved their issues. Pascal pictured in 2019 2017: Pascal Craymer Nick hit headlines with TOWIE star Pascal following a fleeting romance. Things turned sour however, when model Pascal claimed she blocked Nick after he reportedly bragged about his 'revolving' bed' and 'dating younger women'. She alleged that the twice-married DIY SOS host was 'desperate to get his leg over' when they went on a few of lavish dates last year. She also claimed 'forward' Nick tried to kiss her before the starters during a £600 meal and embarrassed her with his 'dad dancing' in a nightclub. 2019-2020: Emily Hallinan Nick and Emily in 2019 Emily and Nick began dating in 2019, after exchanging a series of messages about a work opportunity on Twitter, with Nick telling Emily to get in touch. Sadly, one year later, in February 2020 Nick confirmed the pair had split. He took to Twitter to reveal he is single and urged his followers not to worry about Valentine's Day as he too was spending the day alone. Advertisement

Prior to his romance with Emily, he was reported to have dated Pascal.

Things turned sour however, when model Pascal claimed she blocked Nick after he reportedly bragged about his 'revolving' bed' and 'dating younger women'.

She alleged that the twice-married DIY SOS host was 'desperate to get his leg over' when they went on a few of lavish dates in 2017.

He tried to kiss her before the starters during a £600 meal and embarrassed her with his 'dad dancing' in a nightclub.

Nick later hit back - branding the one-time TOWIE star a 'sad fame-hungry nobody', with his pals issuing a scathing statement about the brunette beauty, who later hit back.

Pascal strongly denied the claims, saying: 'I don’t take too kindly being referred to as a ‘sad fame-hungry nobody.' She insisted the allegations were incorrect.

Prior to his Pascal fling, Nick and Jessica's romance and marriage was also widely publicised, with emphasis on their age gap.

Nick began dating Jessica in 2009 before they tied the knot in 2012 and welcomed their son Eddie in 2014. They split in 2016 - initially amicably, as he supported her through her battle with cervical cancer.

Shock: Prior to his romance with Emily, he was reported to have dated Pascal (pictured in 2017)

Despite a bitter divorce battle surrounding the custody of their then three-year-old son Eddie, the pair are now back on good terms with one another, with Nick recently admitting he still cared about his former wife.

Speaking to The Mirror in 2018 Nick said: 'It took me a while to figure stuff out. I'm really proud of the fact that Jess and I are really good.

'She's a great mother. Coming out of a marriage is hard, so I just want to make sure it stays respectful. I really care about my ex. She's got a new chap and I'm really pleased. They seem really happy.'

It was revealed at the time that Jessica asked for £48,000 a year from him in light of their bitter divorce battle.

Back then: Things turned sour however, when model Pascal claimed she blocked Nick after he reportedly bragged about his 'revolving' bed' and 'dating younger women' (pictured in 2018)

According to The Sun, Jessica who was receiving £4,000 a month as part of their settlement, is demanding an extra £2,000 a month in order to fund their three-year-old son Eddie's education.

'Nick is distraught that Jessica has made these claims. She already gets £4,000 a month from him and he’s funded her life for years,' a source told the publication.

It came after Jessica posted an 'open letter about my divorce' in which she alleged 'years of emotional cruelty, physical abuse' by her husband as well as reportedly withdrawing their son Eddie from private education.

However, sources close to the DIY SOS presenter denied the allegations - saying he 'only wants the best for his son'.

In a statement on the micro-blogging site, she denounced his denials of 'cruelty' and continued to suggest that he has withdrawn his financial support for their son.

Ex: Nick began dating Jessica in 2009 before they tied the knot in 2012 and welcomed their son Eddie in 2014 (Nick and Jessica, pictured in 2016)

In the equally emotional letter captioned: 'In response', Jessica responded to Nick's apparent shock at the 'horrendous' allegations made, saying:

'Nick may be intelligent but he is not smart. He is now denying that he withdrew his promise to send Eddie to private school but it was sent by his solicitor to mine.

'He as also denied years of cruelty but I do have diaries and photographic proof'.

Jessica then alleged that the presenter 'abandoned' her with young son Eddie in Spain for a 'string of girlfriends', and that she wants Nick to 'keep his promises' or she may publish 'witness statements' that could confirm her allegations.

Following the couple's split, Jessica entered a new relationship with RAF engineer William Babbage.

Nick previously said of his relationship patterns: 'My relationships have pretty much followed a pattern. They last six months and start off with me explaining that I work a lot, so will have commitment issues.

'The women involved agree that that is fine, then after a month I get a phone call saying, 'This isn't on.' After three months, we split up, then get back together. After five, there's another tussle. At six, it's all off.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nick Jonas looked typically trendy when he was seen leaving Casa Cruz in Notting Hill on Tuesday after enjoying dinner.

The Jonas Brother, 28, stepped out wearing a green shirt stamped with white floral patches and teamed the bold number with a pair of black trousers.

Opting for comfort in trainers, the popstar clutched a leather bag in his right arm as he made his way through the capital.

Trendy: Nick Jonas, 28, looked typically trendy when he was seen leaving Casa Cruz in Notting Hill on Tuesday after enjoying dinner

Bold: The Jonas Brother stepped out wearing a green shirt stamped with white floral patches and teamed the bold number with a pair of black trousers

On his left wrist, Nick - who is married to actress Priyanka Chopra - sported a luxury watch, while two bracelets were visible on the star's right arm.

Nick further accessorised with a gold chain necklace that could be seen beneath his shirt.

After leaving the up-market eatery Nick hopped into a black car and was whisked home.

It comes after Nick took to social media on Sunday to say it was 'an honour' as NBC aired a special Olympics Edition of Remember This, the Jonas Brothers' summer single.

Comfort: Opting for comfort in trainers, the popstar clutched a leather bag in his right arm as he made his way through the capital

Details: On his left wrist, Nick - who is married to actress Priyanka Chopra - sported a luxury watch, while two bracelets were visible on the star’s right arm

'What an honor...' the superstar performer wrote. 'Our performance of Remember This (NBC Olympics Edition) just aired as part of the Closing Ceremony on @NBC!!'

He added, 'We are so proud of you @TeamUSA ... let's get it!!' with a flexed arm emoji and the hashtag, #TokyoOlympics.

Kevin Jonas, 33, described seeing the clip marking the end of the Olympics as 'a moment I'll never forget' with a mid blown emoji.

He added, 'Our Remember This performance just aired on @NBC during the #TokyoOlympics Closing Ceremony!! Wow!!'

Necklace: Nick further accessorised with a gold chain necklace that could be seen beneath his shirt

Home time: After leaving the up-market eatery Nick hopped into a black car and was whisked home

Tattoos on show: A few of Nick's intricate arm tattoos could be seen as he made his way through the capital

Heavy night? Nick was later seen the leaving the Crown London Aspinalls casino in Mayfair at 3am through a fire escape exit

Smart: The star added a black blazer over his green patterned shirt for the casino trip

Joe Jonas, 31, wrote on Twitter, 'Getting to perform this song at the Olympics Closing Ceremony is quite the bucket list moment for me!!'

The music group took part in a special for the network last month titled Olympic Dreams Featuring Jonas Brothers, in which they took part in various sporting events.

The new video came as the Tokyo Olympics drew to a close after being pre-empted for a year due to the coronavirus pandemic, and was held under strict health protocols.

The end of the ceremony had the theme Worlds We Share, integrating a light show and stunt bikes while pointing to a simulcast from Paris, where the 2024 Summer Games are slated to happen.

Triple threat: Nick, Joe and Kevin Jonas were pictured on a rooftop for a performance of special Olympics Edition of Remember This that aired during the ending ceremony Sunday

Memorable: The brothers all took to social media with messages in reaction to their song airing

International Olympic Committee president Thomas Bach lauded the Olympians for their focus amid the unique set-up of the competition amid the pandemic.

'You were faster, you went higher, you were stronger because we all stood together - in solidarity,' he said. 'This was even more remarkable given the many challenges you had to face because of the pandemic.

'In these difficult times, you give the world the most precious of gifts: hope. For the first time since the pandemic began, the entire world came together.'

The U.S. led the total medal count with 113 overall medals, including 39 gold medals. Rounding out the top five countries included China, Russia, Great Britain and Japan.

The Jonas Brothers are set to hit the road for their Remember This Tour later this month, in which Kelsea Ballerini will open for them. The trek kicks off August 20 at the Park Theater in Las Vegas.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's soaking up the summer sun in Ibiza.

And Caprice Bourret, 49, looked incredible as she hit the beach in a tiny leopard print bikini on Monday.

The American entrepreneur wasn't afraid to show off her impressive figure in the animal print two-piece.

Wow! Caprice Bourret, 49, showed off her tanned and toned bikini body in a leopard print two piece on the beach in Ibiza on Monday

The TV personality showed off her washboard abs and ample assets in the bikini top and low rise bottoms.

The blonde beauty styled her luscious locks in effortless beach waves which framed her tanned visage.

The starlet opted for a natural glowing makeup palette for her beach day, and accessorised with a gold necklace and oversized sunglasses.

Topping up her tan: The TV personality showed off her washboard abs and ample assets in the bikini top and low rise bottoms

Caprice found herself in hot water last month when she warned women not to say no to sex with their husband, with Ulrika Jonsson remarking that her comments were 'dangerous'.

Vanessa Feltz came to Caprice Bourret's defence last week, writing that 'to attack Caprice' for her comments is to do her 'a gross injustice'.

Grateful for 59-year-old Vanessa's support, Caprice took to Instagram to share a screengrab of Vanessa's words, writing: 'Thank you Vanessa,' in a since-deleted post.

Writing in The Express this week, Vanessa said: 'Poor Caprice was accused of all manner of anti-feminist crimes and incurred the wrath of scores of indignant feminists. I declare myself the exception.'

To the rescue: Vanessa Feltz came to Caprice's defence last week, writing that 'to attack Caprice' for her comments is to do her 'a gross injustice'. Pictured in 2009

She continued: 'Caprice is talking about a benign and entirely non-threatening union in which a loving couple are hampered by mildly differing libidos.'

The This Morning star went on: 'Caprice and I both come from the same Jewish tradition of ''shalom bayit'' or peace in the home. It means, just sometimes, going along with something because your partner fancies it. You'd rather not, but you do it anyway to keep the marriage wheels oiled.'

During an interview with with OK! in July, model Caprice commented: 'It's just 10 minutes of your life, you can't say ''I'm tired'' or ''I have a headache'' – no!'

Not impressed: Ulrika Jonsson accused Caprice of 'blurring the line of consent' and branded her comments to 'dangerous' to other women. Pictured in 2020

The blonde beauty added: 'Girls, my advice - even if you aren't in the mood because it's been a long day – it's just ten minute of your life. Or 15!'

Shortly after the interview was published, Ulrika, 53, accused Caprice of 'blurring the line of consent'.

Hitting out at Caprice's views in her column in The Sun, presenter Ulrika told how she was 'embarrassed' for women like the Dancing On Ice star who still holds 'antiquated' viewers of 'gender-typical roles' in a relationship.

The former Gladiators host also remarked that Caprice's comments were 'dangerous' and questioned whether she'd be dishing out the same advice if she had a daughter of her own.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kate Ferdinand looked incredible as she slipped into an ab-flashing cropped blouse for some sultry Instagram snaps on Tuesday.

The former TOWIE star, 30, displayed her tiny waist in the emerald green top as she posed on her landing.

The stylish beauty paired this with a green, orange and white printed wrap skirt, which teased a glimpse of her bronzed legs.

Wow: Kate Ferdinand looked incredible as she slipped into an ab-flashing cropped blouse for some sultry Instagram snaps on Tuesday

She boosted her height with strappy stilettos and accessorised with shimmering jewellery.

Her caramel tresses were pulled into a sleek updo while her pretty features were enhanced with a radiant palette of make-up.

On Sunday, Kate sizzled as she slipped into a very busty black bikini while enjoying time on a boat on a sun soaked family getaway on Sunday.

She set pulses racing in the racy ensemble as it showcased her amazing figure, with the idyllic blue skies and sea as the backdrop.

Kate looked every inch the beach beauty by donning a straw fedora and oversized black sunglasses, before cuddling up to her husband Rio, 42, on the boat.

Chic: The former TOWIE star, 30, displayed her tiny waist in the emerald green top as she posed on her landing

Wow: On Sunday, Kate sizzled as she slipped into a very busty black bikini while enjoying time on a boat on a sun soaked family getaway on Sunday

Beach beauty: She captioned the racy snap: 'Happiest at sea' with a wave emoji

She glowed as she shrugged a snake print shawl round her shoulders and arms.

Kate's mid length straight blonde tresses looked stunning as they blew in the summer breeze.

She captioned the post: 'Happiest at sea' with a wave emoji.

Meanwhile, Rio shared a snap of the couple lounging on the sun deck of the boat, as he wore a black linen shirt open and sported a pair of shades.

Cute: Meanwhile, Rio shared a snap of the couple lounging on the sun deck of the boat, as he wore a black linen shirt open and sported a pair of shades

The former footballer captioned the image: 'Chill time with my [heart] And photobombed by this little one.'

The post comes after she made her return to Instagram on Friday by posting a slew of snaps from the holiday.

She shared a series of photographs and videos from their time away, where they enjoyed luxury boat days, watching dolphins and relaxing poolside drinks.

Kate looked sensational in a snap alongside her footballer beau, in which she wore a burnt orange maxi skirt and coordinating crop top.

Holiday time: On Friday, Kate gave fans a glimpse into her idyllic family holiday with husband Rio and their kids, as she returned to social media

Why so quiet? Alongside her upload Kate explained why she has been quieter than usual on Instagram for a little while

Gorgeous: Within her post she included a heartwarming snap of herself and eight-month-old son Cree spending time together

Fun in the sun: Kate also included faceless shots of husband Rio's three children; Sons Lorenz, 14, Tate, 12, (pictured) and daughter Tia, 10

Within her post she included a heartwarming snap of herself and eight-month-old son Cree spending time together, as well as faceless shots of husband Rio's three children; Lorenz, 14, Tate, 12, and Tia, 10.

Kate explained alongside her upload: 'I've been pretty quiet on here, sometimes I just find it all a bit much!

'Needed to switch off and enjoy some special time with my favourite people …..'

Twinning: Kate and Tia wore matching 'Happy Birthday Tate' tote bags and shell anklets

Kate recently shared an insight into the highs and lows of being a step-parent as she admitted it 'can be the hardest thing you'll ever do'.

She wrote on Instagram: 'Even if you are a totally confident parent, being a step-parent can be the hardest thing you'll ever do.

'Don't give up. You make an important difference. It may take years, but you'll learn things and said that changed their lives for the better. You've been placed in their lives for a reason.

Windswept: Rio took a couple's selfie while enjoying a boat ride with his wife

Adorable: Baby Cree cooled off in a paddling pool filled with colourful balls

'I always think and wonder how other step parents are doing, are you all ok?? Keep going'.

The next day, the reality star wrote: 'Morning, I've been reading through all of your responses from last night and wow...

'Sending all my fellow stepparents lots of love and support. Many of you are feeling grateful but overwhelmed, stressed, pushed out and are struggling.

'1 more question for you all... Where do you go to for support when you're feeling 'stuck'?

'Do you speak to friends? Any specific social pages that help? I salute you all. It can be tough but remember you are doing the best you can'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is the eldest child of rap superstar Eminem.

And Hailie Mathers looked incredible as she showcased her incredible figure in a series of sizzling bikini snaps she shared on Tuesday.

The 25-year-old donned a bright green bikini top which she paired with multi-coloured briefs that highlighted her bronzed tan.

Wow: Hailie Mathers looked incredible as she showcased her incredible figure in a series of sizzling bikini snaps she shared on Tuesday

Letting her brunette locks fall loose down her shoulders, Hailie also sported a pair of sunglasses as she relaxed on a boat.

The social media star completed her look with a gold necklace.

Hailie captioned the stunning snaps: 'aye aye, captain'.

Hailie is mentioned in more than 20 of the rapper’s songs, including Hailie’s Song, My Dad’s Gone Crazy, My Darling, Kim and 97 Bonnie & Clyde.

Pose: The 25-year-old donned a bright green bikini top which she paired with multi-coloured briefs that highlighted her bronzed tan

In March, the Lose Yourself hitmaker praised his daughter while speaking on Mike Tyson's Hotboxin podcast.

Eminem (born Marshall Mathers) said of Hailie: 'No babies, she has a boyfriend, but she’s doing good. She’s made me proud for sure. She’s graduated from college.'

Hailie, who has been dating boyfriend Evan McClintock since 2016, graduated from MSU with a degree in psychology in 2018.

After graduating college, Hailie accompanied her father on a summer tour and posted photos from festivals where he was performing.

Longtime love: Hailie has been dating boyfriend Evan McClintock since 2016

Proud: Hailie is mentioned in more than 20 of the rapper’s songs, including Hailie’s Song, My Dad’s Gone Crazy, My Darling, Kim and 97 Bonnie & Clyde

Earlier that year she told Daily Mail they are 'very close' and that he was supportive.

'I have a niece that I have helped raise too that’s pretty much like a daughter to me, and she is 26,' Eminem added during his interview with Tyson.

'And I have a younger one that’s 17 now. So when I think about my accomplishments, that’s probably the thing I’m the most proud of is being able to raise kids.'

Eminem legally adopted his sister-in-law Dawn's daughter Alaina and Whitney, Kim's daughter from another relationship.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

They appeared to confirm their romance last month when they were spotted strolling hand in hand through Portofino, Italy.

And Joan Smalls and her boyfriend Henry Junior Chalhoub put on another cosy display on Monday, when the loved-up duo was spotted embracing on a luxury boat in St Tropez.

Henry, 35, struggled to keep his hands off the model, 32, pulling her in for a hug and grabbing her bottom before whispering into the model's ear.

Loved-up: Joan Smalls, 32, and her boyfriend Henry Junior Chalhoub, 35, put on a cosy display on Monday, when the loved-up duo was spotted embracing on a luxury boat in St Tropez

Enjoying a couple's workout, Joan put her rock hard abs on display in a sports bra and shorts, while Henry also wore shorts teamed with a black T-shirt.

In between cuddles the couple was seen lifting weights and performing stretches, with businessman Henry, 35, taking off his shirt so that he could stay cool while working up a sweat.

Joan wore her glossy brunette hair swept up into a bun and accessorised with two delicate necklaces.

Very cosy: Henry pulled Joan in for a hug and grabbed her bottom before whispering into the model's ear

Happy: The pair seemed delighted to be in each other's company and could barely keep their hands off one another

Shirt off: Henry took off his shirt so that he could stay cool while working up a sweat

Henry opted for a pair of workout-friendly trainers and made sure to stretch before lifting weights with his partner.

The pair was seen for the first time together last August when they were snapped on a luxury yacht looking incredibly cosy, but it was said at the time that their relationship was platonic.

Joan had been dating Modellounge founder Bernard Smith since 2011 - however they had not been pictured together since earlier in 2019.

Weights: Joan lifted weights with ease as she basked in the warm weather

Working up a sweat: In between cuddles the couple was seen lifting weights and performing stretches

Muscles: Businessman Henry flexed his impressive muscles while taking a breather

Seen in Miami together in January 2019, things looked to be going strong between Joan and Bernard - with her posing for beach snaps while he played photographer.

They were seen cuddling up on a sun-lounger people-watching together, looking very at ease.

Peachy: Joan put her peachy bottom and toned physique on display as she worked up a sweat

They briefly split at the start of their relationship.

However, Bernard was able to win back her heart and the pair had been together since.

It appears that somewhere in early 2019, the couple called it quits.

It comes after Joan rang in her 33rd birthday in Greece last month.

While enjoying a leisurely afternoon on the beach, the supermodel rocked a pink and green one-piece with two cut outs across her very toned midriff.

Joan has become known for her statuesque physique, strutting the runway multiple times as a Victoria's Secret Angel.

Toned: Joan gave an insight into how she manages to keep her figure in runway-ready shape

Strong: Henry showed off his strength as he lifted weights while standing next to his girlfriend

Speaking about how she stays in shape, she previously told Vogue: 'I work out almost every day and I mix it up: I do Thai kickboxing, I have a personal trainer, I work out at my gym.

'I actually like working out. It’s such a stress reliever when you’re just focusing on yourself and not thinking about anything else except the music and your body.'

The 5ft 10in catwalk queen was also asked by Emirates Women, if there was anything she wanted to change about the modelling industry.

Stretch: Henry opted for a pair of workout-friendly trainers and made sure to stretch before lifting weights with his partner

Earrings: Joan was also wearing a gorgeous pair of studded earrings

Joan admitted: 'To have a social responsibility when deciding the message they put out to their consumers and not just do it because they are riding the wave of trends.

'Also to have transparency in jobs/ contracts – it has become much more than just showing up. There are so many variables that I think agencies should be more direct and honest in some instances.'

Back in 2013, the stunner entered Forbes magazine's World's Highest-Paid Models list for the first time, ranking at number eight with over $3 million in earnings.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@AJ Pritchard and his girlfriend Abbie Quinnen could barely stop smiling as they strolled hand in hand through London on Tuesday after watching Singing In The Rain together at Sadler's Wells Theatre.

AJ, 26, stepped out wearing jeans and a grey T-shirt, while Abbie, 24, put on a leggy display in a thigh-skimming brown shirt dress teamed with snakeskin heels.

The pair also bumped into AJ's former Strictly co-star Kevin Clifton - who stars in the stage show - and AJ was quick to wrap his arms around the dancer, who wore jeans and a white T-shirt.

Loved-up: AJ Pritchard, 26, and his girlfriend Abbie Quinnen, 24, could barely stop smiling as they strolled hand in hand through London on Tuesday after watching Singing In The Rain

The trio stopped for a chat before going their separate ways.

Queen rocker Brian May was also in the audience on Tuesday, with the 74-year-old musician looking typically stylish as he left the venue in a navy blazer, black trousers and white clogs.

He was accompanied by his wife Anita Dobson, who teamed jeans with a tailored black coat.

Kevin plays Cosmo Brown in Singing In The Rain alongside Steps star Faye Tozer, 45, who plays Lina Lamont.

Stylish couple: AJ stepped out wearing jeans and a grey polo T-shirt, while Abbie put on a leggy display in a thigh-skimming brown shirt dress teamed with snakeskin heels

Masks on: As they exited the venue, both AJ and dancer Abbie made sure to cover their noses and mouths with face masks

Old friends: The pair also bumped into AJ's former Strictly co-star Kevin Clifton - who stars in the stage show

Sweet: AJ was quick to wrap his arms around the dancer, who wore jeans and a white T-shirt

The Strictly star will perform high-energy routines during the show, which uses more than 14,000 litres of water on stage every night, with the story combining the charm, romance and wit of the 1952 film.

Singing In The Rain is running at Sadler's Wells Theatre until the end of September.

Joining song and dance legend Adam Cooper in the toe-tapping show alongside Kevin and Faye are Charlotte Gooch and Cavin Cornwall.

The plot centres largely on the turmoil that hit the movie industry in the late 1920s when films went from silent to sound.

Star of the show: Kevin plays Cosmo Brown alongside Steps star Faye Tozer, 45, who plays Lina Lamont

Wow: Kevin will perform high-energy routines during the show, which uses more than 14,000 litres of water on stage every night

Chatting away: The trio stopped for a chat before going their separate ways

Plot: The plot centres largely on the turmoil that hit the movie industry in the late 1920s when films went from silent to sound

Meanwhile, AJ confirmed last month that he and Abbie are 'closer than ever', six months after she suffered horrific burns in a freak accident.

The twinkle-toed star confessed their relationship has had 'ups and down' since her terrifying ordeal, but their romance is 'going the right way'.

Dance student Abbie required three skin grafts after she was burned while attempting to turn a glass into a vase for a TikTok video, and has since had to wear a compression vest to help heal her scars.

Still got it: Queen rocker Brian May was also in the audience on Tuesday, with the 74-year-old musician looking typically stylish as he left the venue

Date night: Brian was accompanied by his wife Anita Dobson, who teamed jeans with a tailored black coat

Outfit: Brian donned a navy blazer, black trousers and white clogs

Thumbs up: Clearly in high spirits after enjoying the show, the star flashed cameras a thumbs up

Speaking to the Sunday Mirror in July, AJ said: 'It has been hard, but it has brought us closer together.

'She is doing good on the journey. I hate that word but it is a journey.

'Ups and downs and lefts and rights but all going the right way at the end of the day. That is all that matters.'

Doting husband: Ever the doting husband, Brian placed his hand on his wife's back as they got into a car

Standing tall: Anita added height to her frame in stylish heels
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lauren Goodger has shared heartwarming family snaps of herself alongside her daughter Larose and beau Charles Drury.

The reality star, 34, welcomed 8lb 9oz Larose on July 20 with beau Charles Drury, 24, and only used gas and air during her seven-hour labour.

Lauren was every inch the glowing mother in one photo taken hours after the tot's birth and another four days later.

Family: Lauren Goodger has shared heartwarming family snaps of herself alongside her daughter Larose and beau Charles Drury

In both snaps, she posed in bed while cradling her daughter in her arms with Charles lying beside her.

Lauren looked radiant in one photo taken on July 24 as she donned a white crop top with her brunette locks falling loose down her shoulders.

In the photo taken on the day Larose was born, Lauren cradled the baby while Charles leaned in to give her a kiss.

It comes after Lauren shared more details about her homebirth, revealing her waters broke just 10 minutes after a reflexology session

Heartwarming: In the photo taken on the day Larose was born, Lauren cradled the baby while Charles leaned in to give her a kiss

Answering fans' questions in a Q&A session on Instagram on Monday, the new mum told how she used a birthing pool but 'actually gave birth standing up' and 'got into the zone' to deal with the pain of contractions.

Sharing details about her labour, Lauren revealed: 'My waters broke 10 mins after this reflexology session with @lrussreflex. She is amazing and I highly recommend her!'

Reflexology is a type of massage that involves applying pressure to the feet or hands. It is used to try and aid relaxation and reduce anxiety, pain, nausea.

Lauren later told another fan that she went into labour 'four days early' and Larose was born 'three days early'.

And when asked what Larose was like being born in water, Lauren explained: 'I actually gave birth standing up… so the last part I pushed her out standing up'.

New mum: It comes after Lauren shared more details about her homebirth, revealing her waters broke just 10 minutes after a reflexology session and she 'got into the zone' while in labour

Mother and daughter: The reality star welcomed 8lb 9oz Larose on July 20 with Charles and only used gas and air during her seven-hour labour

Details: Lauren revealed her waters broke very quickly after having reflexology (left) and explained (right) that she actually gave birth to her adorable little girl while standing up

Lauren also chatted about how she and Charles are adapting to life as a family-of-three, saying that they're 'a team' alongside an adorable picture of Larose's face.

Other followers of the former TOWIE star asked what the biggest lesson she's learnt since becoming a mum is, with Lauren telling them that she's just soaking up time with her daughter at the moment.

While another fan asked how Lauren 'stayed positive and strong', with the doting mum saying she just stayed focused on meeting her little girl.

She replied: 'I just got into my zone and took each contraction as it came and each one brought me closer to my daughter'.

Timing: The new mum told her fans that Larose arrived three days ahead of schedule

'I just got into my zone': The reality star also spoke about dealing with the pain (left) as it got her 'closer' to meeting Larose and trying different positions (right) to see if that helped at all

She replied: 'None as of yet. I just love every single minute with her… she is my life'.

Elsewhere in her Q&A, Lauren discussed moving around during labour and how she got 'in and out as she was getting uncomfortable and wanted to try other positions'.

She added: 'The pain was the same in or out the water but I preferred being in the water'.

Candid: Lauren also revealed she 'couldn't of cared less' about being naked during the delivery and moved around by getting in and out of the birthing pool while in labour

Adorable: As well as answering questions about her labour, Lauren shared a few beautiful snaps of her little girl laying in a bed

Open: Lauren also told one fan that she was 'scared' but 'knew it's what I had chosen to do'

Lauren was also asked if she'd 'do it all again' and have another child, with the star admitting that as 'each day goes by and I am healing, yes I prob will do it all again'.

The new mum also chatted about doing a hypnobirthing course to help her prepare and said next time she'll 'take more time' for herself as she was busy with work before Larose's arrival.

As well as answering fans' questions, Lauren also shared a selection of new snaps alongside her answers, including one of herself in the birthing pool.

Taking to Instagram on Monday, the new mum posted a naked snap of herself during the home birth which was adorned with a selection of appropriately chosen emojis.

Future plans? The new mum also admitted she's not completely against the idea of having another baby and going through the pain of labour again

Changes: However she added that for another pregnancy she'd 'take more time for myself' as she was busy towards the end of her first

Lauren added an emoji with a pained expression over her face as well as including a bra containing watermelons and a small baby's face to further protect her modesty.

The star also shared the same snap of herself inside the inflatable pool but covered it with white writing as she discussed her labour and positive waterbirth experience.

She penned: 'This was my home birth and I used @birthpoolinabox. It arrived such fast delivery with the whole kit needed - including the pump to blow the pool up!

'My baby girl Larose was born in 7 hours in my living room - gas and air only. I had my amazing midwife with me and another midwife arrived towards the end.

'No complications. Look into your birth plan and choose the best option for you.'

Special moments: The new mum posted a naked snap of herself during the home birth which was adorned with a selection of appropriately chosen emojis

Q&A: Lauren also praised her 'amazing' midwife as she reflected on her seven hour labour and only using gas and air to help with the pain

It comes after Lauren revealed her placenta resembled a stingray as she continued to detail her drug-free home birth.

Speaking to New! Magazine, Lauren said she now realised why her bump was 'so big' due to the size of her placenta.

She said: 'My placenta was bigger than the baby so no wonder I had such a big bump! It came out like an animal, it looked like a stingray.

'Then they checked me and I didn't need any stitches and I didn't tear. Now I'm just letting my body heal. I'm still bleeding and my bump is going down.'

The couple are happily enjoying life with their newborn and say they are excited about having Larose there on their wedding day.

Charles said: 'Some people say you should be married before you have children but everyone goes at their own pace and I'm actually quite happy now that we're going to be able to share that day with Larose and that's going to be a magical moment.'

Lauren told fans her 'life is complete' in a gushing Instagram post last month, in which she also thanked her followers for their well-wishes.

Happy: Lauren revealed her 'life is complete' as she gushed over her newborn daughter in an Instagram post last Thursday, in which she also thanked her fans for their well-wishes

The new mum wrote on her stories that she was 'so happy' and told how she and her partner are enjoying spending special time with their 'precious baby girl'.

Lauren announced she was expecting her first child with Charles on January 19, three months after confirming their relationship.

At the beginning of the year Lauren confirmed she was three months pregnant in her new magazine column, and revealed that she would welcome the baby in July.

Lauren found fame on The Only Way Is Essex while in a relationship with ex-fiancé Mark Wright, with whom she was in a relationship for over 10 years, before going on to date jailbirds Jake McLean and Joey Morrison.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has racked up an impressive amount of positive reviews for her performance in 2:22 A Ghost Story.

And following another night treading the boards, Lily Allen cut a chic figure as she headed out of the Noël Coward Theatre on Tuesday evening after another stellar show.

The budding actress, 36, looked effortless in a cosy white jumper which featured an 'Aries' spell out on the top right.

Chic: Following another night on the West End, Lily Allen, 36, cut a chic figure as she headed out of the Noël Coward Theatre on Tuesday evening

Lily's stylish jumper was tucked into a pair charcoal mom jeans, while she stepped out in fresh white trainers before heading to dinner at J. Sheekey

The Smile hitmaker accessorised with a chain necklace and carried a small black Prada bag with a khaki strap.

The mother-of-two sported minimal makeup and wore her jet black hair in a sleek, straight style - while her bangs framed her gorgeous visage.

Effortless: The budding actress looked effortless in a cosy white jumper which featured an 'Aries' spell out on the top right

The theatre mogul beamed as she was pictured on the streets of Leicester Square - and it doesn't come as a surprise following the glowing early reviews she has received for her debut performance.

Following the show, Twitter and Instagram were awash with praise with one viewer penning: 'I had goosebumps at the end, the audience were screaming. What a play, what a show, what a cast. It’s unbelievable that was her west end debut'.

Fans took to the microblogging site to write: 'WOW!! I had goosebumps at the end, @sophdoesthings was crying, the audience were screaming...

All in the details: The Smile hitmaker accessorised with a chain necklace and carried a small black Prada bag with a khaki strap

Rave reviews: The theatre star beamed as she was pictured on the streets of Leicester Square - and it doesn't come as a surprise following the glowing early reviews she has received for her debut performance

Applause: Following the show, Twitter and Instagram were awash with praise from fans and audiences alike

Home time: She hopped into a car after the show, getting comfortable on the back seat before leaving the West End for the night

'What a play, what a show, what a cast. @LilyAllen KILLED IT!!! I am so proud of her, it’s unbelievable that was her west end debut never mind opening night!...

Absolutely loved the play last night!! One of the best things I’ve seen in years - you were brilliant, as was the rest of the cast! Smiling face...'

'No spoilers but that was incredible such an amazing play loved it so much! Now Shhh I won’t tell- you HAVE to book and see this !! #222AGhostStory'.

The songstress stars alongside Julia Chan, Hadley Fraser and Jake Wood in the supernatural thriller which follows Lily's character in her fears that her house is haunted and the aftermath of a dinner party with friends.

The play is by Danny Robins and will run at the Noel Coward Theatre until October.

Relaxed: Lily styled her skinny jeans and jumper with white trainers and a warm black jacket
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Machine Gun Kelly surprised fans as he debuted a freshly shaved head on his Instagram, one day after getting matching tattoos with Travis Barker.

While the 31-year-old rapper was pictured rocking platinum blonde with sweeping fringe on Monday, his latest snap showed him without any hair.

As he teased a new single with Cole Bennett on Wednesday, he showed off his daring new look, which included a tattoo on the top of his bald head.

New look: Machine Gun Kelly surprised fans as he debuted a freshly shaved head on his Instagram, one day after getting matching inked with Travis Barker

Machine Gun Kelly revealed he ditched his bleached blonde hairstyle for a video that will be directed by Bennett.

'i shaved my head for this @_ColeBennett_ "papercuts" tomorrow 9pm,' he tweeted on Tuesday, with a screenshot of one of their FaceTime calls.

Just 24 hours prior, Machine Gun Kelly posted multiple photos with his edgy, long tresses, which covered most of his face, after getting inked with Barker, 45.

Big change: While the 31-year-old rapper was pictured rocking platinum blonde with sweeping fringe on Monday, his latest snap showed him without any hair

The rockers both got 'born with horns' etched on their arms, which is the name of Kelly's upcoming album, which Barker produced.

'We’re back for round two…,' Kelly captioned a video of them showing off their tats.

'Let’s f**kin goooo,' Kourtney Kardashian's drummer beau commented.

Tatted: Just 24 hours prior, Machine Gun Kelly posted multiple photos with his edgy, long tresses, which covered most of his face, after getting inked with Barker, 45

Matching: The rockers both got 'born with horns' etched on their arms, which is the name of Kelly's upcoming album, which Barker produced

Barker later shared two photos of them flashing their fresh ink as they stood in front of a white wall with the same caption.

In the images, Kelly wore an oversized tie-dye and black sweatpants, while Barker wore a black beanie and went shirtless.

Travis and MGK (real name: Colson Baker) previously worked together on MGK's 2020 pop-punk album Tickets To My Downfall which Travis co-produced.

'Let’s f**kin goooo,' Kourtney Kardashian's drummer beau commented

It was MGK's fifth studio album and marked a departure from his signature style. MGK rose to fame as a rapper in the 2010s but he has pivoted to rock music over the last two years.

His pal Travis was the perfect collaborator for his new sound, as Barker is known both for his punk-style work with Blink-182 and his own hip-hop drumming that he has focused on in recent years.

Barker's drums were featured on every track of Tickets To My Downfall, and he also showed off his multi-instrumental talents by recording piano, guitar and bass on some songs as well as co-writing almost all of the songs.

Creative collaborators: The two previously worked together on MGK's fifth studio album Tickets To My Downfall which Travis co-produced. Seen in 2020

According to GQ, MGK met Barker after a Blink-182 concert and the two would spend time together whenever Travis was in MGK's hometown of Cleveland.

The outlet reported, 'In 2019, Baker confided that he had an acoustic riff and hook he was struggling to build into a full song. Barker got to work and within days, I Think I'm OKAY, Baker's first true rock track, was finished. Later the two went to the studio to work on what eventually became Tickets to My Downfall.'

Travis, who referred to MGK as his 'best friend' during the GQ interview, recently performed with the singer-songwriter in Venice, California.

Hitting the skins: Travis, who referred to MGK as his 'best friend' during the GQ interview, recently performed with the singer-songwriter in Venice, California

Rock on! MGK shredded on a pink guitar from the elevated stage in June

The pair's rooftop concert in June was attended by their girlfriends, Kourtney Kardashian and Megan Fox. The reality star, 42, and the actress, 35, were spotted having a pleasant conversation as they watched their beaus rock out.

MGK met Megan in March of last year while filming the crime thriller Midnight In The Switchgrass in Puerto Rico, and they began dating later in the summer after she separated from her husband Brian Austin Green.

Travis has been a family friend of the Kardashian–Jenner clan for years, but it wasn't until January of this year that fans suspected he and Kourtney might be dating after he wrote several flirty comments on her Instagram posts.

Cute couple: Megan beamed while spending some time with MGK before the rooftop show

Having a blast: During the concert, Kourtney shared some cute photos of herself showing off her perfect pout while sitting just off to the side of the stage

Sources officially linked the two later in the month, and since then they've gone from just sharing hints of their relationship on social media to being unabashed about displaying their affections.

The relationship has led to tensions with Travis' ex-wife Shanna Moakler, who accused Kourtney and the Kardashians of 'destroying my family' to TMZ.

She complained of being alienated from her children, though Travis' daughter Alabama previously said on Instagram Live that she hadn't seen her mother in more than seven months, well before Kourtney and Travis are believed to have been dating.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A Shabbat dinner quickly spiraled out of control when Ramona Singer, 64, started complaining that Jewish people had shunned her when she first moved to New York and in college.

Drinking in the 70-minute limo ride the housewives took to dinner at a house in Summit, NJ, didn't help the situation nor did the fact that Ramona arrived clearly hungry in Tuesday's episode of the Real Housewives of New York titled Hanger Pains.

The Black shabbat dinner was organized by Eboni K. Williams, 37, as a way to expose the other housewives to other traditions.

However, Ramona soon began to enrage her castmates during a debate on Black and Jewish oppression - as she revealed she used to 'cry herself to sleep wishing she was Jewish in college, and claimed she was 'discriminated against' by Jewish people for being Christian

Ramona spirals: A Shabbat dinner quickly spiraled out of control when Ramona Singer, 64, started complaining that Jewish people had shunned her when she first moved to New York

Hangry: Drinking in the 70-minute limo ride the housewives took to dinner at a house in Summit, NJ, didn't help the situation nor did the fact that Ramona arrived clearly hungry in Tuesday's episode of the Real Housewives of New York titled Hanger Pains

Eboni: The Black shabbat dinner was organized by Eboni K. Williams, 37, as a way to expose the other housewives to other traditions

The episode began with Leah McSweeny, 38, who was in the process of converting to Judaism, preparing to sing the shabbat candle lighting prayer.

When Leah couldn't attend because of a potential COVID exposure, she zoomed in her attendance via phone.

Leah's presence on the phone annoyed Ramona who also became upset when the topic turned to Black and Jewish oppression.

Preparing: Leah McSweeny, 38, who was in the process of converting to Judaism, was preparing to sing the shabbat candle lighting prayer

Zoomed: When Leah couldn't attend because of a potential COVID exposure, she zoomed in her attendance via phone

Annoyed: Leah's presence on the phone annoyed Ramona who also became upset when the topic turned to Black and Jewish oppression

Archie Gottesman, who runs an organization called JewBelong and who hosted the dinner, said at the table that she had been really worried about the relationship between Black and Jewish communities.

Eboni said 'when you are an oppressed people it is very easy to join with other forms of oppression for your own perceived survival. The only person that wins when those communities are at odds is white supremacy.' Eboni said she had paid the price.

Ramona interjected 'we all want what is right in this world.' She also told her that 'we have all paid the price in different ways.' Ramona told them that in college Jewish people hated her.

Archie hosts: Archie Gottesman, who runs an organization called JewBelong and who hosted the dinner, said at the table that she had been really worried about the relationship between Black and Jewish communities

Oppressed: Eboni said 'when you are an oppressed people it is very easy to join with other forms of oppression for your own perceived survival. The only person that wins when those communities are at odds is white supremacy.' Eboni said she had paid the price

Hated: Ramona interjected 'we all want what is right in this world.' She also told her that 'we have all paid the price in different ways.' Ramona told them that in college Jewish people hated her

Eboni found her comments offensive and said in a confessional that Ramona has a hard time sitting with the pain of marginalized Americans. 'I don't think Ramona has any clue as to how painful her reaction is at this moment,' Eboni said.

Leah injected from the phone to stop Ramona from talking. In a confessional, Leah said that not only wasn't the conversation about white people, but that it's 'not about you Ramona.'

'Jewish people hated you at college? I'm sure everybody hated you at college,' Leah added.

Offensive: Eboni found her comments offensive and said in a confessional that Ramona has a hard time sitting with the pain of marginalized Americans. 'I don't think Ramona has any clue as to how painful her reaction is at this moment,' Eboni said

Stop talking: Leah injected from the phone to stop Ramona from talking

Confession: 'Jewish people hated you at college? I'm sure everybody hated you at college,' Leah added

Ramona kept talking about how when she came to New York that Jewish people shunned her and she was discriminated against.

Ramona left the table. Leah screamed at her from the phone that she was acting like a psycho and to 'sit down.' She told her 'you're not looking good right now.'

Ramona came back to the table and apologized to Archie. Archie said she understood she felt the Jewish community left her out.

Discriminated: Ramona kept talking about how when she came to New York that Jewish people shunned her and she was discriminated against

Apology: Ramona came back to the table and apologized to Archie. Archie said she understood she felt the Jewish community left her out

'Well, she did have sex with some Jewish guys,' Sonja Morgan, 57, said.

'Shut, I did not,' Ramona said to Sonja. 'I wish I was born Jewish.'

Sonja tried to get Ramona to stop steering the conversation back to herself.

As the ladies yelled at each other, one of Eboni's friends seated at the table named Brian reached over and said to another friend at the table 'I need another margarita.'

Stop steering: Sonja tried to get Ramona to stop steering the conversation back to herself

Margarita: As the ladies yelled at each other, one of Eboni's friends seated at the table named Brian reached over and said to another friend at the table 'I need another margarita'

Leah asked Eboni to take her phone into the other room and told her she was disgusted by Ramona's behavior.

Leah said later in a confessional that Ramona had the 'IQ of a f**king walnut.'

Ramona got up from the table and said she needed to eat real food and that she hadn't eaten all day despite eating snacks on the limo ride on camera.

She walked into the kitchen and told them she needed food. She told them she couldn't have snacks because they are fattening.

Eboni: Leah asked Eboni to take her phone into the other room and told her she was disgusted by Ramona's behavior

Confession: Leah said later in a confessional that Ramona had the 'IQ of a f**king walnut'

No snacks: She walked into the kitchen and told them she needed food. She told them she couldn't have snacks because they are fattening

Before the dinner started, the housewives all seemed to be having a good time. Ramona, Sonja, Luann and Eboni traveled in the limo together to the event in New Jersey.

When they got there Luann got out of the van, saw there was snow in the trees and started to make mini snowballs to throw at Sonja and the others.

When they arrived at the house, Archie was welcoming to the group. Sonja told Archie she didn't know much about Jewish traditions, but that 'every shiksa has had a Jewish boyfriend.'

Limo: Before the dinner started, the housewives all seemed to be having a good time. Ramona, Sonja, Luann and Eboni traveled in the limo together to the event in New Jersey

Snow: When they got there Luann got out of the van, saw there was snow in the trees and started to make mini snowballs to throw at Sonja and the others

Welcoming: When they arrived at the house, Archie was welcoming to the group

Eboni introduced Sonja to her friends including Brian and Dionne and told them that Sonja had just gone on a date set up by her matchmaker.

She told them that Sonja was going to tell them all about it at dinner. Sonja said though she would rather tell them right now because 'I have a couple of girlfriends with me who like to recycle.'

'They do like some recycled 'd',' Eboni said.

Friends: Eboni introduced Sonja to her friends including Brian and Dionne and told them that Sonja had just gone on a date set up by her matchmaker

Dinner: She told them that Sonja was going to tell them all about it at dinner

Sonja said she wanted to remove Luann and Ramona from the conversation. She told them that when she put her wedding invitation to her previous husband that no one even knew that they were dating.

'Keep that man under-wraps,' Sonja said in a confessional. 'There is always going to be someone trying to trip you up.'

When Luann de Lesseps, 56, walked over, Sonja said let's change the subject. When Luann asked why, Sonja told her it was because she was an introvert and Luann was an extrovert.

Remove: Sonja said she wanted to remove Luann and Ramona from the conversation. She told them that when she put her wedding invitation to her previous husband that no one even knew that they were dating

Luann: When Luann de Lesseps, 56, walked over, Sonja said let's change the subject. When Luann asked why, Sonja told her it was because she was an introvert and Luann was an extrovert

'I'm a fricken donkey if you are an introvert,' Luann said.

The women then sat down for the shabbat dinner. Leah zoomed in for the dinner.

Archie told her she started her organization to make Judaism more welcoming to others. They put Leah on a phone in the middle of the table.

Welcoming: Archie told her she started her organization to make Judaism more welcoming to others. They put Leah on a phone in the middle of the table

Ramona told her that they couldn't all focus on talking to her because they were in the moment at the dinner and 'can't make sure every second you are okay.'

Leah asked why not. And Sonja jumped in and said 'because she's a b**ch.' Leah said she was having a hard time hearing them.

Leah then sang the prayers. Sonja told her she was blown away and really touched by her singing and her commitment.

Focus: Ramona told her that they couldn't all focus on talking to her because they were in the moment at the dinner and 'can't make sure every second you are okay'

Blown away: Leah then sang the prayers. Sonja told her she was blown away and really touched by her singing and her commitment

'Beautiful,' Sonja said, right before the evening spiraled out of control.

Earlier in the episode, Ramona worked on her realtor skills. She met with Michael Lorber, a real estate broker, at a property to help him show the apartment to his client Jordan.

As Michael stood back, Ramona outlined for Jordan the selling points of the two bedroom, three and half bath, 3,826 sq foot, 34th floor unit that was on the market for $17.9 million.

Beautiful: 'Beautiful,' Sonja said, right before the evening spiraled out of control

Realtor: Earlier in the episode, Ramona worked on her realtor skills. She met with Michael Lorber, a real estate broker, at a property to help him show the apartment to his client Jordan

Selling points: As Michael stood back, Ramona outlined for Jordan the selling points of the two bedroom, three and half bath, 3,826 sq foot, 34th floor unit that was on the market for $17.9 million

She said in a confessional she was working on getting her real estate license. 'I like being busy and I like making money,' she said.

Michael tried to tell Jordan which way the unit's living room was facing when Ramona hit him on the shoulder and said 'I'm talking.'

Michael told her there is 'no physical abuse during showings.' Ramona approached him and said 'I'm supposed to be talking and you just be quiet.'

Busy: She said in a confessional she was working on getting her real estate license. 'I like being busy and I like making money,' she said

Ramona continued to show Jordan the apartment. Jordan said that Ramona was doing a good job.

Meanwhile Eboni met with Linda Doyle, a genetic investigator, to help her use her DNA to identify her father.

'I'm so excited to find you because I don't know hardly anything about my family tree,' Eboni told her. 'I'm an only child and don't really have all the answers around the paternity situation.'

Good job: Ramona continued to show Jordan the apartment. Jordan said that Ramona was doing a good job

Genetic investigator: Meanwhile Eboni met with Linda Doyle, a genetic investigator, to help her use her DNA to identify her father

Excited: 'I'm so excited to find you because I don't know hardly anything about my family tree,' Eboni told her. 'I'm an only child and don't really have all the answers around the paternity situation'

She told her that she had done Ancestry.com but that there had been no big reveals and no first cousins. Linda said she was going to first do a clustering analysis that would help her find her father.

'If I could find out anything that gives me a bigger, broader sense of who I am,' Eboni.

Linda said she could have answers for her in a week. Eboni was stunned that she might know additional family members by Christmas.

Cluster: Linda said she was going to first do a clustering analysis that would help her find her father

Broader sense: 'If I could find out anything that gives me a bigger, broader sense of who I am,' Eboni

Answers: Linda said she could have answers for her in a week. Eboni was stunned that she might know additional family members by Christmas

Sonja went on a date with a man named Brad set up by Eboni's matchmaker. 'If I seem rusty it is because I've never done this,' she said. Brad told her he had never done it either.

Sonja had seen Brad's picture three days earlier by Devyn, Eboni's matchmaking friend, but when she saw him in person she thought that he looked different.

She said in a confessional that she remembered him being taller and thinner, but that she was going to just be quiet and see what he had to say.

Rusty: If I seem rusty it is because I've never done this,' she said

Quiet: She said in a confessional that she remembered him being taller and thinner, but that she was going to just be quiet and see what he had to say

They bonded over food but Sonja didn't like what he lived in Chelsea. He told her that has had four back surgeries and told her about his injuries.

They hugged after their first date. Sonja told him she hoped that she would see him again. He told her 'we will.'

The shabbat dinner fight will continue on next week's episode The Real Housewives of New York airing Tuesday, August 17 at 9 PM ET on Bravo.

Surgeries: They bonded over food but Sonja didn't like what he lived in Chelsea. He told her that has had four back surgeries and told her about his injuries

Hugs: They hugged after their first date. Sonja told him she hoped that she would see him again. He told her 'we will
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stephen Amell and his wife Cassandra Jean attended their first event since he was 'removed' from a Delta flight for allegedly shouting at her in June.

The lovebirds, who wed in 2012, appeared to have moved past the incident as they posed for photos with their arms wrapped each other on the red carpet of the premiere of his new series, Heels, on Monday in Los Angeles.

For their night out , the 40-year-old Green Arrow actor wore a light blue suit linen suit, while his spouse stunned in a sparkly gown.

Happy couple: Stephen Amell and his wife Cassandra Jean attended their first event since he was 'removed' from a Delta flight for allegedly shouting at her in June

Kisses: Amell placed a tender kiss on Cassandra's cheek as they gazed at one another lovingly at the Heels after party

Cassandra looked incredible in a gold and black shimmery dress, which she accessorized with a pair of open-toed black heels and gold earrings.

She styled her brown tresses in a sleek updo and opted for a plum lipstick.

The couple spent the evening mingling with Amell's costars, including his onscreen brother Alexander Ludwig, who attended with wife Lauren Dear.

Lovebirds: The lovevirds, who wed in 2012, appeared to have moved past the incident as they posed for photos with their arms wrapped each other on the red carpet of the premiere of their new series, Heels, on Monday

No troubles in sight: Stephen and Cassandra looked like the ideal couple as they posed for photos at the Heels after party

Going strong: For their night out in Los Angeles, the 40-year-old actor wore a light blue suit linen suit, while his spouse stunned in a sparkly gown

Ludwig looked handsome in a burgundy suit as his other half turned heads with her beautiful feathered dress, which hugged her very toned figure.

Dear wore her dark hair in a sleek bun and strutted down the red carpet in silver pumps.

Kelli Berglund, Julie Yorn, Patrick Walmsley, James Harrison, Laura Bauer, Mike O’Malley, Mary McCormack and Alison Luff were also present.

Date night: The couple spent the evening mingling with Amell's costars, including his onscreen brother Alexander Ludwig, who attended with wife Lauren Dear

Onscreen siblings: The men portray wrestling brothers who are navigating their own lives and late father’s legacy in their small town in Georgia

Heels, starring Amell and Ludwig, is set to premiere on August 15.

The men will portray wrestling brothers who are navigating their own lives and late father’s legacy in their small town in Georgia.

Once inside the event, Stephen and Cassandra packed on the PDA. He placed a tender kiss on her cheek as they gazed at one another lovingly.

Meanwhile, Ludwig and his wife Lauren had a blast flexing for the cameras in front of a boxing-themed backdrop.

Big night: Kelli Berglund, Julie Yorn, Patrick Walmsley, James Harrison, Laura Bauer, Mike O’Malley, Mary McCormack and Alison Luff were also present

Friends: Amell posed for a photo with Alison Luff

After showing off their muscles, the couple shared a kiss.

The outing marks Stephen Amell's first event since he responded to reports that he was taken off a flight for allegedly shouting at Cassandra over Twitter.

An article on TMZ characterized him as having been 'forcibly removed' from the aircraft on account of the alleged altercation on Monday.

In a statement he posted on social media he insisted that he was not 'forcibly removed' but left the plane voluntarily when 'asked' to do so.

Sweet: Kelli Berglund and Mike O'Malley were inseparable at the event

Shining bright! All eyes were on Berglund as she strutted down the carpet in a navy feathered gown

Patrick Walmsley and Chris Bauer both attended

'My wife and I got into an argument Monday afternoon on a Delta flight from Austin to LA. I was asked to lower my voice and I did,' he wrote.

'Approximately 10 minutes later I was asked to leave the flight. And I did so immediately. I was not forcibly removed,' Amell added.

In a follow-up tweet the actor wrote: 'I rebooked myself on a Southwest flight 2 hours later and traveled home without any further issue. I let my emotions get the better of me, end of story. Must be a slow news cycle.'

Earlier it had been reported on TMZ that Amell declined to speak more quietly even after a flight attendant asked him to do so more than once.

Snazzy: Allen Maldonado looked cool in a blue suede ensemble, a yellow beaded necklace and silver loafers

Cool: James Harrison cut a casual figure in a white button-down and jeans

Michael Waldron wore a black suit and brown Gucci loafers

Premiere ready: Roxton Garcia and Stone Garcia, known for his role in 2018's Sanitatum, smiled brightly at the event

The website claimed that Amell seemed to be under the influence at the time and was taken off the plane by three flight attendants and an air marshal around 3pm.

Meanwhile Jean, 35, was purportedly so humiliated by the turn of events that she eventually put her face in her hands.

She and her husband have been married for 11 years and share a seven-year-old daughter called Maxwell Alexandra.

Jean and Amell were in Austin for the ATX festival where they were promoting their independent short film Speech And Debate which he starred in and she directed.

Mike O'Malley, Waldron, and Peter Segal posed for a snap together

This past weekend Jean posted an Instagram snap of her and Amell looking in bright spirits while plugging the film at a festival event that included Aisha Tyler.

Close: O'Malley, Maldonado,and Harrison also made sure to get a photograph all together

All together: At one point the entire cast got together for a big group picture

While at the event she ribbed Stephen about the process of making the short film together, according to Us Weekly.

'Stephen displayed some diva-like behavior because he was used to being on a much bigger production,' she said.

During the same conversation he confessed that while he was left unemployed during the coronavirus lockdowns he behaved like a 'turd.'

Before he was involved with Jean he married his first wife Carolyn Lawrence in 2007 but the marriage ended in divorce in 2010.

Flexing: Meanwhile, Ludwig and his wife Lauren had a blast flexing for the cameras in front of a boxing-themed backdrop

Cuties: After showing off their muscles, the couple shared a kiss

Party on: Kelli Berglund and Mary McCormack square-up at the Heels after party
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Roughly five weeks later, Gwen Stefani is still glowing from her and husband Blake Shelton's glorious wedding day.

And the Rocksteady hitmaker, 51, had a little help reminiscing on Tuesday, when she received some lovely parcels from her wedding gown designer Vera Wang.

She took to her Instagram Stories to post visuals of the stunning bouquet she received from Wang, as well as what appeared to be her dueling wedding gowns preserved in boxes.

Still a blushing bride: Newlywed Gwen Stefani had a little help reminiscing about her wedding on Tuesday, when she received some lovely parcels from her gown designer Vera Wang

Gwen started things off with an amusing passage in which Blake, 45, told her he was 'standing here like an idiot' with flowers he got for the vase for dinner, only to find the huge and sprawling bouquet of white matrimonial roses awaiting him upon his return.

Stefani then shared a sweet note from fashion icon Wang, which came along with the flowers and gowns:

'Dearest Gwen, what a pleasure to have shared in your happiness by choosing us to dress you, not once, but twice,' the note read. 'As an enormous fan, on behalf of me and my team, again thank you. Wishing you both a lifetime of happiness! XVERA.'

Wow: The Rocksteady hitmaker, 51, took to her Instagram Stories to post visuals of the flowers she received from Wang

Bride box: She also filmed a video of the boxes containing her gowns, which displayed the words 'My Wedding Gown' at the top and 'Fragile. Handle with Care.' further down

Then, in response, a joyful and overwhelmed Gwen filmed a response to Vera, exclaiming, 'Wow Vera! Thank you so much for the gorgeous flowers, but the dress... like, it was literally a dream come true to be able to work with you and get married to Blake in your gown.

'I love you so much,' she added effusively. 'Thank you!'

She also filmed a video of the boxes containing her gowns, which displayed the words 'My Wedding Gown' at the top and 'Fragile. Handle with Care.' further down.

Sweet: Stefani then shared a sweet note from fashion icon Wang: 'Dearest Gwen, what a pleasure to have shared in your happiness by choosing us to dress you, not once, but twice'

Oops: Gwen started things off with an amusing passage in which Blake, 45, told her he was 'standing here like an idiot' with flowers he got, only to find the huge bouquet of white matrimonial roses awaiting him upon his return

Additionally, Stefani shared a screenshot of a conversation with Vera, in which Wang thanked her for sending flowers after her nuptials.

'Love my flowers. As did my team !' Wang wrote in the message. 'Wishing you both everlasting happiness and joy and kindness. You have everything else.....'

'Thank you for the perfect dress for the perfect day,' the No Doubt bandleader replied. 'It was magic!! Feeling so blessed.'

Lovely: Gwen shared multiple shots of the flowers Blake gifted her, as well

Stefani and Shelton got hitched on July 3rd, in a backyard chapel on Blake's ranch in Oklahoma.

There were only about 40 people in all at the wedding, most likely due to concerns surrounding the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

Carson Daly, who works with the couple on The Voice, was one of the few celebrity friends invited.

Thankful: 'Wow Vera! Thank you so much for the gorgeous flowers, but the dress... like, it was literally a dream come true to be able to work with you and get married to Blake in your gown,' Gwen gushed in response to Vera's gifts

Additionally: Stefani shared a screenshot of a conversation with Vera, in which Wang thanked her for sending flowers after her nuptials

The TV host served as officiant, he shared during the Today show.

'The best way to describe it is it was perfectly them — the whole weekend and the marriage itself,' the TRL star said. 'It was as elegant and refined and cool as Gwen is, and it was as country and down-home and fun as Blake is.'

Daly added it was a 'perfect blend of country and glamour.'

And for those who don't understand how a punky pop star like Gwen and a country cat like Blake can be into each other, Carson said it was like 'delicious fried chicken with a glass of champagne.'

Seen on Instagram on Tuesday: Stefani and Shelton got hitched on July 3rd, in a backyard chapel on Blake's ranch in Oklahoma

The Hollywood veteran then said: 'On paper and on the menu it doesn’t seem to work, but it works,' he said. 'It’s comfort food with class. And everybody roots for that.'

He also shared that he urged Gwen and Blake to pen their own vows.

'I went to them months ago and said, "I think you guys should write your own vows. We shouldn't just do the repeat after me,"' Carson shared. 'They were really reluctant to do that, but ... it's two of the best songwriters in the world, we want to hear your words.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Oscar-winning actress Hilary Swank has settled her lawsuit against the trustees of the SAG-AFTRA Health Plan for refusing to cover her ovarian cyst treatments.

The Boys Don't Cry and Million Dollar Baby star, 47, had filed suit against the actors union in federal court in Los Angeles in September 2020.

Neither party has publicly revealed details of the settlement which was submitted to the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California on August 6, Bloomberg Law reported Monday.

Reached a deal: Double Oscar-winning actress Hilary Swank has settled her lawsuit against the trustees of the SAG-AFTRA Health Plan for refusing to cover her ovarian cyst treatments

In filing her lawsuit last year, Swank sought to force the union to resume coverage of her treatment for recurrent malignant ovarian cysts that have afflicted her for more than 11 years.

She said in her lawsuit that she submitted claims starting in 2009 to the plan's precursor, SAG Health Plan, for treatment of ovarian cysts.

The trustees initially denied, but later agreed to cover treatment, according to her lawsuit.

'However, in 2015, the Trustees reversed course and stopped allowing Swank’s claims for treatment of ovarian cysts. It also just so happened that around the same time as when the Trustees no longer agreed to allow Swank’s claims, Swank was undergoing procedures to preserve her ability to conceive in the future,' the lawsuit said.

Legal action: In filing suit, Swank, 47, sought to force the actors union to resume coverage of her treatment for malignant ovarian cysts that have afflicted her for more than 11 years

'Seizing upon Swank’s choice to keep her options open, the Trustees pointed to an exclusion in the Plan for ''infertility treatment,'' relying on the notion that the only purpose of preserving the health of an ovary is to procreate,' the court papers said.

The lawsuit argued that the issue 'addresses the shockingly antiquated question of whether the sole purpose of a woman, and specifically her ovaries, is to procreate. When faced with a claim for insurance benefits for the medically necessary treatment of ovarian cysts and endometriosis, the Trustees answered ''yes,'' determining that there could be no possible reason to treat those conditions other than for the purpose of trying to conceive'.

Swank's insurance industry attorney Kirk Pasich, of Los Angeles-based Pasich LLP, opened the lawsuit with a quote from Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale, which is about women forced to reproduce.

'As all historians know, the past is a great darkness, and filled with echoes,' read the quote.

Couple: Swank and entrepreneur Philip Schneider married in August 2018. The star was previously married to actor Chad Lowe from 1997 to 2007

The lawsuit said that plan trustees 'repeatedly said that there was no medically necessary reason to treat or monitor ovarian cysts other than for ''infertility treatment''.'

Swank in the lawsuit was seeking a court declaration that the health care plan trustees are required to pay for the requested treatment.

The lawsuit provided a timeline of her treatment starting with her diagnosis in 2008 with ovarian cysts.

'Due to persistent ovarian cysts, Swank’s left ovary was destroyed and removed during emergency surgery in 2008. Since then, she has experienced recurrent cyst formation in her remaining ovary,' the lawsuit said.

No coverage: The actress, pictured in November 2018, appealed the decision to revoke her coverage but it was denied after a consultant determined her treatments were for the purpose of monitoring and treating infertility

She also was suffering from endometriosis resulting in 'pain and digestive issues,' according to court papers.

'Because of ovarian cysts and endometriosis, Swank suffers from extreme and debilitating degrees of acid reflux, pelvic pain throughout her lower abdomen, bloating, cramping, and fatigue, among other symptoms. Swank has and continues to receive treatment for ovarian cysts, including monitoring their growth and treating the cysts and endometrial tissue with ultrasounds, bloodwork, aspirations, and surgery as needed,' the lawsuit stated.

Swank appealed the decision to revoke her coverage, according to the lawsuit, but it was denied after a consultant determined her treatments were for the purpose of monitoring and treating infertility.

She then requested an external review of the decision to deny coverage in April, before filing her case after 'having exhausted her administrative appeals, the lawsuit said.

Swank won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of trans man Brandon Teena in the 1999 biopic Boys Don't Cry.

She earned her second Oscar for Best Actress for playing aspiring boxer Maggie Fitzgerald in the 2004 drama Million Dollar Baby.

Breakout role: Swank won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of transgender Brandon Teena in the 1999 biopic Boys Don't Cry (pictured with Chloe Sevigny)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They've been romantically linked since March.

And Sofia Richie proved that things are still going strong between her and boyfriend Elliot Grainge on Tuesday afternoon.

The couple were spotted leaving La Jolie in Beverly Hills after reportedly spending 'hours' getting pampered at the celeb-friendly med spa.

Other half: Sofia Richie proved that things are still going strong between her and boyfriend Elliot Grainge on Tuesday afternoon

The 22-year-old daughter of Lionel Richie kept casual for her and her beau's pampering session in a plain white tee and distressed denim jeans.

Sofia's freshly highlighted tresses were worn up in a messy bun and she accessorized with a butterfly pendant necklace.

She carried her essentials in a black leather handbag that she had tucked under her arm.

Grainge strolled beside Richie, while donning a black tee and a pair of dark wash jeans.

Pampered partners: The couple were spotted leaving La Jolie in Beverly Hills after reportedly spending 'hours' getting pampered at the celeb-friendly med spa

The 27-year-old music entrepreneur, similarly to Sofia, completed his look with a pair of white sneakers.

With cases of the highly-contagious Delta variant of the coronavirus rising in Los Angeles, Elliot and Sofia decided to mask up for their outing.

Since going public with their relationship in late March, Sofia has continually paid tribute to her boyfriend on social media.

Happy: Since going public with their relationship in late March, Sofia has continually paid tribute to her boyfriend on social media; Elliot and Sofia pictured in March

PDA: Most recently, Richie shared back-to-back shots of her and Grainge, one of which showed the pair sharing a tender kiss; Richie and Grainge pictured on July 31

Most recently, Richie shared back-to-back shots of her and Grainge, one of which showed the pair sharing a tender kiss.

They posed with their arms wrapped around one another for the sweet snaps, which have since amassed over 200,000 likes.

Back in April, a source told Entertainment Tonight that the pair are 'happy together and having fun.'

Having fun: Back in April, a source told Entertainment Tonight that the pair are 'happy together and having fun'; Elliot and Sofia pictured in July

'They have been friends for years and Elliot is also close with Sofia's brother, Miles,' they continued, adding that her family 'approves' of the relationship.

Prior to becoming involved with Elliot, Sofia was romantically linked to Scott Disick, whom she began dating in 2017.

The two later began making high-profile public appearances, which lasted throughout much of 2018 and 2019.

Former flame: Prior to becoming involved with Elliot, Sofia was romantically linked to Scott Disick, whom she began dating in 2017; Scott and Sofia seen in 2019

Split: Despite the fact that the former pair attempted to make things work between them, they eventually split for good last August; Scott and Sofia pictured in February 2020

However, much speculation about the status of the pair's relationship arose in May of 2020, when the 38-year-old reality television personality checked into a rehabilitation center, and the model was seen with a mystery man.

Despite the fact that the former pair attempted to make things work between them, they eventually split for good last August.

Disick is currently dating 20-year-old model Amelia Hamlin. The pair started seeing one another in late October.

Amelia recently paid homage to her 38-year-old beau by unveiling her 'Lord' necklace via Instagram. It's a nod to Disick's Instagram name.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She said in a magazine interview in June that she is 'okay' with the fact that she is 'never going to have abs'.

But Lili Reinhart nevertheless has a stunning bikini body as she proved with an Instagram post on Tuesday.

The Riverdale star, 24, shared a photo in which she's seen posing in a 'Shrek-colored' two-piece on a narrow balcony with scenic views.

Beach babe: Riverdale star Lili Reinhart, 24, showed off her bikini body on Instagram Tuesday, posting a photo of herself posing in a 'Shrek-colored' two-piece on a balcony with scenic views

The actress styled her blonde hair away from her face and was made up with black eye-liner and mascara and matte lip color.

Back in June, Reinhart spoke to DuJour magazine about her ongoing struggles with body image.

'Abs are made in the kitchen, and I had Dairy Queen and chicken parm last night. And that's okay. I'm learning to accept that in myself,' she told the publication.

'I'm not a fitness model. I'm never going to be able to maintain that. I'm not going to not eat the ice cream.'

Young star: In June, Reinhart had spoken to DuJour magazine about her ongoing struggles with body image, sharing that she is 'okay' with the fact that she is 'never going to have abs'

Brave: The actress said: 'It's not amazing to see someone on Instagram calling me fat, but people are never going to stop body-shaming. 'It's a matter of what I can do to make myself feel better about that. My body is a journey that I have with myself'

She added: 'It's not amazing to see someone on Instagram calling me fat, but people are never going to stop body-shaming.

'It's a matter of what I can do to make myself feel better about that. My body is a journey that I have with myself.'

Reinhart had previously revealed that she has battled depression and panic attacks since the age of 13, and also suffers from OCD.

In May she told her Instagram followers: 'You don't need to justify your mental health to anyone. Prioritize yourself when needed, take time to rest. Surround yourself with good people and high vibrations.

'But remember you are always worth fighting for. And tomorrow could be such a beautiful day.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tisha Campbell opened up about a recent encounter she had witnessing a bear cub crawling amok in a Los Angeles grocery store.

The Martin actress, 52, spoke with Entertainment Tonight on Tuesday about the harrowing encounter, which occurred early Saturday at a Ralph's location.

The New Jersey native, who had documented the bizarre incident in an Instagram post, remained calm while exiting the store before letting out her frustration about the scary incident while in her vehicle.

The latest: Tisha Campbell, 52, opened up about a recent encounter she had witnessing a bear crawling amok in a Los Angeles grocery store

'When I got into my car I got to let it out,' Campbell told the show.

She said that the bear, identified as a 120-pound cub, 'was in the bread section' as she was in a separate area of the store shopping for fruit.

Campbell said that while she was calm in the video, she was experiencing 'straight panic' amid the unusual incident.

'My instinct was, "OK, I have to figure out how I'm gonna get out of here," because they were just shooing him outside. "How am I gonna get to my car?"' she said.

Sweet tooth? The bear was seen rummaging around the candy section of the grocery store

Temperament: Campbell said that while she was calm in the video, she was experiencing 'straight panic' amid the unusual incident

Campbell told the show that she didn't immediately exit the premises after seeing the bear in the supermarket.

'I paid for my groceries, but that was part of the panic because I was trying to wait for the bear to go farther,' the actress said. 'So I was panicked. I just kept paying for my groceries.

'I should've just dropped the cart and just ran out while he was distracted. But I just got nervous because that looked like a baby bear to me, it didn't look like a full-grown bear. So where there's a baby there's a mama.'

She added she's 'never seen a bear in this area' near her Los Angeles home, adding, 'It's a very urban area,' as 'there's a lot of people, a lot of houses.'

Bears have been spotted in Los Angeles and other nearby cities in the past, which border the Angeles National Forest.

In 2021, a bear and her cubs were seen taking a dip in a pool in the nearby city of Arcadia, and in 2020, a black bear roamed the streets of Los Angeles in search of food.

In June, a 17-year-old girl pushed off a mother bear trying to hop over a fence into her house.

The California Department of Fish and Wildlife had reported in 2014 that some bears cubs in California were found to have encephalitis, a fatal disease that inflames the brain and causes the animal to behave docile and behave fearlessly.

Some experts believe this disease might be the cause of some of the meetings in recent years between photogenic bears and California residents.

Campbell said that she faced skepticism from her mother and other relatives when she called to tell them about what had happened.

Campbell said she always thinks 'two steps ahead,' adding, 'Thank god my mother taught me how to play chess.'

Details: The cub eventually exited the premises and was tranquilized by wildlife officials, who later took it to the Angeles National Forest

Campbell said that while she was calm in the video, she was experiencing 'straight panic' amid the unusual incident

Aberration: She added she's 'never seen a bear in this area' near her Los Angeles home, adding, 'It's a very urban area,' as 'there's a lot of people, a lot of houses'

'I just started hitting my family members, and my mother kept saying, "You're lying, you're lying" - nobody believed me,' she said.

The cub eventually exited the premises and was tranquilized by wildlife officials, who later took it to the Angeles National Forest, the outlet reported.

Campbell told the show she had another scary run-in with a bobcat and coyotes during a recent trip to Arizona.

'I have been having some type of animal attraction these days because I just left Arizona running from a bobcat,' she said. 'Then there were at my hotel room coyotes surrounding my hotel room howling.

'And then I come home and then there's a bear in the store! I'm from North New Jersey. We've got pigeons, we don't have bears!'

In a true fight-or-flight moment, the teenager daringly approaches the fully grown adult black bear and pushes it off the wall before immediately gathering her pets and going inside. She showed off her injuries on Instagram and TikTok

Eric Liang filmed the bear and four cubs frolicking in the pool at the back of home in Arcadia, California in April

Campbell is beloved for her role as Gina Waters-Payne in the Martin TV series in the 1990s, as well as her role as Janet 'Jay' Kyle in the 2000's show My Wife and Kids.

Her first acting role came in a 1977 short, the Magnificent Major, before she hit her big break on the Rags to Riches TV series in 1987, playing Marva Foley, according to her IMDB.

Recently, Campbell has appeared as characters on Empire and Last Man Standing, and the actress has also taken up voice acting in cartoon series like Harley Quinn and Craig of the Creek.

Tisha Campbell-Martin and Martin Lawrence starred in the TV series Martin from 1992-1997

Campbell continues to act for TV and his currently filming Be Someone, where she will play Tanika Williams. She shared her encounter with the bear cub with Entertainment Tonight
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brendan Fraser got choked up hearing that his fans 'love' and 'root' for him during an interview on Sunday.

TikTok user @LittleLottieCosplay aka Lindley cosplayed as the 52-year-old SAG Award winner's Mummy character Rick O'Connell for the two-minute chat.

'I'm in Oklahoma. That's better. I'm going to work with [Martin] Scorsese and Leo [DiCaprio] and Bob De Niro [in Killers of the Flower Moon],' Brendan nervously marveled.

Touched: Brendan Fraser got choked up hearing that his fans 'love' and 'root' for him during an interview on Sunday

'I think I might be sick, a little anxious. I mean, it's going to be fine.'

Lindley reassured Fraser that he's 'got this' and told him 'the Internet is so behind you.'

'We're so supportive,' she smiled.

'There are so many people out there who love you, and we're rooting for you, and we can't wait to see what you do next.'

TikTok user @LittleLottieCosplay aka Lindley cosplayed as the 52-year-old SAG Award winner's Mummy character Rick O'Connell for the two-minute chat

Brendan nervously marveled: 'I'm in Oklahoma. That's better. I'm going to work with [Martin] Scorsese and Leo [DiCaprio] and Bob De Niro [in Killers of the Flower Moon]. I think I might be sick, a little anxious. I mean, it's going to be fine'

'We're so supportive': Lindley reassured Fraser that he's 'got this' and told him 'the Internet is so behind you'

She added: 'There are so many people out there who love you, and we're rooting for you, and we can't wait to see what you do next'

At that, the Indiana native took a sip of water, tipped his cowboy hat, and emotionally replied: 'Shucks, ma'am'

Big gig! Brendan is clearly excited to portray a lawyer called W.S. Hamilton in the $200M-budget big-screen adaptation of David Grann's 2017 non-fiction book

At that, the Indiana native took a sip of water, tipped his cowboy hat, and emotionally replied: 'Shucks, ma'am.'

Brendan is clearly excited to portray a lawyer called W.S. Hamilton in the $200M-budget big-screen adaptation of David Grann's 2017 non-fiction book - according to Deadline.

Leonardo DiCaprio produces and stars as scheming rancher Ernest Burkhart, who weds a wealthy Osage oil heiress Mollie (Lily Gladstone) in 1917 just before her closest family members mysteriously die.

First image from the film: Leonardo DiCaprio (R) produces and stars as scheming rancher Ernest Burkhart, who weds a wealthy Osage oil heiress Mollie (L, Lily Gladstone) in 1917 just before her closest family members mysteriously die

'Location scouting': The 78-year-old Oscar-winning filmmaker's seven-month shoot runs through November (pictured in 2019)

Ensemble: Killers of the Flower Moon also stars John Lithgow (pictured July 20), Jesse Plemons, Cara Jade Myers, Jillian Dion, and JaNae Collins

The 78-year-old Oscar-winning filmmaker's seven-month shoot runs through November.

Killers of the Flower Moon also stars John Lithgow, Jesse Plemons, Cara Jade Myers, Jillian Dion, and JaNae Collins.

But first, audiences can catch Fraser reprise his dual role as Cliff Steele/Robotman in the 10-episode third season of Doom Patrol, which premieres September 23 on HBO Max.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Adam Sandler looked ready to hit the basketball court while shooting his new movie Hustle on Tuesday.

The 54-year-old actor was spotted on a basketball court in Palma, a city on the small island of Mallorca off the coast of Spain in the Balearic Sea.

Filming started on the project back in October 2020 in various areas around Philadelphia and parts of Camden, New Jersey as well.

Basketball ready: Adam Sandler looked ready to hit the basketball court while shooting his new movie Hustle on Tuesday

The actor was spotted getting out of a black truck wearing a grey and blue trucker's cap and black sunglasses.

He was wearing a tan t-shirt that read 'Ballin' in blue letters along with royal blue basketball shorts.

He completed his look wearing blue and teal sneakers, while seen wearing a black face mask when he was around other crew members.

Adam's look: The actor was spotted getting out of a black truck wearing a grey and blue trucker's cap and black sunglasses

Hustle follows Sandler's character, a washed-up former basketball scout who finds his shot at redemption when he discovers an incredible street ball player in China.

He tries to bring the player back to the United States as a chance for both him and the player to get into the NBA.

Sandler stars alongside Robert Duvall, Ben Foster and Queen Latifah, with LeBron James serving as an executive producer.

Washed up: Hustle follows Sandler's character, a washed-up former basketball scout who finds his shot at redemption when he discovers an incredible street ball player in China

Sandler renewed his lucrative pact with Netflix in late January 2020 through his Happy Madison Productions company, said to be worth $275 million.

The pact was for four new films, the first of which was the October 2020 film Hubie Halloween.

His first Netflix deal also covered four films, The Ridiculous Six, The Do-Over, Sandy Wexler and The Week Of, plus Murder Mystery.

Lucrative: Sandler renewed his lucrative pact with Netflix in late January 2020 through his Happy Madison Productions company, said to be worth $275 million

Hubie: The pact was for four new films, the first of which was the October 2020 film Hubie Halloween

Sandler wrapped production last month on his next Netflix project, Spaceman, adapted from the novel Spaceman of Bohemia by Jaroslav Kalfar.

The actor stars alongside Carey Mulligan, Paul Dano, Kunal Nayyar and Isabella Rossellini, which doesn't have a release date yet.

He also has an animated feature film that he will write, produce, and star in as a voice actor in the works at Netflix.

Wrapped: Sandler wrapped production last month on his next Netflix project, Spaceman, adapted from the novel Spaceman of Bohemia by Jaroslav Kalfar
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The live shows for season 16 of America's Got Talent kicked off on Tuesday at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles.

And Sofia Vergara sizzled on the red carpet as she posed for snapshots beside co-judge Heidi Klum on the red carpet ahead of the night's show.

The 49-year-old Modern Family actress showcased her hourglass frame in a pink off-the-shoulder wiggle dress.

Big night: Sofia Vergara (right) sizzled on the red carpet as she posed for snapshots beside co-judge Heidi Klum on the red carpet ahead of the long awaited America's Got Talent live shows in Los Angeles

The dress featured a sweetheart neckline and a flattering waist cinching component.

Sofia slipped her feet into a pair of strappy high heels adorned with rhinestones that exposed her hot pink pedicure.

She wore her brunette hair styled in loose tendrils that flowed down her chest and back.

As for makeup, Vergara sported a soft brown smokey eye and a matte understated lip.

Pinup perfection: The 49-year-old Modern Family actress showcased her hourglass frame in a bright pink off-the-shoulder wiggle dress

Color coordinated: Sofia slipped her feet into a pair of strappy high heels adorned with rhinestones that exposed her hot pink pedicure

Heidi put her enviably toned and tanned legs on full display in a fuzzy orange mini dress with a matching silk belt.

The 48-year-old supermodel sported several pieces of coordinating jewelry, including a chunky orange bracelet and a glitzy statement ring.

Klum's signature blonde strands were meticulously straightened and she drew attention to her sultry peepers with a dramatic eye look.

Glam: Sofia wore her brunette hair styled in loose tendrils that flowed down her chest and back; Sofia (right) pictured with Heidi Klum

Leggy: Heidi put her enviably toned and tanned legs on full display in a fuzzy orange mini dress with a matching silk belt

Bringing the drama: Klum's signature blonde strands were meticulously straightened and she drew attention to her sultry peepers with a dramatic eye look

She completed her red carpet getup with a pair of transparent stiletto heels.

America's Got Talent judge Howie Mandel was very COVID-19 conscious as he walked the red carpet in a face mask.

The 65-year-old comedian looked suave in a striped blue suit jacket layered over a crisp white dress shirt and a pair of matching trousers.

On the safe side: America's Got Talent judge Howie Mandel was very COVID-19 conscious as he walked the red carpet in a face mask

Bold: Host Terry Crews opted to coordinate with the event's red carpet by rocking red from head-to-toe

Howie rocked a pair of blue-framed glasses for the big night, as well as a pair of snazzy patent leather shoes.

Host Terry Crews opted to coordinate with the event's red carpet by rocking red from head-to-toe.

The 53-year-old actor's suit was perfectly fit to his muscular physique and he played with texture by throwing on a pair of suede dress shoes.

Girl boss: Comedian Gina Brillon oozed confidence in a bold blue top and an edgy faux leather skirt with a slit up the front

Funky: Singer-songwriter Madilyn Bailey looked effortlessly gorgeous in a stylish power suit boasting a funky eyeball pattern

After the America's Got Talent judges and host graced the carpet, it was time for the season 16 contestants to strike some poses of their own.

Comedian Gina Brillon oozed confidence in a bold blue top and an edgy faux leather skirt with a slit up the front.

Singer-songwriter Madilyn Bailey looked effortlessly gorgeous in a stylish power suit boasting a funky eyeball pattern.

She finished off the look with some bright white heeled boots and a pale pink crop top.

Cool kids: Alyssa Edwards and the Beyond Belief Dance Company wowed on the red carpet in an array of eye-catching ensembles

Out of this world: The 41-year-old drag queen proudly posed with her students in a cartoonish blonde wig and a vinyl pink gown

Alyssa Edwards and the Beyond Belief Dance Company wowed on the red carpet in an array of eye-catching ensembles.

The 41-year-old drag queen proudly posed with her students in a cartoonish blonde wig and a vinyl pink gown that exposed her toned legs and sky-high heels.

Singer Jimmie Herrod took a note out of Terry Crews' book by rocking a vibrant red suit of his own.

The Canine Stars Animal Act stole the show as they posed on the red carpet with their ultra talented - and ultra adorable - doggy crew.

Inspired: Singer Jimmie Herrod took a note out of Terry Crews' book by rocking a vibrant red suit of his own

Give them the gold: The Canine Stars Animal Act stole the show as they posed on the red carpet with their ultra talented - and ultra adorable - doggy crew

Comedian Kabir Singh appeared to be having a blast in front of shutterbugs, while rocking a blue blazer with gold buttons and a pair of black pants.

Over-the-top performer Sethward, who is an AGT fan favorite, donned an elaborate phoenix costume.

Musical prodigy Peter Rosalita beamed in a shimmery suit jacket and matching trousers as he took on the red carpet like a seasoned celebrity.

Poet Brandon Leake and singer Matt Johnson donned near identical monochromatic outfits for the season's first live show.

Having a blast: Comedian Kabir Singh appeared to be having a blast in front of shutterbugs, while rocking a blue blazer with gold buttons and a pair of black pants

Rising from the ashes: Over-the-top performer Sethward, who is an AGT fan favortie, donned an elaborate phoenix costume

1aChord, consisting of members Julian Kennedy, Christoff Hairston, and Tavis Kordell, looked every bit the music trio in matching on-trend ensembles.

Musician Dustin Tavella flashed a peace sign while rocking a stylish blue suede bomber jacket layered over a plain white tee and some black pants.

Musical group Gangstagrass, consisting of members R-SON, Dolio the Sleuth, Dan Whitener, Landry McMeans, and Adriel Williams, displayed each of their signature styles as they posed together on the red carpet.

Darling: Musical prodigy Peter Rosalita beamed in a shimmery suit jacket and matching trousers as he took on the red carpet like a seasoned celebrity

Twinning: Poet Brandon Leake and singer Matt Johnson donned near identical monochromatic outfits for the season's first live show

Ahead of Tuesday night's live show, America's Got Talent executive producers Jason Raff and Sam Donnelly proudly revealed to People that they 'have figured out a safe way to once again have a live audience.'

They continued: 'Our audience will be made up of fully vaccinated and masked individuals and we can't wait to bring this excitement back to the Dolby Theatre.'

Raff and Donnelly believe that reincorporating a live audience will make the Dolby Theatre 'feel alive with their applause and enthusiasm.'

Superstars: 1aChord, consisting of members (L-R) Julian Kennedy, Christoff Hairston, and Tavis Kordell, looked every bit the music trio in matching on-trend ensembles

Peace! Musician Dustin Tavella flashed a peace sign while rocking a stylish blue suede bomber jacket layered over a plain white tee and some black pants
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She gave birth to her first child - a daughter - in late May.

And just 10 weeks later, Emmy Rossum showed off her trim post-pregnancy figure on Instagram.

The actress, 34, flaunted her taut abs as she posed for a mirror selfie in a sports bra and skintight leggings.

'Putting the work in': She gave birth to her first child - a daughter - in late May. And just 10 weeks later, Emmy Rossum showed off her trim post-pregnancy figure on Instagram Tuesday

The former Shameless star let her mass of curls fall loose around her shoulders as she snapped the picture with her smart phone.

She explained on the image that she was 'putting the work in' as she focused on honing her post baby body.

Just two weeks ago, Rossum shared the first photo of her baby girl Samantha.

She posted a photo to Instagram in which she was seen holding the infant with the back of the baby's head to the camera while planting a sweet kiss on her hair.

New mom: The actress, 34, shared the first picture of baby daughter Samantha on social media a couple of weeks ago and revealed she'd had the COVID-19 vaccine while pregnant

Starting a family: Rossum shares her baby with Mr. Robot writer and director husband Sam Esmail, 43, whom she married in 2017

She used the occasion to reveal that she had received the COVID-19 vaccine whilst pregnant and urged others to do the same.

'Not only did we have a healthy, beautiful baby girl but we also just learned our daughter now has antibodies,' she shared.

'In short, stop being an irresponsible idiot and get the vaccine,' she said, targeting the millions of Americans who are refusing to get vaccinated as the Delta Variant spreads.

Rossum, who married writer and director Sam Esmail, 43, in 2017, kept her pregnancy under wraps, surprising her fans with the news she'd become a mom on May 25, one day after giving birth.

She posted an image of her newborn's foot print and wrote: '5.24.21 On a sunny Monday morning, at 8:13AM, we welcomed our daughter into the world.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has been meticulous about maintaining and reinventing her gorgeous and glam image over the course of her unparalleled 40-year career.

And Madonna owned up to being a 'Self obsessed b***h… (Just for today)' in a fabulous new selfie posted to her Instagram on Tuesday night, in which she showed off her alabaster complexion and long wavy blonde hair.

The cultural icon, who will turn 63 years young on Monday, sported a black tank top and her usual cluster of eclectic necklaces.

Telling it like it is: Madonna owned up to being a 'Self obsessed b***h… (Just for today)' in a fabulous new selfie posted to her Instagram on Tuesday night

The Queen of Pop modeled a soft shade of matte lipstick, along with a generous helping of mascara and eyeshadow as she stared smokily at the camera.

Her Madgesty also took to her Instagram Stories with a morphing version of the photo, along with a caption that quoted one of the famous titular lyric from Edith Piaf's hit ballad Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien.

Madonna has mentioned on more than one occasion how Piaf has been an influence in her career.

Her Madgesty also took to her Stories with a morphing version of the photo, along with a quoted of the famous titular lyric from Edith Piaf's hit ballad: Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien

She set the brief snippet on her Stories to one of her own vocals from her 1994 hit Human Nature, which goes 'Absolutely no regrets'.

Recently, the Cherish superstar shared photos and videos from an impromptu outing to the beach with her 27-year-old boyfriend Ahlamalik Williams.

Several of her children, including eight-year-old twins Stella and Estere, were also in attendance to watch the nighttime firework display in honor of their mom's impending birthday celebration.

Recently: The Cherish superstar shared photos and videos from an impromptu outing to the beach with her 27-year-old boyfriend Ahlamalik Williams

For her birthday last August, the mother of six shuttled family and friends to the island of Jamaica.

There's no word yet this year if Madonna is planning another jaunt to an exotic locale, as this birthday now marks her second celebrated in the middle of the worldwide pandemic.

And on the career front, Madge has two exciting projects on the horizon: her concert documentary for her most recent tour Madame X, coming to Paramount+ in October, and her major cinematic biopic, cowritten by Diablo Cody and Erin Cressida Wilson, currently in preproduction.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tim Heidecker took to Twitter on Monday to reveal his seven-year-old daughter Amelia was recently diagnosed with coronavirus.

In a series of tweets, the comedian, 45, opened up on the series of events that led to the family crisis.

'My own small Covid story,' Heidecker said. 'Last week my daughter tested positive one day before a little planned beach vacation. We had to cancel last minute. and we were all bummed.

The latest: Tim Heidecker, 45, took to Twitter on Monday to reveal his daughter seven-year-old Amelia was recently diagnosed with coronavirus. He was snapped in NYC in 2019

'My poor daughter felt so guilty. We went camping for a few days just to do something.'

The Allentown, Pennsylvania native said his daughter Amelia 'didn’t really get sick' luckily, and 'had a day or two of feeling off' amid the diagnosis.

The Moonbase 8 actor said he and wife Marilyn Porayko 'kept away from people and all got tested at the end of the week' in the wake of Amelia's test, and 'after a few days we all tested negative ... in the clear!'

Heidecker said 'there was no way [he and his spouse] were going to isolate ourselves from our daughter,' as they 'had been vaccinated' and 'behaved with a reasonable amount of sanitary safety,' in terms of common practices as sharing drinks.

Details: The Allentown, Pennsylvania native said his daughter Amelia 'didn’t really get sick' luckily, and 'had a day or two of feeling off' amid the diagnosis

The actor/comic opened up about the family health crisis in a series of Tweets Monday

Heidecker said that he 'really felt so much more secure knowing' he had previously gotten vaccinated as he encouraged his followers to, if they haven't already.

'Get the shot please!' said Heidecker, who has been seen in films including Bridesmaids, Fantastic Four and Vacation. 'It’s not going to do anything but give you some sense of relief when covid come creeping into your life one way or another.'

News from the entertainer comes as the children under the age of 12 are ineligible to receive vaccination shots, due to their immune systems having not yet fully developed.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that in August's first week, 46,276 kids in the United States were hospitalized with coronavirus amid the ongoing delta strain.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Simon Cowell called one act 'absolutely bloody awful' and said they could officially call the show America Does Not Have Talent on Tuesday's America's Got Talent quarterfinals on NBC.

Simon was referring to Seth Allison who goes by Sethward who performed in a giant peacock costume. Sethward tumbled down a flight of stairs, acted as if he had been burned by pyrotechnics and then was lifted above the stage, rising from the supposed ashes as a phoenix after the audience said they wanted to see him fly.

Simon almost immediately buzzed him off. Sethward was just one of 12 contestants that competed on AGT's Live show quarterfinals live at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood for only seven spots to move through to the next round.

Bloody awful: Simon Cowell called one act 'absolutely bloody awful' and said they could officially call the show America Does Not Have Talent on Tuesday's America's Got Talent quarterfinals on NBC

Buzzed: Simon almost immediately buzzed him off

Phoenix: Sethward tumbled down a flight of stairs, acted as if he had been burned by pyrotechnics and then was lifted above the stage, rising from the supposed ashes as a phoenix after the audience said they wanted to see him fly

The show opened with the Canine Stars, professionally trained rescue dogs plucked from shelters.

Their handlers joked before the dogs took the stage that appearing on AGT had already gone to their puppy heads and now they insisted on only traveling via private jet.

For their act, the dogs not only impersonated the judges playing poker but also jumped on cue and caught frisbees and balls on stage. One black dog even moved around balanced on top of a giant ball.

Canine Stars: The show opened with the Canine Stars, professionally trained rescue dogs plucked from shelters

Dogs and trainers: Their handlers joked before the dogs took the stage that appearing on AGT had already gone to their puppy heads and now they insisted on only traveling via private jet

Dog act: For their act, the dogs not only impersonated the judges playing poker but also jumped on cue and caught frisbees and balls on stage. One black dog even moved around balanced on top of a giant ball

'I always knew one day I would be replaced by a dog,' said Simon Cowell, 61, after the act.

They were followed by Peter Rosalita, a 10-year-old from the Philippines, who sang 'I Have Nothing' by Whitney Houston wearing a gold tuxedo.

Sofia was stunned that such a powerful voice could out of such a small boy. Cowell called him 'gutsy' and said he would sail through to the next round.

He told him he wanted him to do a younger song next time and not one that seemed as though his mother picked it out.

Dog judges: 'I always knew one day I would be replaced by a dog,' said Simon Cowell, 61, after the act

Peter sings: They were followed by Peter Rosalita, a 10-year-old from the Philippines, who sang 'I Have Nothing' by Whitney Houston wearing a gold tuxedo

Gutsy: Cowell called him 'gutsy' and said he would sail through to the next round

Mother: He told him he wanted him to do a younger song next time and not one that seemed as though his mother picked it out

Bringing their dance crew energy, Beyond Belief DC, a six member all young girls group, took the stage to 'sling it.'

They danced in schoolgirl outfits to Fabulous Choreo by Alyssa Edwards. They did cartwheels, back flips and danced in perfect synchronicity as their coach famed drag queen Alyssa Edwards looked on.

Alyssa said on the stage that the group was so full of heart.

Beyond belief: Bringing their dance crew energy, Beyond Belief DC, a six member all young girls group, took the stage to 'sling it'

Coach: They did cartwheels, back flips and danced in perfect synchronicity as their coach famed drag queen Alyssa Edwards looked on

Next, singer and YouTuber Madilyn Bailey, 28, sang for the show a cover of David Guetta's song 'Titanium' while playing a pink piano surrounded by a wall of flowers.

Simon told her that her performance was great and that she sounded like a record.

'I thought it was outstanding,' Simon said. 'I absolutely loved it.'

Song: Next, singer and YouTuber Madilyn Bailey, 28, sang for the show a cover of David Guetta's song 'Titanium' while playing a pink piano surrounded by a wall of flowers

Record: Simon told her that her performance was great and that she sounded like a record

Loved it: 'I thought it was outstanding,' Simon said. 'I absolutely loved it'

Bringing on the laughs, Stand up comedian Kabir 'Kabeezy' Singh, 37, did a routine about his Indian mother just learning how to text message and it was the worst thing that has happened in his life.

He said she now texted him all day. Howie Mandel , 65, said his performance was so relatable.

Sofia Vergara, 49, said she loved that he made fun of himself.

Routine: Bringing on the laughs, Stand up comedian Kabir 'Kabeezy' Singh, 37, did a routine about his Indian mother just learning how to text message and it was the worst thing that has happened in his life

Relatable: He said she now texted him all day. Howie Mandel , 65, said his performance was so relatable

Sofia loves: Sofia Vergara, 49, said she loved that he made fun of himself

Magician David Tavella, 35, card trick blew the judges away with not only his magic but also with his storytelling ability.

As Howie helped him lay out the cards on the stage, everything they did together appeared to have already been depicted in a cartoon book that David brought on stage.

After his act, Simon said 'even with a useless assistant you did something amazing.'

Magic and story: Magician David Tavella, 35, card trick blew the judges away with not only his magic but also with his storytelling ability

Cartoon: As Howie helped him lay out the cards on the stage, everything they did together appeared to have already been depicted in a cartoon book that David brought on stage

Amazing: After his act, Simon said 'even with a useless assistant you did something amazing'

His act was followed by a trio of contemporary gospel singers dressed all in white called 1aChord, who wanted the grand prize, to have a headline show in Vegas.

They took the stage and performed R.E.M's 'Everybody Hurts' with a gospel twist. Sofia called them spectacular.

Simon told them they had the best performance of the night so far. He called them magic.

1aChord: His act was followed by a trio of contemporary gospel singers dressed all in white called 1aChord, who wanted the grand prize, to have a headline show in Vegas

Gospel: They took the stage and performed R.E.M's 'Everybody Hurts' with a gospel twist. Sofia called them spectacular

Best of the night: Simon told them they had the best performance of the night so far. He called them magic

Comedian Gina Brillon, 41, from the South Bronx, also told jokes about her life about growing up Latino and and in the Bronx.

She also talked about the perils of dating a 'skinny guy.' Simon told her she was a little funny but that he sensed a lot of nerves with her tonight.

Howie disagreed and told her the act paid off. Sofia told her she laughed at every joke.

Jokes: Comedian Gina Brillon, 41, from the South Bronx, also told jokes about her life about growing up Latino and and in the Bronx

Skinny guy: She also talked about the perils of dating a 'skinny guy.' Simon told her she was a little funny but that he sensed a lot of nerves with her tonight

Paid off: Howie disagreed and told her the act paid off. Sofia told her she laughed at every joke.

Gangstagrass, a group made up of banjos and rappers, sang their original crossover song called 'All For One' in a performance that encompassed both genres.

After they were done, Howie told them he found their act 'underwhelming.' Sofia said they were amazing and that their act was 'unique.'

Simon said he also didn't think the song was good enough.

Crossover: Gangstagrass, a group made up of banjos and rappers, sang their original crossover song called 'All For One' in a performance that encompassed both genres

Underwhelming: After they were done, Howie told them he found their act 'underwhelming.' Sofia said they were amazing and that their act was 'unique'

Escape artist and Illusionist Matt Johnson from British Columbia told the audience that a year ago he almost killed himself doing an act.

He said he planned for his trick to be at death's door again. He was chained and padlocked to a door by the neck, chest and waist. If he didn't escape in time a chainsaw would go straight through the middle of his skull.

In the end, he was able to get out in time. Simon told him the noises he made throughout the act were over the top and made it a 'little bit hammy.'

Escape artist: Escape artist and Illusionist Matt Johnson from British Columbia told the audience that a year ago he almost killed himself doing an act

Chainsaw: He said he planned for his trick to be at death's door again. He was chained and padlocked to a door by the neck, chest and waist. If he didn't escape in time a chainsaw would go straight through the middle of his skull

'Let's see the noises you make when there is a chainsaw headed to your face,Simon,' Howie responded. 'I can't believe tonight's show started with puppies and children and we are at this now.'

The final act of the night was singer Jimmy Herrod, 30, who Sofia gave the golden buzzer during the auditions.

Jimmy said that growing up he was insecure about how high his voice was. He then wowed the judges singing 'Pure Imagination' on the stage. Sofia told him he already looked like a star and that he gave her goosebumps.

Final act: The final act of the night was singer Jimmy Herrod, 30, who Sofia gave the golden buzzer during the auditions

Simon told him that unlike some of the other performers on the show that he was a singer that they would never forget the following day. He told him that 'you are an artist that is headed straight for Broadway.' Heidi told him he was the million dollar act 'drop the mike.' Howie said he was the singer to beat.

'I can't think of a better way to end our first live performance than listening to your voice and staring at Sofia's goosebumps,' Howie said.

AGT will return Wednesday with the first Quarterfinals results show, narrowing the top 12 to seven acts, with the next episode following Tuesday on NBC.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's just landed a pay raise that will give her 'north of $450,000 an episode' for season 5 of Fox's 9-1-1.

And while that probably makes her the highest paid actress of color ever on a broadcast drama series, Angela Bassett clearly remains very down-to-earth.

The star, 62, was spotted doing her own grocery shopping at an organic supermarket in LA on Tuesday.

Errands: Angela Bassett, 62, was spotted doing some grocery shopping at a supermarket in LA on Tuesday showing off her legs in distressed white shorts and beige strappy sandals

Bassett showed off her legs in very distressed white shorts and beige strappy sandals.

She added a gold t-shirt with the legend 'Black Women Glow Differently' emblazoned across the front.

The actress, who wore a face mask as required in LA County, accessorized with enormous pendant silver hoop earrings and carried some of her purchases in a large yellow tote.

Got supplies: The actress added a gold t-shirt with the legend 'Black Women Glow Differently' emblazoned across the front and accessorized with enormous silver pendant hoop earrings

In the money: Last week, it was reported Bassett landed a pay raise that will give her 'north of $450,000 an episode' for season 5 of Fox's 9-1-1, making her the highest paid actress of color ever on a broadcast drama series

A week ago, Deadline.com reported that all series regulars on 9-1-1 had secured 25 percent pay increases ahead of the new season.

In addition to being the show's lead, Bassett also helped showrunner Ryan Murphy develop the series on which she serves as executive producer. She also executive produces the spin-off 9-1-1: Lone Star.

The show about first responders premiered on Fox in 2018 and co-stars Peter Krause, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Aisha Hinds, Rockmond Dunbar, Kenneth Choi, Oliver Stark, and Ryan Guzman.

Hit show: In addition to being the show's lead, Bassett helped showrunner Ryan Murphy develop the series on which she serves as executive producer (pictured with co-star Peter Krause)

Meanwhile, the What's Love Got To Do With It Oscar nominee has been filming Black Panther: Wakanda Forever in which she reprises the role of Ramonda.

Production got underway in Atlanta, Georgia, last month with Ryan Coogler returning to direct the sequel to the 2018 superhero smash hit Black Panther.

Back in May, Angela Bassett insisted that the movie will be a fitting tribute to the late Chadwick Boseman, who succumbed to colon cancer at the age of 43 after a 'secret' four-year battle with the disease.

'It’s going to be phenomenal and it’s going to pay tribute and it’s going to carry on that legacy,' Bassett, 62, told USWeekly.

Sequel: Bassett has been filming Black Panther: Wakanda Forever in which she reprises the role of Ramonda. She said in May it will be a 'fitting tribute' to the late Chadwick Boseman (pictured in 2018)

Blockbuster: Black Panther debuted in February 2018 and was an immediate box office smash hit. It was the highest-grossing film at the domestic box office in 2018, and second worldwide, just behind Avengers: Infinity War ($2.048 billion)

.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's currently touring the U.S.

But Kesha took a selfie break on Tuesday as she continued rehearsing for the next stop of her journey.

The Tik Tok songstress, 34, shared a snap of herself rocking an edgy slick of sparkling eye makeup during a quick break from the stage.

Music maker! Kesha took a selfie break on Tuesday as she continued rehearsing for the next leg of her journey

The pop star served confidence as she gazed fiercely towards the mirror while proudly showing off her 'Kesha And The Creepies' top.

'Rehearsalllllsss babyyyyyy,' Kesha captioned the snap along with three ghost emojis.

Kesha is currently touring throughout the U.S., with her next stop being August 13, 2021 in Billings, Montana.

The pop star's tour comes as she continues her legal battle with producer Dr. Luke.

Working it! Kesha is currently touring throughout the U.S., with her next stop being August 13, 2021 in Billings, Montana (pictured November 2019)

It was recently revealed that the We R Who We R songstress is seeking legal fees from their ongoing court case.

The American pop star has been locked in a defamation case with the record producer for years, after he sued her in 2014 when accused him of physical, sexual, and emotional abuse.

A judge recently granted Kesha's request to use a recently strengthened free speech law that now allows her to go after Dr. Luke for the costs she's spent defending herself in the eight-year legal battle.

Meanwhile: The pop star's tour comes as she continues her legal battle with producer Dr. Luke (pictured November 2018)

Lawyers for the singer wrote in court papers obtained by Page Six: 'At trial, a jury will agree that Kesha is telling the truth, and thus necessarily conclude that Dr. Luke knew he sexually assaulted Kesha in 2005, but nevertheless pursued for years a meritless lawsuit.

'Kesha is entitled to compensatory and punitive damages and her attorneys’ fees and costs incurred defending the suit.

'Dr. Luke's scorched-earth litigation strategy is designed to humiliate and destroy Kesha … Dr. Luke’s goal has been to crush Kesha into retracting her reports of abuse.'

The news comes after Kesha launched a counterclaim against Dr. Luke in April this year using New York's new anti-SLAPP law, which is geared towards ending courtroom bullying by powerful individuals.

Legal matters: Earlier this month it was revealed that the We R Who We R songstress is seeking legal fees from their ongoing court case (pictured 2021)

Last year, a judge concluded that Kesha published a false statement when she texted Lady Gaga to allege that Dr. Luke also raped Katy Perry.

However, since then New York has introduced new legislation that's intended to protect free speech, and Kesha - who is being advised by Daniel Petrocelli and Leah Godesky - is seeking to use it as part of her counterclaim.

Although a judge previously ruled that Dr Luke was a private figure, meaning he wasn't required to prove that Kesha made false allegations with a malicious intention, that decision has gone to an appeal - and a host of media organisations, such as The Daily Beast and Dow Jones, have given their support to the singer.

Kesha remains hopeful that the trial judge's verdict will eventually be overturned, but the anti-SLAPP law could change the case entirely, as it covers situations in which private figures have to prove actual malice to prevail.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Daytime Emmy-nominated host Giuliana Rancic glammed up to promote her skincare line Fountain of Truth during day two of MAGIC Fashion Events in Las Vegas on Tuesday.

The Italian-born, Maryland-raised journalist - turning 47 on August 17 - donned a $61.25 G by Giuliana 'One-Shoulder Drama Jumpsuit' in pink banana leaf print with nude heels.

Giuliana - a self-described 'ultimate passionista' - founded her Home Shopping Network clothing company nine years ago.

On the mic again! Daytime Emmy-nominated host Giuliana Rancic glammed up to promote her skincare line Fountain of Truth during day two of MAGIC Fashion Events in Las Vegas on Tuesday

'Hey guys, if you are in Vegas at Magic, come see me. I'm heading over right now to the Fountain of Truth booth in the area called Project in Central Hall,' Rancic - who boasts 7.1M social media followers - Instastoried.

'I will be there and I'll be onstage at 2pm. So come see us. Magic is major. Look at this. There's still all day today and tomorrow left so if you're in Vegas you've gotta come check this out. It's incredible!'

The trade show runs through Wednesday at the Las Vegas Convention Center's West Hall.

Speaking of Las Vegas, the breast cancer survivor and her husband Bill Rancic will open a RPM Italian franchise at the Forum Shops at Caesars sometime in January 2022.

Turning 47 on August 17! The Italian-born, Maryland-raised journalist donned a $61.25 G by Giuliana 'One-Shoulder Drama Jumpsuit' in pink banana leaf print with nude heels

Self-described 'ultimate passionista': Giuliana founded her Home Shopping Network clothing company nine years ago

Rancic - who boasts 7.1M social media followers - Instastoried: 'Hey guys, if you are in Vegas at Magic, come see me. I'm heading over right now to the Fountain of Truth booth in the area called Project in Central Hall'

The breast cancer survivor continued: 'I will be there and I'll be onstage at 2pm. So come see us. Magic is major. Look at this. There's still all day today and tomorrow left so if you're in Vegas you've gotta come check this out. It's incredible!'

It will mark the RPM restaurant partners' sixth restaurant after opening franchises in Chicago and Washington, D.C.

Giuliana and the 46-year-old former Trump staffer celebrate their son Edward Duke's ninth birthday on August 29 followed by their 14th wedding anniversary on September 1.

Rancic (born DePandi) originally met Bill when she interviewed him on the E! Network in 2005 after he won NBC's The Apprentice in 2004.

'Vegas, baby!' Speaking of Las Vegas, Giuliana and her husband Bill Rancic will open a RPM Italian restaurant franchise at the Forum Shops at Caesars sometime in January 2022

July 4 family portrait: Rancic and the 46-year-old former Trump staffer celebrate their son Edward Duke's ninth birthday on August 29 followed by their 14th wedding anniversary on September 1

That was quick! The Giuliana Prosecco wine owner's sighting came three months after E! News replaced her with transgender trailblazer Laverne Cox (R) just three days after she resigned from the cable network

The Giuliana Prosecco wine owner's sighting came three months after E! News replaced her with transgender trailblazer Laverne Cox just three days after she resigned from the cable network.

Giuliana inked a new development deal with E!'s parent company NBCUniversal where she will 'produce and bring stories to life.'

Rancic famously got into trouble on the job in 2015 when she made racist comments about Emmy winner Zendaya's dreadlocks, for which she apologized.

Little guy! Also attending the MAGIC conference was The McCord List CEO Rachel McCord, who brought along her cute 14-month-old son Richard 'Jude' Schirmer

Werrrk! The 31-year-old sister of AnnaLynn McCord flaunted her midriff in a white bra-top and colorful-striped metallic harem pants

Glam: Make-up artist Dylan Knox made sure Rachel was ready for her close-up at the event

Outfit change! McCord (pictured Tuesday) hosted panels with Giuliana, Streamline founder Josh Orr, and her own husband Rick Schirmer

Also attending the MAGIC conference was The McCord List CEO Rachel McCord, who brought along her cute 14-month-old son Richard 'Jude' Schirmer.

The 31-year-old sister of AnnaLynn McCord flaunted her midriff in a white bra-top and colorful-striped metallic harem pants.

Make-up artist Dylan Knox made sure Rachel was ready for her close-up at the event.

McCord hosted panels with Giuliana, Streamline founder Josh Orr, and her own husband Rick Schirmer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She welcomed her first child with husband Rick Schirmer in May 2020.

And Rachel McCord was joined by her now one-year-old son Richard as she attended the MAGIC Las Vegas showcase at the Las Vegas Convention Center on Tuesday.

McCord, who was also a featured speaker at the event, showed up in a support of pal Giuliana Rancic and her skincare line Fountain Of Truth.

Dynamic duo: Rachel McCord was joined by her now one-year-old son Richard as she attended the MAGIC Las Vegas showcase at the Las Vegas Convention Center on Tuesday

The 31-year-old actress flashed her enviably toned tummy in a white crop top and a pair of rainbow sequin pants.

She layered up her look with a chic black blazer and slipped her feet into a pair of rhinestone-covered heels.

Rachel wore her lengthy blonde strands in voluminous curls stemming from a middle part.

As for makeup, McCord let her natural beauty do most of the talking while accentuating her pout with pink lipstick and her eyes with a dusting of shadow.

Dazzling: The 31-year-old actress flashed her enviably toned tummy in a white crop top and a pair of rainbow sequin pants

Glitz: Rachel slipped her feet into a pair of rhinestone-covered heels.

She could hardly contain her joy as she posed with her son Richard, who looked darling in a grey tee and a pair of black leggings.

The one-year-old sweetly held onto his mother's hand, while gazing at the camera with his huge blue eyes.

Rachel and Rick, who have been married since 2013, happily revealed their son's arrival via Instagram on May 22, 2020.

The post included a slew of intimate snapshots of the new mom and dad with their son, as well as videos taken at the hospital and during Richard's first night at home.

Bombshell: Rachel wore her lengthy blonde strands in voluminous curls stemming from a middle part

Supportive: McCord, who was also a featured speaker at the event, showed up in a support of pal Giuliana Rancic and her skincare line Fountain Of Truth

One sweet clip showed Richard sleeping peacefully on Rachel's chest as she recovered in a hospital bed.

'My sweet love...it’s not that you’re the best thing I’ve ever done...it feels like you’re the ONLY thing I’ve ever done,' Rachel captioned.

'I love you now and always. Welcome to this new world...Richard “Jude” Schirmer, born on 5/18/20 at 12:02 p.m. at @providencecalifornia #stjohnsbaby.'

Rachel went onto thank the hospital staff that assisted her birth before launching into a public love letter to her husband.

Firstborn: Rachel and Rick, who have been married since 2013, happily revealed their son's arrival via Instagram on May 22, 2020

Partner: '[Rick] we DID it!!!! You are the absolute BEST partner ANY girl could dream of! Thank you for holding it together and helping us every step of the way,' she captioned the post

'[Rick] we DID it!!!! You are the absolute BEST partner ANY girl could dream of! Thank you for holding it together and helping us every step of the way,' she continued.

'I LEGIT couldn’t have done this without you (obviously)...you’re my best friend, my partner, and one of the (now) two LOVES OF MY LIFE!!!,' she concluded.

Months later, Rachel returned to Instagram to update her nearly 1million followers on her experience as a new mom.

'I was telling a friend today...being a mama is the best experience this world can offer,' she gushed, while sharing a snap of herself snuggling Richard in an adorable pumpkin costume in October.

'It’s like living your whole life and then realizing you were never living at all.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Travis Scott wished his girlfriend Kylie Jenner a happy birthday bright and early on Monday morning.

The rapper, 30, gave his love a shout-out on his Instagram Stories, posting two photos of his stunning flame in honor of her special day.

The Sicko Mode hit-maker shared a sizzling snap of his girlfriend rocking a plunging lace-up top that put her cleavage front and center.

Va va voom! Travis Scott wished his girlfriend Kylie Jenner a happy birthday bright and early on Monday morning

'BIRRRRRTTTHHHHHDDDDAAAAAAYYYYYYYYYYYY,' Travis wrote in all-caps.

He also posted a photo of the couple at their daughter Stormi's third birthday, relaxing by a food truck.

'WAKE UP IT'S YOOOO BDAAYYYYYY,' Travis wrote on his Instagram Stories a little after eight in the morning.

Travis was just one of many wishing Kylie a happy birthday on Monday.

Rise and shine! He also posted a photo of the couple at their daughter Stormi's third birthday, relaxing by a food truck

Mom Kris Jenner was the very first to honor her youngest daughter's 24th birthday, writing on Instagram: 'Happy Birthday to my littlest angel @kyliejenner!!!! I can’t believe how fast time goes by!!!'

The 65-year-old manager marveled at how 'kind, generous beyond belief and so loyal, compassionate, and loving' Kylie is

'You have brought all of us so much joy!!! You are the most amazing mommy!!!!' added Kris, referring to the mogul's daughter Stormi, three, who she shares with Travis Scott.

'My little angel': Mom Kris Jenner was the very first to honor her youngest daughter's 24th birthday

Sister act! Kendall posted a picture of herself and Kylie lounging on the beach and wrote: 'happy birthday to my baby sister!'

She went on to declare that Kylie makes 'every day extraordinary' and that she is 'blessed to be your mommy.'

Kris included a slew of heartwarming snaps, including one of herself cradling a then infant Kylie in the 1990s.

Kendall posted a picture of herself and Kylie lounging on the beach and wrote: 'happy birthday to my baby sister!'

Big sister Kim Kardashian also shared several throwback snapshots of herself and Kylie, many of which showcased Kylie as a jovial pre-teen.

'Happy Birthday Ky!!!' the 40-year-old SKIMS founder wrote. 'I love you so much! You will always be my baby sis and I'm here for you no matter what!'

'Happy Birthday Ky!' Kim Kardashian wished Kylie a happy birthday as well
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Addison Rae turned heads as she rocked a skintight red latex midi dress to her forthcoming appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live! on Monday afternoon.

While arriving to the late-night host's studio in the heart of Hollywood, the TikTok star, 20, appeared in high spirits as she waved at onlookers.

On her outing, the beauty showed off her glowing tan after returning from a fun-filled family trip to the Toledo Bend Reservoir last week.

Gorgeous: Addison Rae turned heads as she rocked a skintight red latex midi dress to her forthcoming appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live! on Monday afternoon

For her interview, the actress styled her light brown hair in glamorous waves and sported a stunning pair of silver drop earrings.

She completed her look with a pair of open-toed black and pearl heels.

Her outing comes less than a week after the first official trailer for He's All That - the gender swap redo of the 1999 hit movie She's All That - dropped on Wednesday.

Beauty: While arriving to the late-night host's studio in the heart of Hollywood, the 20-year-old TikTok star appeared in high spirits as she smiled brightly and gave a friendly wave to onlookers

Sun-kissed: On her outing, the beauty showed off her glowing tan after returning from a fun-filled family trip to the Toledo Bend Reservoir

Friendly: For her interview, the actress styled her light brown hair in glamorous waves and sported a stunning pair of silver drop earrings

The clip looked like it has all the right ingredients for a big summer teen hit as it mixes romance with a makeover and plenty of cattiness and fashion.

Rae plays influencer Padgett Sawyer and popular high school student, who dumps her hunky boyfriend after she catches him cheating.

She is then challenged to make over the class dork Cameron Kweller, who is played by Tanner Buchanan of Cobra Kai fame, and make him her date for the prom.

Stylish: She completed her look with a pair of open-toed black and pearl heels

Kickstarting an acting career: Her outing comes less than a week after the first official trailer for He's All That - the gender swap redo of the 1999 hit movie She's All That - dropped on Wednesday

Leading lady: Rae plays influencer Padgett Sawyer and popular high school student, who dumps her hunky boyfriend after she catches him cheating

'Makeovers are my thing. I will create the next prom king… He is a total disaster, weird, antisocial,' it is said in quick quips.

Along the way, Rae's pal Kourtney Kardashian and She's All That vet Rachael Leigh Cook are seen in small roles.

Kardashian, 41, is Jessica Miles Torres and Cook plays Rae's mom.

BFFs: Rae's pal Kourtney Kardashian will also be in the film in a small role

Coming soon: He's All That will debut on Netflix on August 27

Reboot: The Netflix movie is a female version of the hit 1999 teen blockbuster She's All That which starred Freddie Prinze Jr as the big man on campus and Cook as the dork he turns into a pinup

He's All That will debut on Netflix on August 27.

The film is directed by Mark Waters with R Lee Fleming Jr as the writer.

The Netflix movie is a female version of the hit 1999 teen blockbuster She's All That which starred Freddie Prinze Jr as the big man on campus and Cook as the dork he turns into a pinup.

Acting debut: Rae was cast in the film in September 2020 and this is her first acting role

Hard worker: The beauty was a dancer before landing massive fame on TikTok; she is one of the highest-paid performers on the platform. Her fame got another boost when she was taken under the Kardashian wing a year ago

Rae was cast in the film in September 2020 and this is her first acting role.

The beauty was a dancer before landing massive fame on TikTok; she is one of the highest-paid performers on the platform. Her fame got another boost when she was taken under the Kardashian wing a year ago.

Rae is not taking on the role played by Cook in the original romantic comedy.

Instead, she snapped up the role played by Prinze Jr because the movie will be about a woman tries to make over a man in a Pygmalion storyline.

It has been over 20 years since the classic Nineties romantic comedy made over $100M.

The film also starred Paul Walker, and Anna Paquin as well as Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, and Kieran Culkin with cameos from Usher, Lil' Kim and Gabrielle Union.

Almost: Rae is not taking on the role played by Cook in the original romantic comedy

A bit of a twist: Instead, she snapped up the role played by Prinze Jr because the movie will be about a woman tries to make over a man in a Pygmalion storyline

She’s All That follows the story of a high school jock Zack Siler (Freddie) who makes a bet with his pals that he can turn an artsy loner Laney Boggs (Rachel) into the prom queen.

He and fellow jock Dean Sampson (Paul) battle for Laney's attention throughout the film, before she inevitably chooses just one of them.

The hit teen comedy grossed more than $100 million worldwide, and the modern take is set to follow a similar premise.

Rae has also modeled for Kim Kardashian's SKIMS line.

A big hit in 1999: She’s All That follows the story of a high school jock Zack Siler (Freddie) who makes a bet with his pals that he can turn an artsy loner Laney Boggs (Rachel) into the prom queen
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She will soon be seen in the slick action thriller Bullet Train opposite Brad Pitt.

But Joey King was concentrating on her current Netflix release on Tuesday, when she attended the second press day for her new movie The Kissing Booth 3 at the Four Seasons Hotel in Los Angeles, California.

The Act actress, 22, looked like a glammed up Harley Quinn in her ensemble, which featured a chic red and white diamond-pattern sleeveless dress.

Stunner: Joey King was concentrating on her current Netflix release on Tuesday, when she attended the second press day for her new movie The Kissing Booth 3 in Los Angeles

Joey’s statement garment featured a high turtleneck, along with a skirt that ended above her ankle.

The frock allowed for her chunky black Dolce and Gabbana boots to attract attention as well.

King also sported eye-catching opera gloves, which were two-toned in black and red leather.

The starlet wore a smoky eye, and had her auburn hair down straight, parted at the middle and flowing down her back.

Drama: The actress, 22, looked like a glammed up Harley Quinn in her ensemble, which featured a red and white diamond-pattern sleeveless dress and two-toned leather gloves

The Slender Man actress also carried a futuristic bright red purse in a triangular shape.

The Kissing Booth 3 is the third installment in the Netflix franchise costarring Joey, Jacob Elordi, Joel Courtney and Molly Ringwald.

The YA romcom follows King’s character Elle as she navigates young love and must choose between the objects of her affection.

Posing: The frock allowed for her chunky black Dolce and Gabbana boots to attract attention as well

Strutting: Joey’s statement garment featured a high turtleneck, along with a skirt that ended above her ankle

The films are based on the book by Beth Reekles.

Joey posted a large gallery of images and video from her experience making the three Kissing Booths films to her Instagram on Monday, saying that 'you all deserve to see the amount of fun and love put into making them.

'These videos and pictures make my heart so happy,' she also wrote.

King’s appearance on Tuesday follows another stunning display from the actress last Thursday, when she wore a pretty pink minidress for the first press day for the film.

Ready for her closeup: The starlet wore a smoky eye, and had her auburn hair down straight, parted at the middle and flowing down her back

Having fun: The Kissing Booth 3 is the third installment in the Netflix franchise costarring Joey, Jacob Elordi, Joel Courtney and Molly Ringwald

The Kissing Booth 3 is set to hit the Netflix streaming platform on August 11.

In addition to that and Bullet Train, Joey has several other projects in the works, including the new dramedy Camp, following a group of teenagers navigating life during their final year at sleep-away camp.

She is also set to appear in The In Between, about a car accident survivor who is convinced her boyfriend is trying to connect with her after he died in the wreck.

Joey posted a gallery from her experience on the three Kissing Booths films to her Instagram on Monday, saying: 'You all deserve to see the amount of fun and love put into making them'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Emmy organizers with the Television Academy announced on Tuesday that next month's proceedings will be held outside with a pared-down guest list amid the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and delta variant.

The show will be held on the event deck of the L.A. Live venue behind the Microsoft Theater, 'following discussions with health and safety experts,' officials with the Television Academy said in a statement, according to The Hollywood Reporter.

The outdoor venue has previously hosted Governors Balls following the show, but those are canceled amid the spike in coronavirus cases due to the delta variant.

The latest: Emmy organizers with the Television Academy announced on Tuesday that next month's proceedings will be held outside, with a pared-down guest list amid the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and delta variant

Invitations will be limited to both the Creative Arts Emmys on September 11 and 12, as well as the Emmy Awards September 19.

'Unfortunately, this means not all nominees will be able to attend this year’s awards,' the academy said, adding that teams with three of more people are restricted to a maximum of four tickets for each nomination; the nominees will have to determine who gets the tickets.

Shows most likely to be impacted by the revised plan are ones with multiple nods in categories, spanning programs such as The Crown, The Handmaid’s Tale, The Mandalorian, Saturday Night Live, Ted Lasso and WandaVision.

'The health and safety of our nominees is of paramount importance,' the Television Academy said, adding that 'conversations are ongoing, and we will provide further information as it is available.'

Scaled-down: Invitations will be limited to both the Creative Arts Emmys on September 11 and 12, as well as the Emmy Awards September 19

The show will be held on the event deck of the L.A. Live venue behind the Microsoft Theater, 'following discussions with health and safety experts,' the Television Academy said

The Recording Academy this year held the Grammys with a hybrid of indoor/outdoor showcases at the Los Angeles Convention Center.

The red carpet portion of the event will be 'very limited,' the TV Academy said, adding that about 12 outlets will be given credentials to cover the event, while CBS will have a virtual media center in place to continue coverage of the show.

The latest developments come as the California Department of Public Health earlier this week mandated around 2.2 million health care workers to get vaccinated by September 30.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The musical drama Annette starring Adam Driver and Marion Cotillard will be released on August 20.

And the film's French director Leos Carax confirmed to USA Today that he originally wrote in a cameo for Rihanna who he wanted to appear in the movie.

Variety had reported back in 2017 that the superstar would join Driver in the quirky project but her reps quickly shot down the report saying it wasn't true.

However, Carax said that he did write a part for the Barbadian multi-hyphenate but she turned it down.

Could play herself: Rihanna was offered a cameo in the musical movie Annette, the film's French director Leos Carax has confirmed to USA Today (she's pictured 2019)

In Annette, Driver and Cotillard star as a comedian and an opera singer who conceive a child together who has very special talents.

Annette is played by a wooden puppet and the plot turns on how she becomes a global singing sensation as a toddler.

Carax told USA Today that the cameo he wrote for Rihanna called for her to play herself.

'It was a small part written specifically for her,' the filmmaker explained. 'When Baby Annette becomes famous, there was a duet between the puppet and Rihanna. But then Rihanna feels upstaged by this baby.''

Carax worked with Sparks for almost a decade on the project and the musical duo contributed original songs to the film which premiered at Cannes in early July.

Quirky: In Annette, Adam Driver and Marion Cotillard star as a comedian and an opera singer who conceive a child together who has very special talents and is played by a wooden puppet (the stars are pictured at the film's premiere in Cannes on July 6)

Cameo: 'It was a small part written specifically for her,' Carax, pictured in Cannes, explained. 'When Baby Annette becomes famous, there was a duet between the puppet and Rihanna. But then Rihanna feels upstaged by this baby'

Declined: Rihanna, however, turned down the part, according to Carax who developed the movie in collaboration with Sparks who contributed original songs to the project

Meanwhile, Rihanna has been celebrating the phenomenally successful launch this week of her new Fenty perfume.

The billionaire 33-year-old posted a photo to Instagram Tuesday showing herself lounging in bed while eating caviar from a bowl on a silver platter.

She wrote in the caption: 'how I woke up after #FENTYPARFUM sold out this morning!!!'

Infused with scents such as musk, vanilla, and tangerine, Fenty Eau De Parfum sold out just hours after it officially launched on August 10th.

The high life: Meanwhile, Rihanna has been celebrating the phenomenally successful launch this week of her new Fenty perfume. The billionaire 33-year-old posted a photo to Instagram Tuesday showing herself lounging in bed while eating caviar from a bowl on a silver platter

The impressive feat comes just weeks after Rihanna celebrated another financial milestone with her new status as a billionaire.

The singer and businesswoman is worth a whopping $1.7 billion, Forbes claimed, making her one of the richest female musicians on the planet.

It is claimed the bulk of the popstar's fortune ($1.4billion) comes not from music, but from her 50 percent stake in her acclaimed cosmetics line Fenty Beauty - a joint venture with French luxury goods conglomerate LVMH - and worth $2.8billion in total.

Her $270million (£190million) stake in the wildly successful Savage X Fenty lingerie line and her wealth from her 16 year recording career all contribute to her massive wealth.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@April Love Geary continued to defy haters by sharing a series of sexy selfies.

The model partner of Robin Thicke wasn't letting people's recent criticism stop her from sharing steamy pics on Instagram Tuesday.

So the 26-year-old mother-of-three showed off her curves in a simple black lingerie set by Badwood.

Sexy: April Love Geary sizzled in some new lingerie selfies, not worrying about people's recent criticism of her pin-up shots

April looked seductive as she knelt on the ground donning a sports bra and high-cut bottoms which revealed an ample amount of her hips and derriere.

Providing an edgy touch, the brand's name was etched on the elastic in gothic letters.

Meanwhile, April went natural with her beauty, opting for dewy, makeup-free skin.

Her sandy blonde hair was tousled and thrown over one shoulder as she pouted at the camera.

Oh my: April looked seductive as she knelt on the ground donning a sports bra and high-cut bottoms

Revealing: The set by Badwood revealed an ample amount of her hips and derriere

April had to defend her pin-up shots online earlier this month after one commenter took issue.

'Dear April, I love your pictures, and you being a proud mom. But your last "sexy" pictures. I don't know, you don't need that. What do you want us to see...?,' they wrote.

Feeling feisty April responded 'I want you to see my a** in that last pic tbh,' as she posted a grab of the exchange.

Geary has been dating Thicke, 44, since 2014 and he popped the question four years later.

She welcomed her third child Luca back in December.

The couple also share two daughters Mia, three, and Lola, two, while Robin has son Julian, 11, from his marriage to actress Paula Patton.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Zoey Deutch has been hard at work on her forthcoming film Not Okay in recent weeks.

And on Tuesday, Zoey was seen shooting a protest scene for the Hulu Original in New York City, which saw the actress being dramatically whisked away by security.

Deutch was joined on set of the Quinn Shephard directed film by costar Mia Isaac.

Filming: Zoey Deutch was spotted shooting a protest scene for her forthcoming Hulu film Not Okay in New York City on Tuesday with costar Mia Isaac (left)

Dramatic: At one point during the scene, Zoey was dramatically whisked away by a security guard

The scene placed the pair at a gun violence-related protest, with each of them taking the stage to speak before a crowd of onlookers.

As they performed their passionate lines, Zoey and Mia's characters locked hands and raised them into the air in solidarity.

Things take a turn during the scene, when Zoey gets a hold of the microphone to address the crowd.

Turning point: Some wires seemingly get crossed during the scene, which then prompted security to rush Zoey and Mia's characters on stage

It's all acting: Immediately after the scene, Zoey was spotted chilling off to the side with the pseudo security guards

Out of nowhere a pair of security guards could be seen rushing the stage, each one grabbing onto Mia and Zoey.

Immediately after the scene, Zoey was spotted chilling off to the side with the pseudo security guards as they waited for their next take.

Zoey, who plays the role of fame-hungry millennial Danni Sanders, donned an orange plaid button-up shirt layered over a cropped white tank top.

Social butterfly: Zoey plays the role of fame-hungry millennial Danni Sanders

Quirky: For the role, Zoey donned an orange plaid button-up shirt layered over a cropped white tank top

All in the details: Deutch had her brunette and blonde color-blocked hair secured in a claw clip, while sporting a minimally made up face

Her trendy ensemble was completed with a pair of baggy dark denim jeans with white stitching and some platform sneakers.

Deutch had her brunette and blonde color-blocked hair secured in a claw clip, while sporting a minimally made up face.

Meanwhile, Isaac donned an oversized blue tee with a red graphic and a pair of kaki trousers.

Contrasting looks: Meanwhile, Isaac donned an oversized blue tee with a red graphic and a pair of kaki trousers

Natural: The 16-year-old actress wore her curly raven tresses down for the shoot and appeared to be wearing little to no makeup

The 16-year-old actress wore her curly raven tresses down for the shoot and appeared to be wearing little to no makeup.

As per Deadline, Not Okay follows 'a misguided young woman (played by Deutch), desperate for friends and fame' who 'fakes a trip to Paris to up her social media presence.

'When a terrifying incident takes place in the real world and becomes part of her imaginary trip, her white lie becomes a moral quandary that offers her all the attention she’s wanted,' the synopsis concludes.

Solidarity: The scene placed the pair at a gun violence-related protest, with each of them taking the stage to speak before a crowd of onlookers

Synopsis: As per Deadline , Not Okay follows 'a misguided young woman (played by Deutch), desperate for friends and fame' who 'fakes a trip to Paris to up her social media presence'

Zoey shared snaps from her first day on set in late July as she posted some artful Instagrams that read 'day one of not okay' interspersed across slides.

One shot included her getting hair and makeup, while another was a shot of her feet in the orange slippers next to a blocking marker, and a third showed off custom bread branded with the movie's title.

Though no release date for the film has been set it will stream exclusively on Hulu and her casting was only revealed in June.

On set: Zoey shared snaps from her first day on set in late July as she posted some artful Instagrams that read 'day one of not okay' interspersed across slides

On her mark: One shot included her getting hair and makeup, while another was a shot of her feet in the orange slippers next to a blocking marker, and a third showed off custom bread branded with the movie's title
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two-time Grammy winner Stevie Nicks announced Tuesday morning that she's cancelling all of her 2021 concert dates due to the fast-spreading coronavirus delta variant cases.

'These are challenging times with challenging decisions that have to be made. I want everyone to be safe and healthy and the rising Covid cases should be of concern to all of us,' the 73-year-old rock queen - who boasts 6.7M social media followers - tweeted.

'While I'm vaccinated, at my age, I am still being extremely cautious and for that reason have decided to skip the 5 performances I had planned for 2021.

'My primary goal is to keep healthy': Two-time Grammy winner Stevie Nicks announced Tuesday morning that she's cancelling all of her 2021 concert dates due to the fast-spreading coronavirus delta variant cases (pictured September 15)

The 73-year-old rock queen tweeted: 'While I'm vaccinated, at my age, I am still being extremely cautious and for that reason have decided to skip the 5 performances I had planned for 2021'

'Because singing and performing have been my whole life, my primary goal is to keep healthy so I can continue singing for the next decade or longer. I'm devastated and I know the fans are disappointed, but we will look towards a brighter 2022.'

BottleRock Napa Valley organizers promptly replaced Stevie (born Stephanie) with Chris Stapleton as the September 3 headliner to take the stage at Napa Valley Expo.

Jazz Aspen Festival organizers will announce Nicks' 'very exciting' replacement this Wednesday for their fest running September 3-5 in Snowmass, CO.

That was quick! BottleRock Napa Valley organizers promptly replaced Stevie (born Stephanie) with Chris Stapleton as the September 3 headliner to take the stage at Napa Valley Expo

'No need to panic!' Jazz Aspen Festival organizers will announce Nicks' 'very exciting' replacement this Wednesday for their fest running September 3-5 in Snowmass, CO

'Coming soon!' Austin City Limits Music Festival organizers will also announce the Fleetwood Mac singer's replacement this Wednesday for their fest running October 1-3 & 8-10 at Texas' Zilker Park

Austin City Limits Music Festival organizers will also announce the Fleetwood Mac singer's replacement this Wednesday for their fest running October 1-3 & 8-10 at Texas' Zilker Park.

It only took Shaky Knees Music Festival organizers 'one hour' to replace Stevie with Foo Fighters as the October 22 headliner of the fest happening in Atlanta's Central Park.

Nicks didn't have to cancel her concert at this year's New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival in October, because the entire event was pulled by organizers on Sunday.

'We are disappointed': It only took Shaky Knees Music Festival organizers 'one hour' to replace Stevie with Foo Fighters as the October 22 headliner of the fest happening in Atlanta's Central Park

'We urge everyone to follow the guidelines': Nicks didn't have to cancel her concert at this year's New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival in October, because the entire event was pulled by organizers on Sunday

Spike: Only 50% of United States citizens have been vaccinated against COVID-19, which has claimed the lives of 618K Americans and infected 36.1M more since March 2020

Only 50% of United States citizens have been vaccinated against COVID-19, which has claimed the lives of 618K Americans and infected 36.1M more since March 2020.

Disappointed fans can always stream the two-time Rock and Roll Hall of Famer's filmed sold-out 67-date, 24 Karat Gold Tour (spanning 2016-2017) on Amazon Prime Video.

Stevie can take comfort in being a whole lot richer since selling an 80% stake of her song catalog for $100M to music publishing company Primary Wave in December.

'Who else is watching?' Disappointed fans can always stream the two-time Rock and Roll Hall of Famer's filmed sold-out 67-date, 24 Karat Gold Tour (spanning 2016-2017) on Amazon Prime Video (pictured October 31)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bethenny Frankel oozed confidence in a new Instagram on Tuesday.

The reality star proudly went filter-free as she snapped a fresh-faced underwear selfie to mark 'National Shapewear Day'.

Standing in her bedroom in a black sports bra and red briefs, she wrote: 'This is me at 50.'

This is her: Bethenny Frankel went filter-free in a fresh-faced underwear selfie to mark 'National Shapewear Day on Tuesday

Bethenny proved her own best advertisement in the stripped back snap.

The waistband of her underwear was branded Skinnygirl, which is Frankel‘s own company.

Bethenny‘s bare legs and flat midsection were on full display in the mirror selfie.

She wore a delicate silver pendant and a ring.

Her brown hair was down and she puckered her lips ever so slightly.

The image saw the reality star, 50, standing in her bedroom in a black sports bra and red briefs: Her bare legs and flat midsection were on full display in the mirror selfie

'If I were a "filterer" I would have gotten rid of my lines and my dark circles, but this is me at 50,' the former Real Housewife of New York captioned the snap, adding the hashtags #zeroglam and #zerofilter.

'Why do I mention this all the time? Because I think it’s important for young women to know that being flawed is truthful and real, and that filtering yourself into someone fictitious is actually damaging to girls’ and women’s self esteem,' she continued. 'It’s courageous and beautiful to be real at any age.

'I realize that fake and filtered sells, but I’m happy over here with my followers who appreciate the difference.❤️' BF concluded, adding '#NationalShapewearDay @skinnygirlbrand shapewear'

Selfie queen: Bethenny frequently posts to her social media with selfies highlighting the fact that she does not use any glam filters

And while her intention was pure, Bethenny’s train of thought in the caption was seemingly at odds with the name of her lifestyle brand Skinnygirl, which by definition would alienate any potential customer who is not, in fact, skinny.

The beauty, meanwhile, kept the selfie parade coming on Tuesday, adding a few more selfie snaps and videos, including one fresh out of the water and wrapped in a beach towel.

The TV star and entrepreneur also included a video in which she was seen dancing in a market, wearing a denim jumpsuit that also came from her brand.

She kept the selfie parade coming on Tuesday: She added a few more selfie snaps and videos, including one fresh out of the water and wrapped in a beach towel
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Jessica Alba recently enjoyed a luxurious getaway to Cabo San Lucas, Mexico with her husband Cash Warren.

But before returning to Los Angeles, the couple were pictured at their vacation destination soaking up the sun and enjoying some time in the water on Sunday, August 8.

For their relaxing day at the beach, the 40-year-old actress displayed her ample assets in a stringy orange bikini top and a pair of comfy black biker shorts.

Getaway: Jessica Alba recently enjoyed a luxurious getaway to Cabo San Lucas, Mexico with her husband Cash Warren

She looked noticeably makeup-free, often concealing her eyes with a pair of large designer shades.

The Honest Company founder's damp brunette hair was worn down and swept behind her.

As for Cash, the 42-year-old film producer remained shirtless and rocked a pair of bright swim trunks featuring a quirky lobster pattern.

Jessica and Cash had all of their belongings sprawled out on lounge chairs resting beneath a canopy, which shaded the pair from the blinding sun.

Soaking it up: The couple were pictured at their vacation destination soaking up the sun and enjoying some time in the water on Sunday, August 8

Shady: Jessica looked noticeably makeup-free, often concealing her eyes with a pair of large designer shades

The couple, who originally met on the set of Fantastic Four in 2004, have been married since 2008 and share three children, daughters Honor, 13, Haven, nine and son Hayes, three.

Although there were various beach toys scattered about, none of Jessica and Cash's three children appeared to be present during their beach day.

After enjoying some lounge time, Jessica and Cash decided to venture into the ocean water.

Lounging: Jessica and Cash had all of their belongings sprawled out on lounge chairs resting beneath a canopy, which shaded the pair from the blinding sun

Adventure time: After enjoying some lounge time, Jessica and Cash decided to venture into the ocean water

They grabbed an array of snorkeling gear, consisting of goggles, fins, and snorkels.

Once at the water's edge, Jessica took a seat in the sand, slipped on her fins, and secure her mask and snorkel on her face. Cash followed suit.

Though it's unclear when the couple returned from their Mexican getaway, Jessica was spotted out and about in Santa Monica on Tuesday afternoon.

She was heading to her office where she leads 190 employees at The Honest Company, which has a reported market value of $1.54B and she owns 5.65M shares.

Snorkeling: They grabbed an array of snorkeling gear, consisting of goggles, fins, and snorkels

Getting ready: Once at the water's edge, Jessica took a seat in the sand, slipped on her fins, and secure her mask and snorkel on her face. Cash followed suit

Playful pattern: The 42-year-old film producer remained shirtless and rocked a pair of bright swim trunks featuring a quirky lobster pattern

Alba looked ultra chic in a dark green linen blazer layered over a silky orange tank top. She tucked the bottom of her top into the waistband of her distressed denim jeans.

The Sin City actress toted her belongings in a leather handbag and carried a reusable coffee cup in her hand.

Due to rising cases of the highly-contagious Delta variant of COVID-19, Jessica donned a face mask for her outing.

Back to work: Though it's unclear when the couple returned from their Mexican getaway, Jessica was spotted out and about in Santa Monica on Tuesday afternoon
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sophia Bush revealed why she does not speak about her ex-husband Chad Michael Murray during Monday's episode of the Inside of You podcast.

The 39-year-old star, who got engaged to Grant Hughes this month, was briefly married to her One Tree Hill costar from 2005 to 2006.

When asked about Murray by Michael Rosenbaum, Bush immediately replied: 'Oh, I'm not going to talk about him. I'm not allowed to.'

Smart: Sophia Bush revealed why she does not to speak about her ex-husband Chad Michael Murray during an appearance on the Inside of You podcast; seen in 2021

'I've tried to poke fun at being a dumb kid and whenever I've done that, it gets twisted into I'm talking s**t about somebody who I don't even know anymore, who's clearly a grown-up,' she explained.

'I think you have to, like, laugh at who you used to be,' she continued.

'But when people ask me about history that involves someone else ... it's not worth my time. It's not a place where I harbor ill will or anything.'

While talking about her youth in the spotlight, the False Positive star said she said she was a 'very naïve 21-year-old kid.'

Short-lived: The 39-year-old star, who got engaged to Grant Hughes this month, was briefly married to her One Tree Hill costar from 2005 to 2006

'And that's all there is to it,' she said of their five-month marriage.

'I think lots of people do stupid s**t before their prefrontal cortexes are fully formed — and they're not until they're 26.'

She joked: 'So you do the math on my timeline. I literally didn't have a whole brain.'

Now, she's looking forward to marriage since she knows what she's signing up for versus thinking she'll get 'some Kate Hudson and Matt McConaughey rom-com life' romance.

Former flame: When asked about Murray by Michael Rosenbaum, Bush immediately replied: 'Oh, I'm not going to talk about him. I'm not allowed to'

Bush explained: 'You know, this notion that you're going to meet your person and they're going to make you so happy that you're going to be fulfilled and you'll never be nervous again and you'll never ever think anyone else is hot? Like, what? It's such an absurd joke.'

She also said romances on set are more common than fan's know.

'When you spend 100 hours a week on set and you don't even get home for eight hours to sleep, like, yeah, I'm not surprised that every 20-year-old on a set has dated every other 20-year-old on a set,' she explained.

'I've tried to poke fun at being a dumb kid and whenever I've done that, it gets twisted into I'm talking s**t about somebody who I don't even know anymore, who's clearly a grown-up,' she explained

The star continued: 'We act like it's not common and it's wildly common. Some of our favorite celebrity couples are people who married the fourth costar they dated.'

On Tuesday, she shared news of her engagement, which took place on vacation in Lake Como, Italy.

'So it turns out that being your favorite person's favorite person is the actual best feeling on planet Earth #YES,' she said in her Instagram caption as she shared an image.

Yes! On Tuesday, she shared news of her engagement, which took place on vacation in Lake Como, Italy
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has a recurring role in the HBO hit series The White Lotus.

And on Tuesday, Molly Shannon looked on top of the world as she made her way to an appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live!

The SNL alum, 56, showcased her legs in a pleated mini skirt and towering strappy stiletto heels.

Star: She has a recurring role in the HBO hit series The White Lotus. And Molly Shannon looked on top of the world as she made her way to an appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live! Tuesday

Shannon smiled and waved to fans as she arrived at Kimmel's Hollywood studio.

She completed her ensemble with a sweater and a white purse on a shoulder chain.

Her shoulder-length hair was loose and she appeared to be makeup-free.

Looking good: The SNL alum, 56, showcased her legs in a pleated mini skirt and towering strappy stiletto heels, and added a sweater and a shoulder purse

Cute: She completed her ensemble with a sweater and a white purse on a shoulder chain

Going on late night TV: Shannon, who appeared to be makeup-free, smiled and waved to fans as she arrived at Kimmel's Hollywood studio

The comedienne and actress made her name on Saturday Night Live where she was a castmember from 1995 to 2001.

She went on to establish her career in movies with such films as A Night At The Roxbury, Never Been Kissed, How The Grinch Stole Christmas, Serendipity, Shallow Hal and Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby.

In The White Lotus, Shannon plays wealthy mom Kitty who surprises her son and new daughter-in-law during their honeymoon at an exclusive Hawaii resort.

Funny: The comedienne and actress made her name on Saturday Night Live where she was a castmember from 1995 to 2001 (pictured on the skit show during a guest appearance in 2007)

Hit show: In The White Lotus, Shannon plays wealthy mom Kitty who surprises her son and new daughter-in-law during their honeymoon at an exclusive Hawaii resort

Jake Lacey and Alexandra Daddario star as the newlyweds in the ensemble satire that follows the lives of a group of guests at the White Lotus resort.

Other stars include Connie Britton, Murray Bartlett, Natasha Rothwell, Jennifer Coolidge, Brittany O'Grady and Sydney Sweeney.

On Tuesday, HBO announced that there will be a second season of the show written and directed by Mike White which will feature a new location and a different cast.

According to Deadline, 'Season 2 checks out of Hawaii and will follow a different group of vacationers as they book their stay at another White Lotus property and settle in temporarily amongst its inhabitants.'

The White Lotus season one will conclude on HBO and HBO Max on Sunday, August 15 at 9 p.m. EST.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Country star Jillian Jacqueline announced she's expecting her first child with husband Bryan Brown in an Instagram post on Tuesday.

In the social media post, the 33-year-old posed in a red lacy dress while holding her baby bump, captioning the shot, 'Mother' with a red heart emoji. Brown posted the shot with the caption, 'Wife & child' with a heart.

In the outdoor shot showcasing a lush grass field and trees, Jacqueline had her wavy brown locks down and parted.

The latest: Country star Jillian Jacqueline, 33, announced she's expecting her first child with husband Bryan Brown in an Instagram post on Tuesday

The singer received a number of joyous responses from her musical industry peers, as Michelle Branch and Tenille Townes both congratulated the couple, while Caylee Hammack said 'OMGOMGOMG!! You GLOWING fairy! Congratulations.'

Also chiming in with kind words were Karen Fairchild, Mat Kearney and Cassadee Pope.

Jacqueline and Brown, who plays guitar in her band, wed in April of 2019 in Nashville at the Ruby building, with 150 guests in attendance, People reported.

Jacqueline praised the venue for its 'calm and open' presentation, with its 'high ceilings and white plaster walls.'

Happy: In the outdoor shot showcasing a lush grass field and trees, Jacqueline had her wavy brown locks down and parted

On the red carpet: The musical artist was snapped in November of 2019 at the ASCAP Country Music Awards in Nashville

Jacqueline and her husband got engaged during a trip to Paris in March of 2018 during a visit to the Eiffel Tower

Beaming: The couple was seen in an embrace earlier this year

Brown had proposed to Jacqueline during a trip to Paris in March of 2018 during a visit to the Eiffel Tower, according to the outlet, and gave her a 'dream ring' which was 1920s art deco jewelry.

The couple delivered their vows to songwriter Craig Wiseman's wife K.K. Wiseman, as Jacqueline lauded her to the publication for her verbal talents.

'It makes sense that she’s married to a hit songwriter because she has such an incredible way with words and is such a great public speaker,' she said. 'We are so happy she is marrying us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rowan Blanchard and Auli'i Cravalho have joined forces to star in an untitled movie project for Hulu described as a queer teen romance.

The 19-year-old Blanchard and 20-year-old Cravalho have signed on to star in the film from director Sammi Cohen, according to Variety.

Russian Doll star Natasha Lyonne and Luca star Maya Rudolph have also come aboard to produce the film through their Animal Pictures company.

Rowan: Rowan Blanchard and Auli'i Cravalho have joined forces to star in an untitled movie project for Hulu described as a queer teen romance

Auli'i: The 19-year-old Blanchard and 20-year-old Cravalho have signed on to star in the film from director Sammi Cohen, according to Variety

Producer: Russian Doll star Natasha Lyonne and Luca star Maya Rudolph have also come aboard to produce the film through their Animal Pictures company

The movie follows Blanchard's character named Paige, described as an 'aspiring artist' who is 'thrust out of her comfort zone when she's forced to join the track team.'

The track team is also captained by her longtime crush, but she surprisingly falls for a different teammate and begins to discover what true love is really like.

Cravalho is playing AJ, described as, 'an elusive track star who has always lived in the shadow of her twin sister.'

Rowan's character: The movie follows Blanchard's character named Paige, described as an 'aspiring artist' who is 'thrust out of her comfort zone when she's forced to join the track team

Kirsten King and Casey Rackham are writing the script, with Lyonne and Rudolph producing with their Animal Productions partner Danielle Renfrew Behrens.

Also producing is Jeremy Garelick, Will Phelps and Ryan Bennett for American High, Depth of Field’s Andrew Miano, 3Arts’ Katie Newman and LD Entertainment’s Mickey Liddell and Pete Shilaimon.

Depth of Field’s Britta Rowings and Dan Balgoyen will serve as executive producers, with Rowings overseeing production with Michael Glassman of LD Entertainment and Max Butler.

Another producer: Kirsten King and Casey Rackham are writing the script, with Lyonne and Rudolph producing with their Animal Productions partner Danielle Renfrew Behrens

Lyonne and Rudolph formed Animal Pictures back in 2018, originally signing a first-look deal with Amazon Studios.

Their first project was the comedy special Sarah Cooper: Everything's Fine, which debuted on Netflix in October 2020, with Lyonne directing.

This untitled project marks Animal Pictures' first feature film production after developing a number of TV projects.

Projects: Lyonne and Rudolph formed Animal Pictures back in 2018, originally signing a first-look deal with Amazon Studios.

Blanchard currently stars as Alexandra Cavil in TNT's hit series Snowpiercer, which wrapped production on its upcoming third season and was renewed for a fourth season.

Cravalho stars as Jos Cleary-Lopez in the upcoming Amazon Studios series The Power, which doesn't have a premiere date yet.

She is also attached to star as Wendla Bergmann in Spring Awakening, based on Frank Wedekind's play.

The coming-of-age story is set in 19th-century Germany and centered on a group of teens discovering their sexuality.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck once again demonstrated just how serious their on-again romance is as they continued their search for a love nest in Los Angeles.

The couple were spotted touring Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate on Tuesday.

Ever the doting boyfriend, Ben, 48, drove his ladylove, 52, in his luxurious Mercedes Benz while she peered out the open window.

House hunting! Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck once again demonstrated just how serious their on-again romance is as they continued their search for a love nest in Los Angeles on Tuesday

Even for their day of house hunting, JLo looked incredible with a touch of makeup gracing her youthful complexion.

Her dashing, bearded beau opted for a dark blue sweater.

The couple were reportedly touring the sprawling, five-acre property once belonging to the famous British-American comedian at around 11:30AM, and spent an hour there.

The lavish home is currently owned by billionaire Ron Burkle and comes with luxurious amenities such as a one hole golf course.

Simply stunning: Even for their day of house hunting, JLo looked incredible with a touch of makeup gracing her youthful complexion

Eyes on the road: Affleck drove his ladylove in his luxurious Mercedes-Benz

In addition to Hope's former residence, Ben and Jennifer were spotted touring an $85 million estate in Beverly Hills.

The stunning property comes with everything a celebrity could want and more with 12 bedrooms, a basketball court, and boxing ring, according to TMZ.

The house tour is just another sign of how serious the couple have become, ever since rekindling their romance earlier this year.

This isn't the first time the couple have been spotted house hunting together, with the duo also spotted checking out potential homes last month.

Off they go: The couple were reportedly touring the sprawling, five-acre property once belonging to the famous British-American comedian at around 11:30AM, and spent an hour there

Future home? The lavish home is currently owned by tycoon Ron Burkle and comes with everything and more a celebrity could want - including a one hole golf course

Hitting the road: Ben followed another vehicle out of the gated property

The two seem on the cusp of moving in together after Jennifer already took steps to make LA her new permanent home.

The Out Of Sight star has been spotted touring schools in the area for her children in recent months, and they're reportedly on board with relocating to the West Coast.

She's normally based in Miami, where her kids can easily spend time with their father, singer Marc Anthony.

Going strong: The property tour is just another sign of how serious the couple have become, ever since rekindling their romance earlier this year

Home sweet home? The property once owned by the British-American comedian is on the market for $40 million

Wow: In addition to Hope's former residence, Ben and Jennifer were spotted touring an $85 million estate in Beverly Hills

Future focused: The two seem on the cusp of moving in together after Jennifer already took steps to make LA her new permanent home

Jennifer shares two twins with her ex Marc — 13-year-old Max and Emme — while Ben has three children with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner: Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine.

While planning for relocating her children, J.Lo has reportedly been looking forward to living with her boyfriend again.

'Ben and Jen are spending almost every night together when they’re not working,' an insider told Us Weekly last month. 'They plan on moving in together very soon.'

Jennifer and Ben have been seemingly attached at the hip ever since reconciling, 17 years after ending their engagement in 2004.

The couple recently celebrated Jennifer's 52nd birthday on board a massive yacht as they explored the likes of St. Tropez and Capri together.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He stars in the box office hit The Suicide Squad that debuted at number one this past weekend.

And on Tuesday, it was announced that in demand Idris Elba has landed another plum role - as Knuckles in Paramount's Sonic The Hedgehog 2.

The former Luther star confirmed the news by posting an image of the Sega game character's signature hand to his Instagram with the caption: 'Knock, knock…..'

In demand: Idris Elba (pictured in 2019)has been cast as the voice of Knuckles in Paramount's Sonic The hedgehog 2, it was announced on Tuesday

Excited: The actor, 48, confirmed the news by posting an image of the Sega game character's signature hand to his Instagram with the caption: 'Knock, knock…..'

The first movie was released in February 2020, right before the COVID-19 pandemic forced movie theatres to close, and grossed a staggering $319 million worldwide.

In May 2020, director Jeff Fowler confirmed via social media that a sequel was in the works and filming recently began in Vancouver, Canada.

Returning are Ben Schwartz as the voice of Sonic as well as James Marsden as Sheriff Thomas Michael Wachowski, Tika Sumpter as his wife Maddie and Jim Carrey as the villainous Dr. Robotnik.

The first movie was released in February 2020, right before the COVID-19 pandemic forced movie theatres to close, and grossed a staggering $319 million worldwide

Helming again: In May 2020, director Jeff Fowler confirmed via social media that a sequel was in the works and filming recently began in Vancouver, Canada

Cast: Back in action will be Ben Schwartz as the voice of Sonic as well as James Marsden as Sheriff Thomas Michael Wachowski (pictured) and Jim Carrey as the villainous Dr. Robotnik

It's all about the hands: Elba's character Knuckles is a spiny anteater who made his first appearance in the 1994 Sega video game Sonic the Hedgehog 3

Elba's character Knuckles is a spiny anteater who made his first appearance in the 1994 Sega video game Sonic the Hedgehog 3.

Knuckles started out as an antagonist having been persuaded by Dr. Robotnik that Sonic was his enemy, Variety reported.

He went on to become a playable character in a follow-up game Sonic and Knuckles, also released in 1994.

The character ultimately realizes who the bad guy is and changes sides, becoming Sonic's pal.

Hit movie: Elba currently stars as Bloodsport in James Gunn's The Suicide Squad which opened atop the box office this past weekend

London-born Elba, 48, has been busy since movie production started opening up again amid strict pandemic protocols.

His drama Concrete Cowboy dropped on Netflix in April and his highly-anticipated performance as Bloodsport in James Gunn's The Suicide Squad has delighted fans and critics alike.

The actor has wrapped filming on the fantasy drama Three Thousand Years of Longing with Tilde Swinton and has been working on the thriller Beast.

He'll next be seen on screen in the Western The Harder they Fall which is set for a theatrical release on November 3.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Halle Berry says she is 'proof' that the entertainment industry is changing for women over 40, just days ahead of her 55th birthday on Saturday.

While Hollywood is notorious for ageism, the Oscar-winning actress raved that her career is still thriving after wrapping her new film Bruised.

'It used to be when you were 40 your career was done … and I mean really done.

'Or you had to wait until you were old enough to play a grandma, and then you could have another bite at the apple, right?,' she told EW.

Going strong: Halle Berry says she is 'proof' that the entertainment industry is changing for women over 40, days ahead of her 55th birthday on Saturday

She added: 'I mean, I couldn't think that I'd be playing an MMA fighter at 54 years old. Yet I did, so it's got to be changing. I'm proof of that.'

In addition to serving as the upcoming indie drama's leading lady, the star also stepped behind the camera to make her directorial debut.

While speaking about the opportunity, Berry revealed the script 'was written for a twenty-something Irish Catholic white woman.'

She recalled: 'I couldn't get it out of my mind, so I thought, is it possible that this could be reimagined for someone like me?

Role of a lifetime: While Hollywood is notorious for ageism, the actress raved that her career is still thriving after wrapping her new film Bruised

'It used to be when you were 40 your career was done … and I mean really done. Or you had to wait until you were old enough to play a grandma,' she told EW

'Because I think I have a take on it that could actually work — making it about a middle-aged Black woman, someone fighting for a last chance rather than another chance.'

'When you're young we all get chances, they're a dime a dozen. But when you're at a certain stage in life it becomes something more impactful and meaningful, right?' Berry added.

After Blake Lively the role 'wasn't for her,' the mother-of-two said she went to the producer and gave him her pitch.

After getting into the best shape of her life for the role, she told the outlet she broke two ribs on the first day of shooting.

Exciting: In addition to serving as the serving as the leading lady for the upcoming drama, the star stepped behind the camera to make her directorial debut

Unlike when she fractured her ribs during the shooting of 2019's John Wick: Chapter 3 — Parabellum, she pushed through the pain.

Speaking of her injury on the set of Wick, she said, 'I told the director about it, they told the insurance.

'We had to shut down for months and it was a big ordeal. On this, because it was an independent movie, we didn't have a big budget.'

'The director in me said, 'I didn't come this far and work this hard to go home,' she explained.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They have been hot and heavy for a number of years and are soon to be costars in a brand new romantic film.

And Bella Thorne was the center of attention as fiancé Benjamin Mascolo got behind the camera for an impromptu photoshoot with his love last week.

The Duff actress, 23, was topless and fresh-faced in the photos, with her flame red hair hanging loose.

She woke up like this: Bella Thorne was the center of attention as fiancé Benjamin Mascolo got behind the camera for an impromptu photoshoot with his love last week

Bella‘s only accessory was a delicate silver chain around her neck.

In one snap, the actress and author laid sideways with the comforter bunched up around her breasts.

She showed off some sexy side boob in the image.

Another photo saw Thorne on her back, with her arms outstretched covering her nipples while she had a playful smile on her face.

The actress captioned the gallery with a series of quotes: 'Will you still love me when I’m old and wrinkled?' 'Always' she concluded, tagging Mascolo.

Skin is in: In one snap, the actress and author laid sideways with the comforter bunched up around her breasts

As for Benjamin: He shared photos from the shoot last week to his own Instagram account, including shots of his beautiful bride-to-be lying with the sun shining in her face

As for Benjamin, he shared photos from the shoot last week to his own Instagram account, including more shots of his beautiful bride-to-be lying with the sun shining in her face.

He geolocated the post in Mississippi, and shared more details about how the photo shoot came about in his caption.

'Woke up to your breathtaking beauty this morning. What a work of art you are, I had to pick up my camera and create these memories,' Ben wrote in the caption.

'You’re my favourite actress and this is our own life movie. Thank you for inspiring me everyday, I love you.'

The pair of lovebirds will soon be seen in the Italian film Time Is Up, the poster for which Benjamin also posted to his Instagram feed last week.

Coming soon: The pair of lovebirds will soon be seen in the Italian film Time Is Up, the poster for which Benjamin also posted to his Instagram feed last week

Around the same time, Bella commented on the film on her own feed, sharing two gorgeous visuals of the star couple in the movie.

'I’ve never filmed a movie before with someone I’m romantically involved with, and I’m so happy I got to fall in love with you on screen and off screen a million times over,' she shared in her caption.

'If you love romance movies “Time Is Up” is the one for you!'

Time Is Up is slated for release in Italy on the 25th of October.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Before 28-time Grammy winner Beyoncé Knowles-Carter put her third studio double album I Am... Sasha Fierce together in 2008, she was told b&w imagery 'wouldn't sell.'

'I remember being in a meeting discussing analytics, and I was told the research discovered that my fans did not like when my photography was black and white,' the 39-year-old R&B diva recalled in the September 2021 issue of Harper's BAZAAR, which hits newsstands August 31.

'They told me I wouldn't sell if it wasn't in color. That was ridiculous. It p***ed me off that an agency could dictate what my fans wanted based on a survey. Who did they ask? How is it possible to generalize people this much? Are these studies accurate? Are they fair? Are all the people I'm trying to uplift and shine a light on included? They're not. It triggered me when I was told, "These studies show..."

'They told me I wouldn't sell if it wasn't in color': Before 28-time Grammy winner Beyoncé Knowles-Carter put her third studio double album I Am... Sasha Fierce together in 2008, she was told b&w imagery 'wouldn't sell'

'I was so exhausted and annoyed with these formulaic corporate companies that I based my whole next project off of black and white photography, including the videos for Single Ladies and If I Were a Boy and all of the artwork by Peter Lindbergh for I Am...Sasha Fierce, which ended up being my biggest commercial success to date. I try to keep the human feeling and spirit and emotion in my decision-making.'

I Am... Sasha Fierce received mixed reviews from critics, but went on to sell over 8M copies and earn six Grammy Awards in 2010 - the most won in one night by a female artist.

Beyoncé likely enlisted the late German photographer who died, age 74, from undisclosed causes in 2019 because his iconic work was instrumental in creating the nineties supermodel.

Lindbergh's 1990 British Vogue cover featured Linda Evangelista, Naomi Campbell, Tatjana Patitz, Cindy Crawford, and Christy Turlington - and inspired George Michael's Freedom '90 video.

The 39-year-old R&B diva recalled in Harper's BAZAAR: 'It p***ed me off that an agency could dictate what my fans wanted based on a survey. Who did they ask? How is it possible to generalize people this much? Are these studies accurate? Are they fair? Are all the people I'm trying to uplift and shine a light on included? They're not. It triggered me when I was told, "These studies show..."'

Beyoncé (pictured in 2008) continued: 'I was so exhausted and annoyed with these formulaic corporate companies that I based my whole next project off of black and white photography'

Knowles-Carter added: 'Including the videos for Single Ladies and If I Were a Boy and all of the artwork by Peter Lindbergh for I Am...Sasha Fierce, which ended up being my biggest commercial success to date'

Alter ego: I Am... Sasha Fierce received mixed reviews from critics, but went on to sell over 8M copies and earn six Grammy Awards in 2010 - the most won in one night by a female artist

Knowles-Carter is turning the big 4-0 next month and she said she wants the next decade to 'be fun and full of freedom.'

'I want to feel the same freedom I feel on stage every day of my life. I want to explore aspects of myself I haven't had time to discover and to enjoy my husband and my children,' the Destiny's Child alum explained.

'I have paid my dues and followed every rule for decades, so now I can break the rules that need to be broken. My wish for the future is to continue to do everything everyone thinks I can't do.'

Beyoncé also revealed she's been in the recording studio for the last 'year and a half' and teased: 'Yes, the music is coming!'

Kingmaker: The Destiny's Child alum likely enlisted the late German photographer (pictured in 2010) who died, age 74, from undisclosed causes in 2019 because his iconic work was instrumental in creating the nineties supermodel
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

She turned 24-years-old this Tuesday.

And Kylie Jenner got an immediate to her birthday celebrations as she clued fans in on some of her at-home festivities via Instagram.

The makeup mogul was treated to an impressive breakfast spread, complete with drool-worthy trays of cinnamon rolls, pancakes, and waffles.

Let's celebrate! Kylie Jenner got an immediate to her birthday celebrations on Tuesday as she clued fans in on some of the at-home festivities via Instagram

She proudly shared the decadent display on her Instagram Story, marveling at the seemingly endless options.

Kylie slowly panned over the entire spread, which also included various breakfast meats, garnished avocado toasts, and delicious glazed donuts.

For those wanting a healthier option, there were several bowls of mixed berries topped with bright purple flower garnishes readily available.

In traditional birthday fashion, Jenner had a tray of vanilla cupcakes featuring gold '24' decor as an homage to her recently released Kylie Cosmetics 24K gold collection.

Blessed: Kylie showed off the excessive floral arrangements she had received from family and friends for her birthday via Instagram Story

Artsy: Kylie and her birthday crew honed their art skills as they headed outdoors to partake in a relaxing group painting session

After getting her 256million followers' stomachs growling, Kylie returned to Instagram to show off the excessive floral arrangements she had received from family and friends.

The flowers ranged from ruby red roses to bright yellow sunflowers - a personal favorite of the reality star's.

'blessed,' captioned Kylie on one snap that gave fans a closer look at nine floral arrangements overtaking her dining table.

In a follow-up shot, Jenner revealed some more impressive displays, like one arrangement in the shape of the number 24. Another one, made of the same flowers, was shaped like a dog.

Yummy! The makeup mogul was treated to an impressive breakfast spread, complete with drool-worthy trays of cinnamon rolls, pancakes, and waffles

Jealous? Kylie slowly panned over the entire spread, which also included various breakfast meats, avocado toasts, and glazed donuts

Endless options: For those wanting a healthier option, there were several bowls of mixed berries topped with bright purple flower garnishes

Mixed among the flowers were several small gifts and cards.

Kylie and her birthday crew, eventually, headed outdoors to partake in a relaxing group painting session.

Each participant had their very own miniature easel, as well as brushes, a plate to dispense their paint on to, and water glasses to wash their brushes off in.

Kylie had squeezed out several colors onto her plate, which she showcased in an Instagram Story snap.

All of her favorites: Kylie's flower arrangement ranged from ruby red roses to bright yellow sunflowers - a personal favorite of the reality star's

Creative: Jenner revealed some more impressive displays, like one arrangement in the shape of '24.' Another one, made of the same flowers, was shaped like a dog

Jenner's afternoon paint party was hosted by Timree Gold of Paint Club, who had the reality star and her crew create a seaside landscape painting.

Though she has yet to show off her final product, Kylie was eager to showcase some of her friends' impressive paintings via Instagram Story video.

'Wow!' she remarked.

Relaxing: Jenner's afternoon paint party was hosted by Timree Gold of Paint Club, who had the reality star and her crew create a seaside landscape painting

Impressive: Though she has yet to show off her final product, Kylie was eager to showcase some of her friends' impressive paintings via Instagram Story video

Making memories: Several of Kylie's closest pals, including former assistant Victoria Villarroel and BFF Stassie Karanikolaou, shared snaps and videos from the painting party to their own Instagram Stories

Several of Kylie's closest pals, including former assistant Victoria Villarroel and BFF Stassie Karanikolaou, shared snaps and videos from the painting party to their own Instagram Stories.

Victoria and Stassie each unveiled their finished products to their respective followings, while Yris Palmer captured a brief clip of her daughter honing her artistry skills.

This afternoon's wholesome festivities are undoubtedly just the start of Kylie's birthday celebrations, with the billionaire expected to make a glamorous transformation for some evening fun.

Sweet: Kylie's pal Yris Palmer captured a brief clip of her daughter Ayla painting

Done! Stassie proudly showed off her finished product

Nice! Victoria snapped a photo of another party attendee showcasing their artistry

To kick off her birthday, Jenner first displayed her voluptuous figure in a slinky green dress, as well as her famous pout, for her social media followers to gawk at.

'Cheers to 24,' the entrepreneur captioned the series of photos.

She wore her lengthy raven hair down and styled in voluminous tendrils that flowed down her back as she posed in the backyard of her Hidden Hills mansion.

The mother of one completed her eye-catching birthday ensemble with some jeweled designer heels and a pair of chunky earrings.

Birthday girl: To kick off her birthday, Jenner displayed her voluptuous figure in a slinky green dress, as well as her famous pout, for her social media followers to gawk at

Stunning: She wore her lengthy raven hair down and styled in voluminous tendrils that flowed down her back as she posed in the backyard of her Hidden Hills mansion

Amid the successful launch of her Kylie Cosmetics birthday collection on Tuesday, Kylie was flooded with sweet messages and tributes from her friends, family members, and fans.

Mom Kris Jenner was the very first to honor her youngest daughter's 24th birthday, writing on Instagram: 'Happy Birthday to my littlest angel @kyliejenner!!!! I can’t believe how fast time goes by!!!'

The 65-year-old manager marveled at how 'kind, generous beyond belief and so loyal, compassionate, and loving' Kylie is

'You have brought all of us so much joy!!! You are the most amazing mommy!!!!' added Kris, referring to the mogul's daughter Stormi, three, who she shares with Travis Scott.

All love: Amid the successful launch of her Kylie Cosmetics birthday collection on Tuesday, Kylie was flooded with sweet messages and tributes from her friends, family members, and fans

Youngest: Mom Kris Jenner was the very first to honor her youngest daughter's 24th birthday, writing on Instagram: 'Happy Birthday to my littlest angel @kyliejenner!!!! I can’t believe how fast time goes by!!!'

Throwback: Kris included a slew of heartwarming snaps, including one of herself cradling a then infant Kylie in the 1990s

She went on to declare that Kylie makes 'every day extraordinary' and that she is 'blessed to be your mommy.'

Kris included a slew of heartwarming snaps, including one of herself cradling a then infant Kylie in the 1990s.

Travis, who has remained an amicable co-parenting relationship with Kylie in spite of their 2019 breakup, made his warm feelings felt as well.

He posted an old snap of them at a food truck to his Insta Stories and urged her: 'WAKE UP ITS YOOOO BDAAYYYYYY.'

Wake up! Travis Scott, who has remained an amicable co-parenting relationship with Kylie in spite of their 2019 breakup, made his warm feelings felt as well

Bonded: Kendall posted a picture of herself and Kylie lounging on the beach and wrote: 'happy birthday to my baby sister!'

Kendall posted a picture of herself and Kylie lounging on the beach and wrote: 'happy birthday to my baby sister!'

Big sister Kim Kardashian also shared several throwback snapshots of herself and Kylie, many of which showcased Kylie as a jovial pre-teen.

'Happy Birthday Ky!!!' the 40-year-old SKIMS founder wrote. 'I love you so much! You will always be my baby sis and I'm here for you no matter what!'

Sister sister: Big sister Kim Kardashian also shared several throwback snapshots of herself and Kylie, many of which showcased Kylie as a jovial pre-teen
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Olivia Culpo was in a light mood while posting to Instagram Tuesday.

The social media star looked carefree as she shared a cute reel with sisters Aurora and Sophia Culpo, captioning the video: 'Beginning of family vacation vs end of family vacation.'

At the start of the post the three young women are excited to see each other as they skip, laugh, and embrace.

Joking around: Olivia Culpo shared a cute, light-hearted reel with sisters Aurora and Sophia, captioning the video: 'Beginning of family vacation vs end of family vacation'

By the end, they're feistily dunking each other under water as they swim in the ocean.

'Who can relate?' she asked her almost 5 million followers.

The multi-hyphenate beauty is finally on her way home after a month-long European vacation. After extensive travel, Ms. Culpo is glad to be homebound.

The fashion influencer posted a video in her Instagram stories expressing excitement to finally be going home.

'I have not been home in about a month and a half — in my own bed. And I cannot wait to get there,' she said emphatically.

Fake feud: At the end of the reel they're feistily dunking each other under water as they swim in the ocean

Excited: The fashion influencer posted a video in her Instagram stories expressing excitement to finally be going home

'I cannot wait to just drink water,' the brunette babe added.

In the video The Miss Universe winner wore a white hat and a pair of black biker shorts with a matching sports bra.

She casually draped an orange sweatshirt around her shoulder.

At the end she skipped through the airport, captioning the post, 'Make way people. Lunatic comin through!!'

Travel style: In the video The Miss Universe winner wore a white hat and a pair of black biker shorts with a matching sports bra

Paradise: The jetsetter has been spoiling us with stunning photos of amazing food, beaches, and fashion for weeks as she traveled with loved ones

The jetsetter has been spoiling us with stunning photos of amazing food, beaches, and fashion for weeks as she traveled with loved ones.

First the I Feel Pretty actress spent time in Italy with her Revolve fashion team as she visited the Amalfi Coast.

Later the 29-year-old was in Greece with some of her 'favorite peeps' as at her coastal hotel.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her ex-boyfriend Austin Butler was recently spotted making out with Lily-Rose Depp.

But all of that was out of sight, out of mind for Vanessa Hudgens as she enjoyed a day of golf with her Pittsburgh Pirates beau Cole Tucker.

The actress, 32, posted a photo capturing their day together in which she elegantly rested her arm on his shoulder.

Linking up! Vanessa Hudgens enjoyed a day of golf with her boyfriend Cole Tucker, after photos emerged of her ex-boyfriend Austin Butler making out with Lily-Rose Depp

The image was part of a slideshow Vanessa posted capturing their day on the golf course, captioned, 'While he golfs...'

The post began with a video of Vanessa dancing in their golf cart as her beau hit the course.

The High School Musical actress grooved about wearing a polka dot top and teal skirt, before giggling and ending the recording.

A second video showed Cole standing on the course as Vanessa zoomed into what appeared to be a tennis ball on the grass.

Making moves! The post began with a video of Vanessa dancing in their golf cart as her beau hit the course

Spot on! The High School Musical actress grooved about wearing a polka dot top and teal skirt, before giggling and ending the recording

'Yeah are they driving or hitting?' Cole asked someone who was out of view.

'Balls,' Vanessa said as she gave fans a close-up shot of the green orb laying on the ground.

The golfing outing comes just one day after photos emerged of Vanessa's ex Austin packing on the PDA with Lily-Rose, 22.

The actors put on a steamy display as they wrapped their arms around each other after enjoying a dinner date over the weekend.

'Balls': Hudgens zoomed into what appeared to be a tennis ball laying on the field

Lily-Rose, who is the daughter of Johnny Depp and Vanessa Paradis, was seen going for an evening stroll with Switched at Birth star Austin, 29, following their meal.

Austin dated Vanessa from 2011 to 2019, and the former couple are said to have partied ways near the end of 2019 with Butler reportedly absent from her birthday celebrations in December.

Vanessa told the November 2018 issue of Women's Health that she was in no rush to wed.

Locking lips! The golfing outing comes just one day after photos emerged of Vanessa's ex Austin packing on the PDA with Lily-Rose, 22

'I want to get married, travel, then have kids — probably in my late 30s,' she explained at the time. 'Everyone's clock is different.'

Their split was confirmed in January 2020 when a source told Us Weekly: 'Vanessa and Austin are officially broken up, and Vanessa has been telling those close to her about their breakup.'

Vanessa and Cole have been dating since late 2020, after first meeting in a Zoom meditation group.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Heidi Klum glowed as she stepped out for a casual Starbucks run in sunny Los Angeles this Tuesday.

The 48-year-old German supermodel slipped into a highlighter green jumpsuit and allowed it to fall beguilingly off one shoulder - pairing the ensemble with yellow Crocs.

The outing came amid claims that her former husband Seal has become romantically involved with his ex-personal assistant Laura Strayer.

Refreshed: Heidi Klum glowed as she stepped out for a casual Starbucks run in sunny Los Angeles this Tuesday - wearing yellow Crocs

But that didn't appear to dampen Klum's spirits.

The lean, green stunner continued her look by sharpening her screen siren features with makeup.

Meanwhile, she let her signature blonde hair cascade freely over her shoulders.

Heidi shielded her face from the rays with a pair of aviators and complemented the ensemble with a blue print handbag.

Her latest public sighting comes amid claims that her former husband Seal has become romantically involved with his ex-personal assistant Laura Strayer.

Heidi's ex was glimpsed holding hands with a mystery blonde out and about in St. Tropez last week and this Tuesday a Page Six report identified her as Laura.

Looking fab: The 48-year-old German supermodel slipped into a highlighter green jumpsuit and allowed it to fall beguilingly off one shoulder

Off she goes: Heidi shielded her face from the rays with a pair of aviators and complemented the ensemble with a blue print handbag

Laura is alleged to have begun living and working at Seal and Heidi's mansion in 2006, the year after the onetime couple got married.

She reportedly no longer works for the English rapper and has since secured a job elsewhere in the music business.

After Heidi and Seal separated in 2012 she began running around with her South African bodyguard Martin Kirsten and remained with him for over a year.

Seal then publicly accused Heidi of having cheated on him with Martin, telling TMZ that 'whilst I didn’t expect any better from him I would’ve thought Heidi would’ve shown a little bit more class and at least waited until we separated first before deciding to fornicate with the help, as it were.'

Meanwhile: Her latest public sighting comes amid claims that her former husband Seal has become romantically involved with his ex-personal assistant Laura Strayer

Now in the wake of the rumors about Seal and Laura a source in Heidi's camp told Page Six: 'Of course, we all want him to be happy - but it’s definitely ironic that he’s dating the help when he had such strong feelings about Heidi seeing Martin.'

Heidi and her ex-husband Seal have three children - Henry, 15, Johann, 14, and Lou, 11 - and he also adopted her daughter Leni, 17, from a previous relationship.

A few months ago Seal told Us Weekly that co-parenting after a breakup 'can be challenging. It requires teamwork. If you are a team, if both parents are a team, then it's really easy and that's not a real challenge at all… But you have to be a team. And if you're not a team, then it can all fall to pieces.'

Seal then explosively claimed that he and Heidi 'never had that teamwork' with one another when it came to bringing up their children.

The way they were: Laura is alleged to have begun living and working at Seal and Heidi's mansion in 2006; Heidi and Seal are pictured during their marriage

Their differences hit the headlines last year when she wanted to take the children to her native country so she could film Germany's Next Top Model there.

Seal objected on the grounds that the children might be exposed to coronavirus but an emergency court hearing was held and Heidi prevailed.

Although she was permitted to take them to Germany he was given 'expanded time' with them before and after the trip.

At the moment Heidi is married to her fellow German Tom Kaulitz who rose to fame as the guitarist for the band Tokio Hotel.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She recently wed her country star fiancé wearing a stunning Vera Wang dress.

And Gwen Stefani looked fashionable as ever on an errand run on Tuesday, when she was seen in a Beverly Hills, California parking lot rocking a statement look.

The No Doubt singer, 51, sported a military inspired tie-dye work jacket, in shades of hunter green, brown and orange.

That's Mrs. Shelton to you: Gwen Stefani looked fashionable as ever on an errand run on Tuesday, when she was seen in a Beverly Hills parking lot rocking a statement look

The jacket had beading details underneath the collar.

Gwen paired this with a black top, over which she hung several extra long gold chain necklaces, including a crucifix pendant.

She slipped into a pair of cropped patchwork denim jeans that were shredded just above the ankle.

On her feet, the Bathwater songbird walked along in lovely Gucci slip on sneakers.

Artful outfit: The No Doubt singer, 51, sported a military inspired tie-dye work jacket, in shades of hunter green, brown and orange

The mother of three donned a patterned face mask amid the heightened risk of Covid, and had her platinum blonde hair pulled up into a thin ponytail.

Her manicure was extra long and fluorescent yellow.

Last month, Stefani married her fiancé and Voice costar Blake Shelton on a beautiful ranch in Oklahoma.

Last month: Stefani married her fiancé and Voice costar Blake Shelton on a beautiful ranch in Oklahoma; seen in a wedding snap shared on Instagram

Shelton recently explained that he has 'had awkward conversations with so many of my friends' that were chagrinned to be left off the guest list for the intimate ceremony, which was kept small most likely due to Covid concerns.

'"Oh, oh, yeah. I read about that. How was that?"' the Voice star said on the Storme Warren XMSirius radio show last week. 'Listen, we kept it small, get over it!'

They did not spend much time honeymooning after getting hitched, however, as the musical pair have been seen performing in several venues since their nuptials.

They did not spend much time honeymooning after getting hitched: The musical pair have been seen performing in several venues since their nuptials; like here at the CMA Summer Jam, which took place in Nashville, Tennessee on July 27

One of those was the CMA Summer Jam, which took place in Nashville, Tennessee on July 27.

While Blake does not have any children of his own, Gwen shares three sons with her ex-husband Gavin Rossdale.

The pair, who were married from 2002 until 2016, share sons Kingston, 15, Zuma Nesta Rock, 12, and Apollo Bowie Flynn, seven.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Coco Austin thinks it's wrong for 'society' to pressure moms to stop breastfeeding 'at two.'

The model wife of Ice T sparked quite a bit of backlash when she revealed she still nurses five-year-old daughter Chanel last week.

But Coco, 42, told E!'s Daily Pop she's not letting the outrage sway her opinion, explaining that 'as a mother' you should only stop breastfeeding after the child 'says so.'

Her way: Coco Austin thinks it's wrong for 'society' to pressure women to stop breastfeeding 'at two' and says she'll keep nursing five-year-old daughter Chanel until her little one 'says so'

Still: The model wife of Ice T sparked quite a bit of backlash when she revealed she still nurses Chanel

'I'm [not] going to stop because I feel like it's a great bonding experience between her and I,' she went on. 'She's my only child, it's not like I have a big family of kids, and so I'm savoring every moment with this child.'

Coco - full name Nicole - had her daughter in her lap as she unpacked her views on breastfeeding, admitting while she's 'not really an arguer' she stands by her parenting choices.

Little Chanel also made it clear she was happy sticking close to mom, saying yes and smiling when mom asked her 'Do you want the boob?'

She also revealed that she never though she would be so dedicated to breastfeeding.

'I always thought I wasn't going to go on and on with this breastfeeding thing,' Coco admitted.

Family: 'I'm [not] going to stop because I feel like it's a great bonding experience between her and I,' she went on. 'She's my only child, it's not like I have a big family of kids, and so I'm savoring every moment with this child'

Happy camper: Little Chanel also made it clear she was happy sticking close to mom, saying yes and smiling when mom asked her 'Do you want the boob?'

'I thought I would stop more like around one. Then I loved it too much, and I'm like, "I feel like I'm wanted, like she wants me." I think a lot of mothers would understand.'

And she says husband of 16 years Ice T completely agrees with her approach, cheekily noting: 'Well, he loves the boobs too.'

'He's got one side, she's got the other. She's going to be a boob freak.'

Coco went on, saying: 'Ice, he believes in everything I believe.'

And their intimate parenting style means the family still even shares a giant bed.

'We call it the family bed. We have all the dogs, Chanel, that's our bonding time together,' Coco said.

Surprising: She also revealed that she never though she would be so dedicated to breastfeeding, saying 'I thought I would stop more like around one. Then I loved it too much, and I'm like, "I feel like I'm wanted, like she wants me." I think a lot of mothers would understand'

'We incorporate our family bed every single night. We co-sleep and that's another one people want to get on. It's weird situation because I don't know why I have to explain myself.'

Earlier this month Coco revealed Chanel was still nursing to Us Weekly, telling the magazine 'Chanel still likes my boobs.'

'It's a big bonding moment for a mother and your child,' Austin continued.

She added: 'Why take that away from her? … If she doesn't want it, all right, that's where you stop it. But I'm not just going to say no.'

Coco previously assured people Chanel does eat 'real food' and doesn't get all her nutrients from breast milk, but nurses her to help her relax.'

'At this point in nursing its just for comfort and believe me the girl loves meat so its not like she isn't eating real food...'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Airwolf actor Alex Cord died Monday at 88 at his home in Valley View, Texas.

Cord's longtime publicist Linda McAlister told Deadline Tuesday that the actor had passed away.

Cord, a native of New York, played the role of Michael Coldsmith-Briggs III, also known as Archangel, alongside Jan-Michael Vincent and Ernest Borgnine on the action series from 1984 thru 1986 on CBS.

The latest: Actor Alex Cord, best known for his role on the 1980s series Airwolf, died Monday at 88 at his home in Valley View, Texas.

The character was a government agent on a mission to retrieve the Airwolf supersonic helicopter from Libya.

Cord as a child overcame a battle with polio, later going on to become a strong horseback rider, which lent to many of his earlier career roles in Western genre productions.

He was a graduate of New York University and went on to study acting at the American Shakespeare Theatre prior to breaking into Hollywood.

The actor had built a prolific resume of credits over five decades in show business, beginning in 1961 with a role on the NBC western Laramie.

80s hit: The show featured (L-R) Ernest Borgnine, Cord, Jean Bruce Scott and Jan-Michael Vincent

Busy: The actor, seen in 1969's Night Gallery, had built a prolific resume of credits over five decades in show business

Background: He was a graduate of New York University and went on to study acting at the American Shakespeare Theatre prior to breaking into Hollywood

In the 1960s, he appeared on TV shows including Route 66, Branded and The Doctors and the Nurses, as well as in films such as Stagecoach, Stiletto and The Brotherhood.

The 1970s brought stints in films including The Dead Are Alive! and Grayeagle, and on TV shows including W.E.B., The Six Million Dollar Man, Police Story, The F.B.I. and Mission: Impossible.

In the 1980s, he was seen on shows including Fantasy Island, Cassie & Co., Simon & Simon, Jake and the Fatman and Murder, She Wrote.

His 1990s word included roles in films such as CIA Code Name: Alexa and The Naked Truth; and on shows such as Walker, Texas Ranger.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Normani shared that she felt 'overlooked' when she was a member of the girl group Fifth Harmony that brought her into the spotlight.

The 25-year-old has now established a career as a solo artist and has starred in a colorfully psychedelic new cover of Allure.

She told the magazine that as she works on an upcoming album she is in the process of 'reinventing myself' and showing that 'now I know I'm the s***.'

Candor: Normani shared that she felt 'overlooked' when she was a member of the girl group Fifth Harmony that brought her into the spotlight

Normani revealed: 'I didn't get to really sing in the group. I felt like I was overlooked. That idea has been projected on me. Like, this is your place.'

She was put together with Camila Cabello, Ally Brooke, Lauren Jauregui and Dinah Jane as Fifth Harmony when they were all on The X Factor nine years ago.

They all became stars together but eventually the girl group went on 'hiatus' indefinitely beginning three years ago.

Normani has previously discussed her turmoil within the group including in a cover interview for Billboard late last year.

Looking fab: The 25-year-old has now established a career as a solo artist and has starred in a colorfully psychedelic new cover of Allure

'Having certain things happen so blatantly while also feeling like the "other" and being so young and hearing the public compare [us] took a toll on my confidence. For a long time, I didn’t believe in myself because I didn’t feel like I was given the opportunity to,' dished the Atlanta-born songstress in Billboard.

In her new cover interview for Allure she lifted the curtain on the inner confidence that was fostered in her by her parents and grandmother.

Normani referred to her grandmother, who looked after her when her parents were traveling for work, as 'really my best friend' and 'my soul mate, for real.'

She explained: 'I grew up feeling beautiful. My mom, my dad, my grandmother instilled in me at a very early age that I was beautiful. The fact that my skin was chocolate was a beautiful thing. My kinky hair was beautiful. I don’t need to straighten it. I can rock my braids to my all-white school.'

Esteem: She told the magazine that as she works on an upcoming album she is in the process of 'reinventing myself' and showing that 'now I know I'm the s***'

Although she 'did get bullied a lot' and 'Not feeling like I had that representation at school was very hard' the self-esteem she got from her family helped her cope.

As part of her solo career she released a single called Wild Side last month featuring a guest verse by rap superstar Cardi B.

While the song was in the works Normani informed her co-writer Brittany Hazzard aka Starrah: 'I want something really sexy.'

The sizzling sensation told Allure: 'I just felt this sense of me coming into my own. I feel like a woman now,' pointing out that 'A lot of people aren’t expecting this [song] and that’s why I wanted to put it out first.'

'I grew up feeling beautiful': In her new cover interview for Allure she lifted the curtain on the inner confidence that was fostered in her by her parents and grandmother

Wild Side, which will be featured on an upcoming album with an unannounced name, is 'the record I need to also feel like a bad b****.'

The album will also unveil a more emotionally open incarnation of Normani and she confessed in her new interview: 'For me, that takes a lot.'

She elaborated: 'It’s that end of the spectrum. It’s vulnerability. It’s the things that make me scared. It’s the things that I’m insecure about.'

However she is 'reinventing myself' with the album 'Now you all are finally going to be able to see me tap into that awareness - that I know I’m the s***.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Heather Rae Young shared with her followers on Instagram that she and fiancé Tarek El Moussa scrapped the entire plan for their wedding and completely started over in recent months.

The Selling Sunset star, 33, divulged that she and El Moussa went as far as sending out invitations to their guests then sending out another set with 'Just Kidding' written on them.

Accompanying a black and white photo of the pair, Young wrote, 'Spent the whole day wedding planning and it just made me so excited for our special day. I haven’t fully shared this but in the beginning, Tarek and I hired a wedding planner, sent out our save the dates, and then after rethinking some things we decided to completely change everything.'

'Completely change everything': Heather Rae Young shared, via the caption of this photo, with her followers on Instagram that she and fiancé Tarek El Moussa scrapped the entire plan for their wedding and completely started over in recent months

The former Playboy Playmate of the Month said the Flip or Flop star saw how stressed she was getting over the plans, so the two 'decided to go in a different direction with the wedding planner'.

The couple hired a new one and changed the wedding locale.

'I'm a biggg believer that everything works out the way it should and after seeing so much of our vision come together today we couldn’t be happier,' Young wrote on her post.

The Christmas In Compton actress also said the couple wants a big wedding with friends and family, but one that also feels 'really intimate'.

A big, intimate wedding: Heather wrote on her Instagram post that the couple wants a big wedding with friends and family, but one that also feels 'really intimate'

Many July milestone: Tarek El Moussa got Heather gifts for their anniversary in July. The two met in July 2019 and became engaged in July of last year

'This is a big day for us and for our family and we don’t take that lightly. All I can say is that I’m so lucky to have someone who’s on the same page as me and I think we’re both just ready for the day to finally come'.

Her future husband responded to the post with 'My everything' followed by three heart emojis.

The two television stars met in July 2019 and got engaged a year later. While no exact date has been revealed yet, Young wrote on Instagram that the couple are getting hitched 'so soon'.

Right around the corner: While no exact date has been revealed yet, Young wrote on the caption for this photo on Instagram that the couple are getting hitched 'so soon'

This will be Young's first wedding but not El Moussa's.

The HGTV star was previously married to his co-host on Flip or Flop Christine Haack from 2009 to 2018. They have two children together, 10-year-old Taylor El Moussa and Brayden, aged five.

In an interview with PEOPLE last month, said she enjoyed being a 'bonus mom' and called the kids her babies.

'That's true. They're my babies and I love them. I'm just so happy and fulfilled. We're crazy busy right now. We're focused on our careers, as well, so a baby is just not in the cards right now. But you never know what's going to happen.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has been filming the upcoming reimagining of the 1980s cult classic Dead Ringers in the Big Apple as of late.

But Rachel Weisz enjoyed a quick break from throwing herself into character while working on the the Amazon series on Tuesday.

The actress, 51, was spotted taking a quick stroll with a pal on the set of the new show.

Take five! Rachel Weisz enjoyed a quick break from throwing herself into character while filming the the upcoming Amazon series on Tuesday

Rachel was looking chic in a low-cut sweater paired with flowing black trousers

The actress slicked her raven locks back into a chic updo while protecting her eyesight behind a pair of circular shades.

She looked amazing with a touch of rosy blush and a coordinating shade of lipstick accentuating her pout.

Rachel is starring as both Mantle twins, Elliot and Beverly, in the upcoming Dead Ringers reimagining.

Simply chic: The Mummy actress looked stylish in a low-cut taupe sweater and billowing black trousers

The twin sisters were originally played as men by Jeremy Irons in the movie version from the 80s.

The twins share everything in their lives - from drugs to romances to a desire to 'push the boundaries on medical ethics in an effort to challenge antiquated practices and bring women’s healthcare to the forefront'.

Michael Chernus is starring opposite as Tom, a scientist, who collaborates with one of the twins, Elliot, on a daring medical feat.

Walk and talk: The actress, 51, was spotted taking a quick stroll with a pal on the set of the upcoming psychological thriller

'As one of today’s most accomplished and versatile actresses, Rachel Weisz will captivate the Amazon Prime Video global audience with her take on these two ruthless, twisted characters,' Albert Cheng, COO and co-head of television for Amazon Studios said of the casting.

'This update to Dead Ringers explores the darker side of medicine, obsession, and the human condition, making it a compelling addition to our slate of Amazon Original series.'

Rachel - who is married to James Bond frontman Daniel Craig - devised the idea for a new take on Dead Ringers, and is collaborating with Alice Birch, who worked on Normal People for BBC Three, on the project.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Lucy Hale put on a jaw-dropping display as she took part in a seriously sexy photo shoot in Malibu on Monday.

The Pretty Little Liars actress, 32, left little to the imagination putting her body on display in a black lace bra and matching underwear.

All eyes were on Lucy as she struck an array of seductive poses in her skimpy outfit on a beachfront balcony.

Va va voom! Lucy Hale put on a jaw-dropping display as she took part in a seriously sexy photo shoot in Malibu on Monday

Adding yet another sizzling touch were the black high heels she wore, further accentuating her toned legs.

Lucy looked amazing with her shoulder-length brunette hair styled into loose waves and a perfectly done-up face full of makeup.

A dazzling silver necklace ramped up the glam factor.

While posing for cameras, she also showed off her many tattoos - including a sun tattoo she received with her sister Maggie and recently revealed she was planning to have removed.

Leggy lady: The actress looked amazing putting her incredible legs on full display

Cheeky! She also showcased her pert behind with a pair of black lace underwear

Lucy looked absolutely breathtaking as she raised her arms into the air while gently closing her eyes.

At one point, the starlet changed out of the sexy black look and into something a little more modest.

She covered up with a floral print robe, while flashing a hint of skin with her pretty pink bra.

Lucy gave fans a sneak peek at her sexy shoot on her Instagram Stories, where she posted a video of herself sitting in the makeup chair.

Making waves: Her shoulder-length locks were styled into stylish loose waves

Well heeled! She worked a sexy pair of black high heels which further complimented her toned legs

Nailed it! The star upped the glam factor with her perfect French tip manicure

The Katy Keene actress looked incredible wearing her lace bra and robe as she hung out with her glam team.

No word on what exactly the shoot was for.

Overall, Lucy has remained busy with her acting career as of late.

Her survival thriller Borrego had its first screening during Cannes Film Festival last month.

Lacy lady: Hale put her toned back on display with her sexy black lace bra

Strike a pose: The star looked a natural posing up a storm in front of the camera

More modesty: At one point, the starlet changed out of the sexy black look and into something a little more modest

She will also be back on small screens in the upcoming thriller Ragdall, which is based on the book of the same name and follows detectives attempting to solve the case of the Ragdoll Killer.

The actress recently wrapped filming on the series, and took to her Instagram account to share several behind-the-scenes photos.

'feeling so grateful for a wrap on Ragdoll and for all the beautiful friends & memories I made. Cannot wait for you all to see this coming to your (TV emoji)'s soon ! Thank you to so many people but especially, Thalissa, the genius Freddy Syborn, everyone at Sid Gentle… too many to name but wow we did it. Congrats everyone !'

Coming soon: She will also be back on small screens in the upcoming thriller Ragdall, which is based on the book of the same name and follows detectives attempting to solve the case of the Ragdoll Killer
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He is one of Hollywood's top stars.

And Bradley Cooper has been using his platform to represent worthwhile causes in the most relaxed way possible.

The 46-year-old actor was seen bringing awareness to the One Tribe Foundation in the form of a T-Shirt while out and about in Santa Monica on Monday.

Bradley matched the top as he sported a pair of grey sweat shorts and black flip flops.

Sending a message: Bradley Cooper was seen bringing awareness to the One Tribe Foundation in the form of a T-Shirt while out and about in Santa Monica on Monday

He donned a pair of black Persol sunglasses while juggling various items in his hands including water bottle, keys, and baseball cap.

The shirt he was wearing represents a suicide prevention nonprofit which provides education and therapy to veterans, first responders and their families.

Based out of Texas and formerly known as 22KILL, the One Tribe Foundation 'services and facilities to address today’s growing mental health issues including depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and suicide,' according to a release.

Brad used his star power recently to promote Penn's Community Organized Relief Effort which has been on the ground providing cost-free COVID-19 testing and vaccinations.

Chill: The 46-year-old actor matched the top as he sported a pair of grey sweat shorts and black flip flops

Sean and Bradley have a connection that goes way back to 1999 - years before Bradley became a movie star in his own right.

When Sean was being interviewed on Inside The Actors Studio a 24-year-old Bradley was one of the students in the audience who asked him a question.

Bradley asked him about starring in the 1998 movie Hurlyburly which featured Sean as a character he had played onstage years earlier.

The young aspiring actor then sat rapt as Sean explained that 'having done the play ended up being like an intensive rehearsal period for the movie, and then the movie becomes its own process as would a movie that had a two-week rehearsal period.'

During a 2015 appearance on The Howard Stern Show Bradley recalled he was 'so nervous' before asking Sean his question.

He also noted that his segment 'never aired,' saying that 'they only aired it after, I think, I started doing well as an actor.'

Old connections: When Sean Penn was being interviewed on Inside The Actors Studio a 24-year-old Bradley was one of the students in the audience who asked him a question

About three years ago when Bradley was being feted with the American Cinematheque Award one of the speakers was Sean, per Entertainment Tonight.

Whilst at the lectern Sean took the opportunity to playfully rib the guest of honor by replaying the throwback video of the pair of them on Inside The Actors Studio.

Sean publicly gushed about Bradley after the younger actor made his directorial debut with a remake of A Star Is Born starring himself opposite Lady Gaga.

He praised Bradley for 'mentoring a brilliantly talented by very inexperienced leading lady to an astonishing performance,' while 'playing a very tortured character who's really struggling and that's challenging for an actor to do and own it organically' and also 'directing a movie at scale like this' on Jimmy Kimmel Live!.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Seal is dating a woman who used to work for him 15 years ago when he was wed to America's Got Talent star Heidi Klum.

The 58-year-old singer's new girlfriend is his former personal assistant Laura Strayer, according to a Tuesday report from PageSix.

The hitmaker and the blonde woman were seen holding hands and cuddling when in St Tropez, France for a summer vacation last week.

Lucky in love: Seal is dating former personal assistant Laura Strayer, according to a Tuesday report from PageSix; seen in France last week

Laura lived in Seal and Heidi's marital mansion in Los Angeles when she worked for the Kiss From A Rose crooner in 2006.

Laura used to work for him almost 20 years ago when he was wed to Heidi Klum

Heidi, 48, and Seal were wed from 2005 until 2014.

Strayer no longer works as a personal assistant and has a job in the 'music industry' the site added.

Oddly, Heidi also dated one of her staff members as well: after she split from Seal in 2012, she started dating her bodyguard Martin Kristen.

Seal was critical of Heidi's relationship with Martin saying publicly she had 'no class' for being with an employee.

A source told Page Six on Tuesday that Heidi now finds it odd that Seal is dating one of his former employees.

'I literally had no idea that Seal was dating Laura until I saw these photos,' a 'family source' told the site.

Back in the day: Laura lived in Seal and Heidi's marital home in Los Angeles when she worked for the Kiss From A Rose crooner in 2006. Laura used to work for him almost 20 years ago when he was wed to Heidi Klum Heidi, 48, and Seal were wed from 2005 until 2014

'Of course, we all want him to be happy — but it's definitely ironic that he's dating the help when he had such strong feelings about Heidi seeing Martin.'

While in France with Laura, Seal looked happy as he was being fed gelato from ice cream shop, Barbarac.

The pair looked to do a bit of shopping in town as she carried around a few different bags.

She is happy these days: Model Klum is wed to Tom Kaulitz; seen here at the LuisaViaRoma for Unicef event at La Certosa di San Giacomo on July 31 in Capri, Italy

He was first pictured with his new mystery blonde in February as they grabbed dinner at Nobu Malibu with what looked to be her daughter — who was also present on the trip.

In 2017 it was reported that he had split from his girlfriend Erica Packer, 43, after two years of dating.

During their relationship she had gushed over him. 'I'm very happy. It's an incredibly happy time in my life and he's a very beautiful and magical soul and I feel lucky to have met him.'

His ex Klum — with who he shares children: sons Henry, 15, Johan, 14, and daughter Lou, 11 — has also been enjoying a European vacation with her husband of two years Tom Kaulitz.

She also has Leni, 17, who Seal also legally adopted when she was five years old.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jennifer Aniston wished her ex-husband Justin Theroux a happy 50th birthday via Instagram stories on Tuesday.

In two back-to-back posts the Friends star showed the actor love. In the first one Justin sits on a forest green chair, dressed in a suit and tie with a raised eyebrow and his dog at his side.

Jen wrote 'Happy birthday JT!' with a celebrating emoji.

Still friends: Jennifer Aniston wished her ex-husband Justin Theroux a happy birthday via Instagram stories on Tuesday

They were an it couple for a while: Theroux and Aniston attend the Series Mania Festival opening night at Le Grand Rex in 2017 in Paris, France

In the second story post the actress chose a shirtless photo of her former flame wearing a Nike visor and a gold nameplate ring.

The 52-year-old star captioned the image: 'Truly one of a kind. LOVE YOU!'

Jen and Justin were married from 2015 until they announced their split in February 2018 with a statement saying they had made the decision at the end of the previous year.

Rockin' out: The 52-year-old star captioned the image: 'Truly one of a kind. LOVE YOU!'

The Morning Show actress is known for staying friendly with her exes.

The Leftovers star told Esquire, 'We can not be together and still bring each other joy and friendship. It would be a loss if we weren’t in contact, for me personally.'

Nearly a year ago she and ex Brad Pitt made headlines when they were chummy during a Zoom table read of Fast Times at Ridgemont High.

Hunky: JT was seen at a Hudson Valley, New York gas station on Sunday, pumping gas into his black sedan while sporting a 70s-style thick mustache and a Selena shirt

JT was seen at a Hudson Valley, New York gas station on Sunday, pumping gas into his black sedan while sporting a 70s-style thick mustache.

Theroux is in the Hudson Valley while currently filming a new HBO Max series titled The White House Plumbers.

Last week, it was reported that filming on the series was halted after an altercation arose between the director of the show, David Mandel, and a member of the crew.

Giving back: In an Instagram post the InStyle cover star said half her proceeds from the Friends merchandise collection would be donated to Americares

It was recently announced that Friends dropped a line of merchandise for the legendary show.

In an Instagram post the InStyle cover star said half her proceeds from the collection would be donated to Americares.

Quoting a line from the beloved show, Jennifer started her caption with, 'For the record… we were SO not on a break.'

Clapping back: The blonde beauty recently defended her decision to cut friends from her circle who have 'refused' to get their COVID-19 vaccine

The blonde beauty recently defended her decision to cut friends from her circle who have 'refused' to get their COVID-19 vaccine.

The Hollywood icon explained that she has no time for anti-vaxxers or those who 'just don't listen to the facts' when it comes to science.

The Friends star said she feels the swath of American's who aren't getting their COVID jabs are basing their stance on 'fear or propaganda.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He just celebrated his 23rd birthday.

And Shawn Mendes looked content while walking around his hometown of Toronto, Canadat with girlfriend Camila Cabello and their dog Tarzan on Tuesday.

The In My Blood singer and Havana songstress, 24, made the most of their day, first enjoying an open air lunch before grabbing coffee.

Hometown hero: Shawn Mendes showed girlfriend Camila Cabello around his hometown of Toronto, Canada on Tuesday

Shawn opted for a 90s-chic outfit, teaming light denim with a distressed black and white Sting tee shirt as he walked his Golden Retriever.

Completing the look on a retro note, he donned a chain necklace and white sneakers with high socks.

Camila looked summer chic besides him, donning a green plaid maxi-dress with gold jewelry, leather sandals and a $760 MCM 'Soft Berlin' crossbody bag.

Walk and talk: Shawn opted for a 90s-chic outfit, teaming light denim with a distressed black and white Sting tee shirt as he walked his Golden Retriever

Lunch in the sun: The In My Blood singer and Havana songstress, 24, enjoyed an open air lunch before grabbing coffee

The couple enjoyed the good weather with an outdoor lunch, which also allowed them to dote on Tarzan.

The pop star took to Instagram that same day to share a handsome snap with Tarzan.

Sitting on a stoop while sipping on coffee and donning a sleeveless NASCAR tee with his beloved dog at his side, Mendes captioned the snap: 'Home.'

Man's best friend: The pop star took to Instagram that same day to share a handsome snap with Tarzan

Home, sweet home: Sitting on a stoop while sipping on coffee and donning a sleeveless NASCAR tee, Mendes captioned the snap: 'Home'

Shawn and Camila were in Toronto after celebrating Mendes' birthday at Little Sister Lounge in Manhattan's East Village on Saturday night.

Video from the boozy bash showed a friend lifting Mendes above his head on the dance floor, as well as a birthday cake decked out with sparklers and a big marquee sign reading 'Happy bday Shawn.'

The next day Shawn teased a treat for fans, telling fans to 'pre-save' his song Summer Of Love before its yet-to-be announced release date.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Presley Gerber no longer feels 'misunderstood'.

The model son of Cindy Crawford appeared to be in the process of removing the word 'Misunderstood' from under his left eye, 18-months after getting the ink last February.

Presley, 22, tried to keep a low-profile during the outing to Malibu Country Mart, where he was joined by girlfriend Sydney Brooke.

Disappearing ink: Presley Gerber appears to have removed his 'misunderstood' face tattoo. He pictured left in Malibu on Monday and right, in March last year

Though Presley appeared fresh faced, you could still seen tattoos decorating his neck.

The second generation celeb dressed down in a black tee shirt and matching track pants.

He had a long chain around his neck and mirrored sunglasses clipped into the neckline of his tee.

After walking around maskless for a moment, the surfer decided to toss one on.

Sydney walked hand-in-hand with Presley while flashing a bit of belly in a black and white baby tee teamed with low-slung sweatpants.

Fresh faced: Presley appears to be shedding his bad boy image

Love: Sydney walked hand-in-hand with Presley

Last February Presley defiantly told off critics of his face tattoo - which was done by celeb-beloved artist JonBoy - via Instagram Live, telling viewers: 'People love to hate me.'

But the ink was conspicuously absent in a July Instagram of the star, just two months after being photographed in another post on his feed.

Laser tattoo removal can cost from $200 to $500 per treatment. The amount of sessions needed to remove a tattoo varies, depending on placement, age and other factors.

Presley is reportedly getting over his rebellious streak.

New you: The ink was conspicuously absent in a July Instagram of the star

Later haters: Last March Presley defiantly told off critics of his face tattoo - which was done by celeb-beloved artist JonBoy - via Instagram Live, telling viewers: 'People love to hate me'

Last September an insider told Us Weekly, Gerber was 'doing better' since the coronavirus pandemic forced him to stay close to home and spend time with family.

'Being able to spend so much time with close friends and family during the lockdown has been beneficial for him,' a source told Us Weekly on Thursday.

'His family was really focused on getting him the help he needed...He's been able to get his act together more.'

Still, he remains on probation through 2022 after pleading no contest to one misdemeanor DUI stemming from a January 1, 2019 arrest.

Gerber still lives in his parents' Malibu guesthouse, and he works in the kitchen of his 58-year-old father's nearby Cuban restaurant Café Habana.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hailey Bieber sent temperatures soaring in a skintight blue latex dress as she cosied up to her husband Justin for a loved-up Instagram snap.

The model, 24, flaunted her incredible figure in the sexy dress as she joined the dapper singer for the image, presumably ahead of their latest date night.

Justin took to Instagram to share several snaps from his evening with wife Hailey, including one of his own smart ensemble, consisting of a black pinstripe blazer.

All glammed up: Hailey Bieber sent temperatures soaring in a skintight blue latex dress as she cosied up to her husband Justin for a loved-up Instagram snap

Hailey, 24, looked incredible in a figure hugging baby blue dress, and she clutched designer Bottega Veneta's popular 'pouch leather clutch' of the same color.

Her pout was painted pink and her nails were the same color. She wore a gold necklace that complemented the gold hardware on the dress's straps.

Justin, who married model Hailey in September 2019, was dressed in a black pinstripe blazer with a silk, button down black shirt underneath. He brightened up the look with a colorful necklace.

Speechless: Justin took to Instagram to share several snaps from his evening with wife Hailey, including one of his own smart ensemble, consisting of a black pinstripe blazer

After posting the photo with his bride JB added two solo shots to his Instagram grid.

He posed with his hands in his pockets in front of a pillar at the Beverly Hills Hotel entrance that read 'The Beverly Hills.' He wore a bright yellow sweater, shades, and creased khakis.

The look was made complete with a fresh pair of white Air Force 1s.

Mellow yellow: Justin posed with his hands in his pockets in front of a pillar at the Beverly Hills Hotel entrance in a recent social media snap

The music artist had no words; none of the photos had captions, but that didn't stop his followers from liking the posts and leaving heaps of spirited comments.

Also posted today in the songwriter's stories was a promotion for Made in America's festival's tenth anniversary.

Justin is set to join the lineup as a feature artist at the Philadelphia event scheduled for September 3-5.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The deliciously dark satire The White Lotus will return for a second season with an all new cast.

Audiences were immediately drawn into the world of the exclusive White Lotus resort in Hawaii, rocketing the show to the top of HBO's streaming charts.

And now fans can look forward to another season of the Mike White-helmed series after season one concludes this Sunday, according to Deadline.

Return to paradise: The White Lotus will return for another season with a completely new cast of characters

The site reports that: 'Season 2 checks out of Hawaii and will follow a different group of vacationers as they book their stay at another White Lotus property and settle in temporarily amongst its inhabitants.'

White, who wrote and directed the series, was also behind the HBO cult favorite Enlightened, starring Laura Dern.

The first season of The White Lotus featured a standout ensemble cast that included Murray Bartlett, Natasha Rothwell, Connie Britton, Jennifer Coolidge, Alexandra Daddario, Jake Lacy, Brittany O'Grady and Sydney Sweeney.

Steve Zahn, Lukas Gage, Fred Hechinger and Kekoa Kekumano and Molly Shannon also appear.

The White Lotus has been a streaming star, reportedly ranking number one out of all HBO Max content.

Packed cast: The first season of The White Lotus featured a standout ensemble cast that included Murray Bartlett, Natasha Rothwell, Connie Britton (above with Steve Zahn), Jennifer Coolidge, Alexandra Daddario, Jake Lacy, Brittany O'Grady and Sydney Sweeney

Big numbers: The White Lotus has been a streaming star, reportedly ranking number one out of all HBO Max content

The show has also 'achieved consistent week-over-week growth for both premiere and digital audience, leading into the finale episode,' according to Deadline.

'Mike has once again delivered a quintessential HBO show, and it's the talk of the town,' said Francesca Orsi, EVP Programming at HBO.

'We were thrilled to hear where he wanted to go next, after closing this epic chapter in Hawaii, and can't wait to keep following him wherever he takes us.'

White acts as executive producer with David Bernad and Nick Hall while Mark Kamine serves as co-executive producer.

The White Lotus season one will conclude on Sunday, August 15 at 9pm EST.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her new Fenty perfume sold out just hours after it officially launched.

And Rihanna celebrated the impressive feat with quite the breakfast in bed.

The billionaire pop star, 33, was sitting in the lap of luxury as she enjoyed a bowl full of caviar in a slew of snaps she posted to her Instagram on Tuesday.

Lap of luxury! Rihanna nibbled on a bowl of caviar as she celebrated her sold-out new Fenty perfume

Wearing a black sweatshirt and sunglasses, the songstress gently nibbled on the delicacy which was presented to her on a silver platter.

The star had an air of cool to her as she served herself a morsel of the dish with a tiny white spoon.

'how I woke up after #FENTYPARFUM sold out this morning!!!' Rihanna captioned the decadent post.

Infused with scents such as musk, vanilla, and tangerine, Fenty Eau De Parfum sold out just hours after it officially launched on August 10th.

Nothing fancy: The caviar was served to her on a silver platter

Richie Rich! The star had an air of cool to her as she served herself a morsel of the dish with a tiny white spoon

The impressive feat comes just weeks after Rihanna celebrated another financial milestone with her new status as a billionaire.

The singer and businesswoman is worth a whopping $1.7 billion, Forbes said Wednesday, making her one of the richest woman musicians on the planet.

It is claimed the bulk of the popstar's fortune ($1.4billion/£1billion) comes not from music, but from her 50 percent stake in her acclaimed cosmetics line Fenty Beauty - a joint venture with French luxury goods conglomerate LVMH - and worth $2.8billion (£2billion) in total.

Sounds like success! The impressive feat comes just weeks after Rihanna celebrated another financial milestone with her new status as a billionaire (pictured 2019)

Her $270million (£190million) stake in the wildly successful Savage X Fenty lingerie line and her wealth from her 16 year recording career all make up the mogul's mass wealth.

Mogul Rihanna founded acclaimed beauty brand Fenty Beauty back in 2017 with a desire to 'make women everywhere (feel) included'.

It became a leader in providing diversity in the makeup industry when it first launched 40 shades for its foundation line.

Asked about her newly minted billionaire status by 247PapsTV, Rihanna said, 'God is good.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is known for putting on a sensational display daily.

And Ashley Roberts was again wowing as she stepped out in a pair of leather trousers and matching blazer after her Heart FM radio show on Tuesday.

The former Pussycat Dolls star, 39, looked sensational in the leather look as she braved the wet weather in London, while cutting a stylish figure in the all-black ensemble which highlighted her incredible figure.

Chic: Ashley Roberts, 39, wowed in a pair of leather trousers and a matching blazer as she left her Heart FM radio show at Global Studios, London, on Tuesday

Ashley donned a pair of straight-leg leather trousers from Because Of Alice, retailing at £85, for her shift on the radio and tucked a black T-shirt into the waistline.

She topped off the standout look with a matching black leather boyfriend blazer - costing £95 - which hung off her shoulders.

To accesorise the look she wore a pair of rectangle sunglasses, carried a small black crocodile-effect handbag and wore some black pointed high heels.

The only colour in her look came from her bright blue nails which were perfectly manicured.

Stylish: The former Pussycat Dolls star rocked the leather look as she braved the wet weather in the capital

Fashionable: Ashley donned a pair of straight-leg leather trousers from Because of Alice and tucked a black T-shirt into the waistline

It comes after it was revealed that her ex Giovanni Pernice is said to be moving 'really quickly' with new girlfriend Love Island star Maura Higgins.

Ashley and Giovanni split in January last year after one year of dating.

He announced the news on Twitter, writing: ''Ashley and I have made the decision to separate as a couple. We remain friends and wish each other well for the future'.

Statement look: Ashley topped off the standout look with a matching black leather boyfriend blazer which hung off her shoulders

Maura and Giovanni were pictured for the first time enjoying a night out in a drag bar last week in Blackpool – where the Italian dancer is performing in a new show.

MailOnline revealed on Sunday that Giovanni and Maura, both 30, have spent several nights at a hotel in the bucket and spade resort.

And he’s introduced her to the cast and crew of the Him And Me show he’s starring in with new Strictly judge, Anton Du Beke.

All-black look: To accesorise the outfit Ashley, who shared a glimpse of her look on Instagram, wore a pair of rectangle sunglasses, carried a small black crocodile-effect handbag and some black pointed high heels

A source said: 'Gio and Maura are very much a couple. Everyone know he’s played the field in the past but he is serious about Maura. He’s smitten with her, they’ve become close really quickly and are spending a lot of time together in Blackpool.

'She’s become pals with all of the cast and crew of Him and Me too and they think she’s great. Maura has also met Anton and they got on brilliantly.'

The pair went public with their love for the first time last week at Sapphires, Blackpool's Premier Drag Cabaret Show Bar.

Italian hunk Giovanni, who was last year paired with Good Morning Britain's Ranvir Singh on Strictly, treated Maura to some of the legendary dance skills.

Happier times: It comes after it was revealed that her ex Giovanni Pernice is said to be moving 'really quickly' with new girlfriend Love Island star Maura Higgins (Ashley and Giovanni. pictured in April 2019)

An onlooker who saw them in Blackpool on Thursday night said: “They turned up with a large group of friends. They’d booked a VIP area of the venue to themselves and everyone was having a good time, dancing and singing.

'Maura and Giovanni joined in. They had clearly bubbled together as they were together all night and looked totally smitten with each other.

'They spent about an hour away from the group playing pool. At one point they appeared to be having a bit of a row but it couldn’t have been that serious because they left together and looked very much like a couple.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Coronation Street stars Helen Worth (who plays Gail Platt), Bill Roache (Ken Barlow) and Rula Lenska (Claudia Colby) were seen in funeral scenes in Manchester on Wednesday, sparking speculation that Sue Nicholls' iconic character Audrey Roberts has died.

Sue's character Audrey is not only mother to Helen's Gail, but shares a close friendship with Bill's character Ken and has had a long-term rivalry with 'best frenemy' Claudia, played by Rula, who recently returned after an 18 month break - could the death of an old friend have drawn her back to the cobbles?

Also shooting funeral scenes mid-week were Daniel Brocklebank (Billy Mayhew), Gareth Pierce (Gavin Moss), Tony Maudsley (George Shuttleworth) and Patti Clare (Mary Taylor). Daniel was in character as priest Billy and wearing a clerical collar, while Gareth and Tony were dressed in smart black suits and sunglasses.

Speculation: Coronation Street stars Helen Worth, Bill Roache and Rula Lenska were seen in funeral scenes in Manchester on Wednesday, sparking speculation that Sue Nicholls' iconic character Audrey Roberts has died

Smart: Bill was also dressed in smart funeral attire consisting of a crisp shirt, suit bottoms, a tie and sunglasses

Bill was also dressed in smart funeral attire consisting of a crisp shirt, suit bottoms, a tie and sunglasses, while Patti filmed scenes in both a floaty khaki dress and a long white frock.

Arriving for a day of filming in jeans and a plaid shirt, Helen was sporting a face mask and carrying a large shopping bag before getting into character.

Standing next to her character's former flame on a doorstep, Rula appeared to be wearing pyjamas and beamed from ear to ear between scenes, suggesting she was delighted to be filming again after such a long break.

It was announced last month that Rula would return to the soap, and viewers last saw her in action in April 2020 when the loud and cheerful redhead decided to stay at Stillwaters' retirement village despite Bill's Ken returning back to Weatherfield.

Downcast: Helen appeared downcast with her arms folded across her chest while acting

Arrival: Arriving for a day of filming in jeans and a plaid shirt, Helen was sporting a face mask and carrying a large shopping bag before getting into character

Beaming: Standing next to her character's former flame on a doorstep, Rula appeared to be wearing pyjamas and beamed from ear to ear between scenes

Return: It was announced last month that Rula would return to the soap, and viewers last saw her in action in April 2020

It comes after the cast and crew of Coronation Street and Emmerdale were warned to stick to precautions amid an 'alarming number' of Covid cases on both shows.

In July, Corrie returned to location filming for the first time in 14 months.

Masks were worn between takes and social distancing was observed, and cast members had to do their own make-up.

Dapper: Long-time Corrie favourite Bill looked dapper on set in the middle of the week

Change of outfit: When actor Bill arrived on the Manchester set he was wearing casual trousers and trainers

Decisions: In April, Rula's Claudia decided to stay at Stillwaters' retirement village despite Bill's Ken returning back to Weatherfield

Bosses halted filming on both shows for two weeks in January 'as a consequence of the coronavirus pandemic'.

They made the decision to stop shooting on Corrie so the cast and crew could have a short break due to the pressures of filming during the coronavirus crisis.

ITV bosses suspended filming on Emmerdale after a production team member contracted COVID-19.

Cast: Also shooting funeral scenes mid-week was Daniel Brocklebank (Billy Mayhew) who was wearing his character's priest's collar

Head to toe: Tony Maudsley (George Shuttleworth) was also dressed smartly from head to toe

Smart: Actor Gareth Pierce (Gavin Moss) looked smart as he strolled around set wearing a pinstripe suit

An ITV spokesperson told MailOnline at the time: 'Coronation Street will pause filming from next Monday, 25 January for two weeks to undertake some rewriting of stories and scripts as a consequence of the coronavirus pandemic.

'We will also be taking the opportunity to review all health and safety requirements to ensure we continue to provide a safe working environment for the cast, crew and production team.

'This pause in filming won't affect our ability to deliver six episodes of Coronation Street each week.'

Floaty: Patti Clare (Mary Taylor) was first seen on set wearing a floaty khaki dress

Quick change: Patti then filmed scenes in a white, shin-skimming frock
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Coronation Street is set to be rocked by a tense murder trial following the death of Seb Franklin (played by Harry Visinoni), after he was attacked and later died in hospital.

And Millie Gibson, who plays Kelly Neelan in the ITV soap, was joined by her on-screen mother Kel Allen, who plays Laura Neelan, as they filmed outside a Manchester courthouse on Tuesday.

Millie, 17, whose character is set to learn whether she'll be wrongfully imprisoned for Seb's death, cut a casual figure in a white top which she paired with navy tie-dyed trousers.

Filming: Millie Gibson, who plays Kelly Neelan, cut a stylish figure as she arrived to film courtroom scenes for Coronation Street in Manchester on Tuesday

Millie wore her platinum blonde locks in a poker straight style while she also sported a pair of sunglasses for the scene.

Kel sported a black printed T-shirt for the day along with a pair of dark grey jeans while she cinched her waist with a belt.

Joining the ladies on set was Maximus Evans who plays the killer Corey Brent.

The trio all looked in good spirits as they were seen laughing outside the courthouse in between takes.

Co-star: She was joined by her on-screen mother Kel Allen, who plays Laura Neelan

Outfit: Millie cut a casual figure for the day in a white top which she paired with navy patterned trousers

Kelly and her mother have long had a toxic relationship with Laura often leaving her daughter to fend for herself while prioritising her new boyfriend.

However, Laura's neglect came back to haunt her this week as she was arrested on suspicion of child cruelty after attempting to sell Kelly's story to the press.

Tensions are rising on Coronation Street, with fans soon set to see Seb's murder trial play out onscreen.

His death aired on the soap in May as part of a brutal assault storyline which saw Seb and girlfriend Nina Lucas (played by Mollie Gallagher) brutally attacked and hospitalised.

On location: Joining the ladies on set was Maximus Evans who plays the killer Corey Brent

Fun: The trio all looked in good spirits as they were seen laughing outside the courthouse in between takes

Tension: Kelly and Laura have long had a toxic relationship with Laura often leaving her daughter to fend for herself while prioritising her new boyfriend over the teenager

Production: Kel shared a joke with her co-stars as the cast and crew waited to film

A gang of thugs were responsible for the murder, including Corey.

Viewers watched on as Kelly was arrested and locked up as she was present at the violent scenes.

She was seen assaulting Nina, but it's still not known how heavily involved she was in the attack.

Laid back: Millie was seen donning an 'M' necklace between takes while she also sported a pair of black sandals

Trial: Also on set was actress Georgia Taylor who portrays Toyah Battersby

Tense: Coronation Street is set to be rocked by a tense murder trial following the death of Seb Franklin (played by Harry Visinoni), after he was attacked and later died in hospital

Not wanting her to take the fall for the murder, Imran Habeeb (played by Charlie de Melo) is set to defend Kelly - his foster daughter - in the pivotal trial.

It's also been teased that upcoming episodes will include flashbacks from the assault as actor Harry was seen back on set and in character as Seb, earlier this month.

Fans won't have long to wait until the all-important trial plays out, with scenes expected to hit the soap in August.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Romance is brewing between Zack Hudson (James Farrar) and Nancy Carter (Maddy Hill) on EastEnders as the pair get closer in scenes set to air this Thursday.

The pair have been spending more time together as Zack has helped Nancy through the next stages of her recovery from a horror car crash earlier this month.

Nancy was run over by her half sister Frankie (Rose Ayling-Ellis) when she was distracted during a driving lesson and was left hospitalised.

Flirting: Romance is brewing between Zack Hudson (James Farrar) and Nancy Carter (Maddy Hill) on EastEnders as the pair get closer in scenes set to air this Thursday

But what Nancy doesn't know is that her new crush was the cause of her accident as he drunkenly distracted Frankie from the road when the collision occurred.

In the new images released by the BBC of the upcoming scenes, Nancy could be seen looking coyly at Zack as they chatted together on the pavement in Walford.

Zack then affectionately took Nancy's hand in support as she clutched her chest in physical distress.

After Nancy was run over by Frankie, Zack lied to the police about what happened and how it led to Nancy getting injured.

Plot: The pair have been spending more time together as Zack has helped Nancy through the next stages of her recovery from being run over by her half sister Frankie earlier this month

It's unclear whether Zack's feelings for Nancy are genuine or whether he is overcome with guilt over the hit and run.

And in scenes yet to air, Nancy's dad Mick (Danny Dyer) storms into the gym and corners Zack as he demands to know his intentions with his daughter.

In his panic, Zack confesses that Sharon Watts (Letitia Dean) was also involved in Nancy's accident but keeps quiet about himself.

Protective: In the upcoming episode, Nancy's dad Mick (Danny Dyer) storms into the gym and corners Zack as he demands to know his intentions with his daughter

James spoke with Digital Spy about the way in which Zack and Frankie have been dealing with the hit-and-run.

He reflected: 'When characters do things that you wouldn't personally do, it's hard to have empathy for them.

'Zack, in his reaction to the crash, certainly does something that as James I would not do.

'That is why he struggles and that is why it's hard to play that – but then really, how often do you run somebody over? And how do you make decisions on the back of that?'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She revealed earlier this week that she enjoys sunbathing in the nude.

But Amanda Holden kept her phenomenal figure under wraps on Tuesday as she made her way through London after finishing a shift at Heart Radio.

The 51-year-old Britain's Got Talent judge was spotted wearing a black leather jacket over a brown co-ord as she made her way through the capital.

Out and about: Amanda Holden looked stylish in a brown co-ord and cropped leather jacket as she left the Heart Radio studios in London on Tuesday

Amanda's two piece set from Fabiana Filippi featured a top with a V-shaped neckline and matching high waisted trousers that cinched in at her slender waist.

She teamed the garment with a leather jacket which featured short sleeves and matched the black handbag she was also seen carrying.

On her feet, Amanda wore a pair of black heels, and she accessorised her ensemble with large square sunglasses, a hooped gold bangle and a chunky gold necklace.

Casual: The 51-year-old Britain's Got Talent judge was spotted with her hand in her pocket as she made her way through the capital in her chic ensemble

Stylish: Amanda's two piece set from Fabiana Filippi featured a top with a V-shaped neckline and matching high waisted trousers that cinched in at her slender waist

Amanda's outing comes after she revealed she loves to sunbathe nude on holiday.

Speaking on Alan Carr's Life's A Beach holiday podcast, Amanda branded herself a 'nudist' and admitted she never wears a bikini when vacationing.

She also stressed that she 'doesn't mix' with other nudists but has no problem baring all in her own private villa.

The star said: 'I'm a nudist. I never wear a bikini on holiday. But I wouldn't mix with other nudists. There's a difference. I'd never get my noonie out in public. In a private villa, yes.'

Layering up: She teamed the garment with a leather jacket which featured short sleeves and matched the black handbag she was also seen carrying

Accessories: On her feet, Amanda wore a pair of black heels, and she accessorised her ensemble with large square sunglasses, a hooped gold bangle and a chunky gold necklace

Elsewhere in the podcast, Amanda revealed that she was encouraged to steal food when she was a child as her family struggled financially while on holiday.

The star recalled a time when her mum Judith told her and sister Debbie to swipe cereal from the breakfast queue as they'd run out of money to eat.

Looking back on the moment, Amanda, who is now a successful TV, music and radio star, told how her mother informed her if she wanted any breakfast 'you'll have to steal it.'

Discussing the moment with Alan, Amanda said: 'We'd spent all our money on holiday and we came back on a ferry and my mum told me to go and nick milk and Sugar Puffs from the breakfast queue.

'She said to me, "Amanda if you want any breakfast you'll have to steal it"'.

The Heart FM radio star then joked: 'My mum will kill me for admitting this.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tahar Rahim, star of The Serpent — one of the BBC's most popular dramas ever — has found a way to make crime pay.

He will portray one of the drug kingpins behind the French connection, an underworld system that put dangerous narcotics on to American streets.

The untitled television series will be about Corsican gangsters Antoine and Barthelemy Guerini, known as the Guerini Brothers.

Tahar Rahim (pictured at Cannes Film Festival) will portray a drug kingpin behind the French connection, an underworld system that put dangerous narcotics on to American streets

The untitled television series will be about Corsican gangsters Antoine and Barthelemy Guerini. Pictured: Tahar Rahim during the opening ceremony of Cannes Film Festival

'They ruled the Marseilles drug trade after the war and into the 1960s and 1970s,' Rahim told me in Cannes, where he is on the Film Festival jury led by Spike Lee.

The screenplay for the show is still being written, the 40-year-old Paris-based star said.

'I will portray one of them — but I cannot tell you which one until we are ready. We're at such an early stage and we do not plan to film until next year.'

He stressed that it's a different story to the one told in 1971 thriller The French Connection, about two New York cops who break up an international drug-smuggling operation.

In The Serpent, Rahim (pictured with Jenna Louise Coleman) portrayed Charles Sobhraj, a serial killer, fraudster and thief who preyed on hippies travelling through Asia in the 1970s

Rahim's breakthrough came in Jacques Audiard's powerful movie A Prophet (pictured), a hit at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival

The movie won five Oscars, including best actor for Gene Hackman and best picture, and remains a stunning piece of film-making (both it and its equally impressive sequel are on Disney+).

Rahim said that his series, which is being backed by Netflix, will explore how the Guerini brothers fought for the Resistance during the Nazi occupation of France.

'Some of their wartime comrades became elected leaders in Marseilles,' he said.

The brothers leveraged those alliances, which helped them gain control of the Marseilles dockyards, where officials turned a blind eye to their activities shipping heroin to the United States.

In The Serpent, Rahim portrayed Charles Sobhraj, a serial killer, fraudster and thief who preyed on hippies travelling through Asia in the 1970s.

Rahim also won acclaim for his performance in Kevin Macdonald's film The Mauritanian, with Jodie Foster (both pictured) starring as his lawyer

The Mauritanian followed the true story of a prisoner called Mohamedou Ould Slahi, who was held at Guantanamo Bay for 14 years

The actor told me he enjoyed working with 'my partner in crime' Jenna Coleman.

Rahim also won acclaim for his performance in Kevin Macdonald's film The Mauritanian, the true story of a prisoner held at Guantanamo Bay for 14 years (with Jodie Foster as his lawyer).

His breakthrough came in Jacques Audiard's powerful movie A Prophet, a hit at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival.

SHAZAM! BUSY HELEN TAKES A SUPERHERO BREAK TO FLY IN

Helen Mirren has been taking the red-carpeted steps at the nightly Cannes Film Festival premieres, in the Grand Theatre Lumiere, at a run. The steeper the stairs, the faster her pace.

'I say 'Action!' in my head and just keep going — and going — till I reach the top,' Mirren joked, when I mentioned this.

The actress has been involved in several projects during the pandemic, including wartime drama White Bird: A Wonder Story, opposite Gillian Anderson.

It was shot in the Czech Republic for director Marc Forster.

Helen Mirren (pictured) has been taking the red-carpeted steps at the nightly Cannes Film Festival premieres, in the Grand Theatre Lumiere, at a run

Mirren told me she'd taken a break from shooting Shazam! Fury Of The Gods in the States in order to see films at the festival with her director husband Taylor Hackford.

I liked the first Shazam! movie that Warner Bros released in 2019 — it was pure popcorn fun. Mirren chuckled and said: 'It is fun. And I enjoy working with a young company.'

Another of her films, The Duke, in which she starred with Jim Broadbent, was shown at last year's Venice Film Festival. I visited the set in Leeds when director Roger Michell was shooting it back in 2019.

It's based on a true story about a portrait of the Duke of Wellington that was stolen from the National Portrait Gallery in the 1960s.

It's an utterly delightful picture; beautifully observant of Great British down-to-earth people.

Film distributor Pathe were smart to hang on to it and wait for a UK cinema release on September 3.

Mirren (pictured) said she'd taken a break from shooting Shazam! Fury Of The Gods in the States in order to see films at the festival with her director husband Taylor Hackford

Mirren said that The Duke would have an American gala at the Telluride Film Festival, way up in the Rocky Mountains in Colorado, also in early September.

The Oscar-winning actress, who turns 76 later this month, said she hasn't visited England since before the pandemic.

In fact, I'm pretty certain on that occasion we had tea together in Mayfair. As you do.

'I do miss family, and the theatre,' she said. She wants to return to the stage but is not sure about the timing. 'I'd love to do a 30-minute play!' she said, only half joking.

Seeing the look on my face, she added: 'OK then. I'd love to do a 60-minute play.' The great dame would be luminous, no matter how long she spent on the boards.

SOPHIE GOES TO TOWN IN A WELL-CUT GOWN...

French actress Sophie Marceau told me the secret of Gallic glamour is to keep it simple and 'not overthink it'.

She said: 'It's not really a secret, but simplicity is the key.' That, and a well- cut gown.

French actress Sophie Marceau (pictured) graced the red carpet at the Cannes Film Festival for the world premiere of Francois Ozon's film Everything Went Fine

Ms Marceau graced the red carpet at the Cannes Film Festival for the world premiere of Francois Ozon's film Everything Went Fine, in which she plays the daughter of a wealthy aesthete (Andre Dussollier) who, after suffering a stroke, asks her to help him end his life.

After seeing The Father, I have found it very difficult to sit through movies about death.

But Marceau, who has always been much more than 007 arm candy (opposite Pierce Brosnan in The World Is Not Enough) or the token femme in action films (Mel Gibson's Braveheart) finds touches of humour in the sadness, with the help of some gentle coaxing from Ozon.

She and her co-stars Dussollier and Geraldine Pailhas (who plays her sister) allow welcome shafts of light to permeate the darkness — so much so that I laughed out loud a few times at some of the tart exchanges between the family members.

Oh, and there's a scene- stealing moment when Charlotte Rampling, playing the estranged wife, visits her husband in hospital. Her lip curls as she mutters scornfully 'your father doesn't look that ill'.

Festival favourites such as Isabelle Huppert and Diane Kruger (pictured) supported a French film that speaks a language we all understand when it comes to frank honesty

Within the context of the film, that tells you all you need to know about that relationship.

It was lovely to see festival favourites such as Isabelle Huppert and Diane Kruger supporting a French film that speaks a language we all understand when it comes to frank honesty and common sense.

WATCH OUT FOR

Todd Haynes, who screened his excellent documentary Velvet Underground, about the cultural forces that brought together Lou Reed, John Cale, Maureen Tucker and all of Andy Warhol's Factory posse.

It's so insightful — and some of the comments about the counter-culture are brutal. I was never a devotee of the Velvet Underground (though I knew some of their music), so a lot of what Haynes and his associates uncover is a revelation. Plus, I like folk reflecting on their art from a distance.

It's great to see Haynes working with long-time producer Christine Vachon (the first time I spotted Vachon's credit on a movie was for Superstar, the short film Haynes made in 1988 about Karen Carpenter). Velvet Underground will be streamed on Apple TV+.

Pedro Almodovar, who presented Jodie Foster with an honorary Palme d'Or this week.

The director flew in from Spain, where he is editing his latest film, Parallel Mothers.

'It's about mothers and their babies that are born on the same day,' the legendary filmmaker told me.

Pedro Almodovar (pictured), presented Jodie Foster with an honorary Palme d'Or this week. The director flew in from Spain, where he is editing his latest film, Parallel Mothers

He said the film was shot during the pandemic. 'We all wore masks. A lot of masks.' But masks won't feature in the actual movie which stars Almodovar's muse Penelope Cruz. Milena Smit, Aitana Sanchez-Gijon and Rossy de Palma also have key roles in the picture, which the director said he hopes to finish by December.

Val — another must-see documentary — made from thousands of video tapes the screen artist Val Kilmer shot at auditions, on sets or at home with his family.

Kilmer was too ill (after treatment for throat cancer) to travel to Cannes, so his children from his marriage to Joanne Whalley, Mercedes and Jack (who narrates his father's words), presented the film at the festival. It will be on Amazon Prime next month.

Kilmer and I clashed a couple of times over the years regarding a few of the duds he made (he made some fab movies, too!). But I was very moved by Val.

It's a cautionary tale for up-and-coming actors who believe the baloney about them being a star at the age of 21. Or was it 12?

LUMA, STAR OF HER OWN MOO-VIE

Andrea Arnold's captivating BBC Film, Cow, film follows Luma (pictured), a British milking cow, through two births and the daily grind of what a poor cow has to do for her supper

Spending childhood summers at my uncle's dairy farm in Okehampton, Devon, allowed me, I think, to 'udder-stand' and appreciate the full power of Andrea Arnold's captivating BBC Film, Cow, which had a special gala in Cannes yesterday.

The film follows Luma (aka No 29), a British milking cow, through two births and the daily grind of what a poor cow has to do for her supper.

The wider point is: what are cows for? And are they being treated right?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stillwater (15)

Verdict: Lacking in fizz

Rating:

The Last Letter From Your Lover (12A)

Verdict: Unconvincing, full stop

Rating:

All films fall broadly into one of three categories: they are either more than, equal to, or less than the sum of their parts. Stillwater belongs squarely in that third group.

It boasts Hollywood's most reliable leading man, in the solid form of Matt Damon. As female lead, it has Camille Cottin, the beguiling French actress who will be familiar to fans of the glorious Netflix series Call My Agent!.

The director and co-writer is Tom McCarthy, whose splendid 2015 film Spotlight was nominated for six Academy Awards and won two, including Best Picture.

And it is inspired by the compelling story of Amanda Knox, the American student convicted of murdering her British flatmate Meredith Kercher in Italy in 2007, but later exonerated.

All that is more than enough to get expectations bubbling, but Stillwater works only in fits and starts. It is further blighted by insistently jaunty piano music that undermines and cheapens the drama.

Matt Damon stars as 'Bill' in director Tom McCarthy's 'Stillwater'. All films fall broadly into one of three categories: they are either more than, equal to, or less than the sum of their parts. Stillwater, BRIAN VINER writes, belongs squarely in that third group

Damon plays Bill Baker, a God-fearing, gun-owning former oil-rig worker with a baseball cap apparently stitched into place.

He lives in the blue-collar town of Stillwater, Texas, but is now working on construction sites to fund his regular trips to Marseille, where his daughter Alison (Abigail Breslin) is serving a nine-year sentence for killing her French-Arab girlfriend. Alison insists she was wrongfully convicted; Bill is doing all he can to help her prove her innocence.

This situation is complicated by their uneasy relationship. Bill seems to us like a pretty decent, hard-working, well-meaning cove, but to Alison he's serially messed-up and feckless, evidently on account of chronic past misdeeds. Yet there is no sign of these misdeeds, even in flashback. So we're being asked to believe in something when all evidence is to the contrary, a narrative hump that the film never really overcomes.

Then, with the French lawyers having washed their hands of Alison's case, Bill befriends a local actress called Virginie (Cottin).

This unlocks a whole different set of narrative problems as the picture changes tone as jarringly as Chopin giving way to Scott Joplin, seeming almost to forget about the imprisoned daughter while a laughably unlikely romance blossoms between the Texan roughneck and the sexy French woman.

(L to R) Camille Cottin as 'Virginie', Matt Damon as 'Bill' and Lilou Siauvaud as 'Maya' in Stillwater

Of course, it's Damon and Cottin, so it's hardly a surprise to find them falling for each other, and their bond is cemented by Virginie's cutesy eight-year-old daughter Maya.

She thinks Bill is just terrific, enabling a clunkily obvious contrast with Alison, who thinks he's a jerk.

Oh yes, Alison. It turns out Bill hasn't forgotten about her, because when he lovingly takes Maya to see her beloved Olympique de Marseille football team, he sets eyes in the enormous crowd on the one man who seems to hold the key to the whole case.

This slab of cinematic serendipity cues another tonal lurch as Bill goes violently rogue, but I'll say no more, except to reiterate that Stillwater is a whirlpool of improbable plot twists, dramatic misjudgments and silly music.

Soulful strings and poignant piano are on overtime again in The Last Letter From Your Lover, Augustine Frizzell's soppy adaptation of the bestselling Jojo Moyes novel.

The story is set across two time frames, with a modern-day journalist, Ellie (Felicity Jones), prompted by some swooningly passionate letters she finds in a dusty newspaper archive, obsessively unearthing the details of a doomed mid-1960s love affair.

Our love birds are Jennifer (Shailene Woodley), an American socialite stuck in a dreary but well-resourced marriage to Laurence, a lavishly rich but one-dimensionally horrid industrialist (Joe Alwyn), and Anthony (Callum Turner), a foreign correspondent sent to the South of France to interview Laurence, who is conveniently called away on business for as long as it takes for him and Jennifer to fall hopelessly in love.

The Last Letter From Your Lover, Augustine Frizzell's soppy adaptation of the bestselling Jojo Moyes novel, is set across two time frames, with a modern-day journalist, Ellie (Felicity Jones, pictured left), prompted by some swooningly passionate letters she finds in a dusty newspaper archive, obsessively unearthing the details of a doomed mid-1960s love affair

Improbabilities, large and small, abound. They spend a casual Riviera afternoon on a seemingly unskippered yacht, drifting blissfully to within sight of Corsica. That's the kind of drifting that requires ferocious jet propulsion, but never mind.

More problematic is the sense, compounded by the watery chemistry between Woodley and Turner, that Jennifer has embraced infidelity mainly to relieve crushing boredom.

In the meantime, the story contrives an awkward parallel romance between Ellie and Rory (Nabhaan Rizwan), the shy archivist helping her.

There are duly some predictable nods to the differences between billets-doux then and now (how many kisses should you add to a text message, that sort of thing).

But the script by Nick Payne and Esta Spalding makes humour an exclusively modern phenomenon. Their past isn't just a foreign country, it's a cripplingly earnest foreign country.

Frizzell does her best with all this, and it's all jolly nice on the eye (even if she's a little over-fond of the overhead shot, as if she's only just discovered the drone camera), but as befits a film in which amnesia following a road accident is a key plot device, it is distinctly forgettable, the quicker the better.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Off The Rails (15)

Rating:

Verdict: Well-timed, feel good movie

The World To Come (15)

Rating:

Verdict: Meticulous period romance

Was there ever a film more perfectly timed than Off The Rails, in which three middle-aged women, and a teenage girl, take an Interrail trip through Europe, burying old hatchets and igniting new romances?

In this staycation summer, in which holiday destinations across the Channel have never seemed so far away, here are four women travelling through France, Spain and Italy, happily ignorant of quarantine regulations, enviably free of masks. It’s just the escapism we need, and the accompaniment of majestic Blondie tracks propels those of us of a certain age right back in time, as well as sideways across the continent.

Mind you, it’s a death that has sent them on their way, and their trip is also bedevilled by a long-ago love rivalry, not to mention time-of-life issues. ‘Of the 32 symptoms of the menopause, I have 34,’ says Liz (Sally Phillips, who gets all the best lines).

Musing on her long, monogamous marriage, Liz equates it to ‘signing a contract to say you’ll only eat ready-salted crisps for the rest of your life. I mean, what about salt and vinegar? Prawn cocktail?’

Scene from Off The Rails, which offers 'just the escapism we need', according to Brian Viner

The feel-good Off The Rails film follows four women as they go interrailing through Europe

As it turns out, their journey could hardly be more flavoursome. Their final destination is Palma Cathedral in Majorca where, at a specific time on a particular day, sunlight streams through a coloured-glass window at such an angle that it creates a magical light effect. This rather reminded me of another feelgood film with a light show, 1983’s

Local Hero, and indeed there’s a further connection in the slender form of Jenny Seagrove, whose character in Bill Forsyth’s eternal charmer was so young and so carefree.

Here she plays the uptight and impecunious Kate, who’s no ray of sunshine, with a lifetime of regrets and near-misses behind her. Nothing makes you reflect on the passing of your own decades quite like the movies.

But, as I say, this is a feel-good picture, even though it begins with news that cancer has prematurely claimed the life of Anna, giving us a short burst of the glorious Judi Dench, playing her heartbroken old mum.

Anna has left four rail tickets, decreeing from beyond the grave that her three old pals will travel to Palma with her 18-year-old daughter Maddie (Elizabeth Dormer-Phillips).

The other friend is Cassie, exuberantly played by Kelly Preston. This yields another, more poignant case of life and art colliding, because Preston, the wife of John Travolta, died last summer of breast cancer.

Anyway, off go the quartet through Europe; and Jules Williamson’s film, with a screenplay by Jordan Waller, nicely balances broad comic misadventures with grown-up anxieties and recriminations, as well as romantic attachment (one falls for Franco Nero’s urbane Italian mayor, another for Ben Miller’s amiable British trou- badour). There’s a lot packed into this appealing film’s concise running time. It’s like a 94-minute-long holiday.

Katherine Waterson and Vanessa Kirby in passionate moment in The World To Come, set in rural 1850s America

Female friendship is tackled in a strikingly different way in The World To Come, set in rural America in the 1850s, where gloomy Abigail (Katherine Waterston) is mourning a child and going through the motions of frontier life with her taciturn farmer husband (Casey Affleck).

The narrative drive is provided by Abigail’s diary: ‘With little pride and less hope we begin the new year…’ Then, a new neighbour arrives on the other side of the hill.

This is the outgoing, ravishing Tallie (Vanessa Kirby), who is also shackled to a puritanical husband, but unlike Abigail has the beans to stand up to him.

Tallie brings light to Abigail’s bleakness as each gives the other what they don’t get from their husbands: empathy, conversation, fun.

Soon, they add what they don’t give their husbands: sexual passion.

Meticulously directed by Mona Fastvold, and written with a perfect ear for 19th-century language by Ron Hansen and Jim Shepard, this is another in what has recently become practically a genre in its own right: the lesbian period drama.

But it deserves to sit alongside the best of the others, which include The Favourite, Ammonite, and Portrait Of A Lady On Fire.

Riders of Justice (15)

Rating:

Verdict: Revenge thriller with laughs

Riders Of Justice is a terrific Danish-language film in which Markus, a soldier (played by the splendid Mads Mikkelsen), returns home on compassionate leave after his wife is killed in a train ‘accident’.

Then a nerdy bunch of algorithm experts, one of whom was on the same train, convince him that his wife was actually ‘collateral damage’ in an assassination by a motorbike gang, the eponymous Riders Of Justice.

Mads Mikkelsen in the 'revenge thriller' Riders of Justice

In plotting vengeance, they form an unlikely alliance — the hot-headed military man and the nerds — while also navigating the strained relationship between Markus and his adolescent daughter.

None of this can be called a comedy, exactly, but it is genuinely hilarious in parts and captivating throughout.

Old (15)

Rating:

Verdict: Won't age well

This extravagantly silly film teeters precariously on the premise that a bunch of holidaymakers at a swanky tropical island hotel end up on a secluded beach where really weird stuff happens.

To be precise, they start ageing uncontrollably. I know we all age uncontrollably, but this lot age like the clappers… up to 50 years in a day. It’s meant to be chilling and creepy, but honestly, it’s a hoot.

The normally reliable Rufus Sewell plays a surgeon who loses his mind, becomes a homicidal maniac, then dies in a convulsion of terrible acting.

Vicky Krieps, so splendid opposite Daniel Day-Lewis in Phantom Thread (2017), looks understandably startled when her two young children turn into teenagers literally while her back is turned, but five minutes later has pretty much come to terms with it. ‘It’s probably a virus,’ she says, just like anyone would if their six-year-old cutie-pie suddenly sprouted pubic hair and a Bramley of an Adam’s apple.

Meanwhile, a little girl grows up, conceives a baby and gives birth before anyone has time to put up a deckchair.

So this really is a beach where weird stuff happens. It turns good actors into bad, and a writer-director with one cast-iron classic behind him, namely M Night Shyamalan (The Sixth Sense), into a floundering hack.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mothering Sunday

Verdict: Sad, gorgeous and ineffably English

Rating:

For two hours in Cannes last weekend, being English felt like a real privilege. I'm not referring to a certain football match, at the conclusion of which this French Riviera town felt like a suburb of Turin, such was the dancing in bars and parping of horns.

No, I mean the premiere of Mothering Sunday, a film so ineffably English that it's hard to imagine anyone else truly grasping all its nuances.

As if to prove it, a German critic told me, minus a fierce expletive, that she found it extremely boring. It might be as well that it is not in competition for the prestigious Palme d'Or. But I adored it.

An adaptation of Graham Swift's 2016 novel, the story unfolds, mostly, on Mother's Day in 1924.

Mothering Sunday is a film so ineffably English that it's hard to imagine anyone else truly grasping all its nuances

Jane Fairchild (charmingly played by the Australian actress Odessa Young) is a maid at the handsome Home Counties house of the Nivens (Colin Firth and Olivia Colman), over whom the long shadow of the Great War still falls.

They, like their friends the Sheringhams, lost sons on the Western Front.

Firth performs his kindly, repressed, upper-class Englishman act to absolute perfection.

But in a way Colman is the cleverer piece of casting. We're so used to that toothy dazzler of hers, a smile that could light up a dark night, that not to see it at all is faintly perturbing.

Mrs Niven, it emerges, was a pile of fun in the old days. But now she radiates nothing except misery and irascibility, and her daily trigger is her mild husband's attempted bonhomie: 'Godfrey, for goodness' sake!' she snaps, her fuse shortened by grief. So much for the Jazz Age.

So often in the movies, the 1920s roar. Here they weep.

Meanwhile, and here's the nub of the story, Jane is having a passionate affair with the Sheringhams' only surviving son, Paul (Josh O'Connor), a law student who is about to marry the imperious daughter of a third set of friends, the Hobdays.

On an unseasonally warm Mothering Sunday, when nice Mr Niven gives Jane the day off, she cycles over to the Sheringhams' house for a tryst with Paul, before he has to motor down to Henley for a champagne lunch and stilted conversation.

His parents are waiting for him on the banks of the Thames, with their dear friends, the Nivens and Hobdays — and Paul's moody fiancee.

Alice Birch's beautifully crafted screenplay moves us back and forth through time, with a cameo for Glenda Jackson as the elderly Jane Fairchild.

By the time we get to Jane in her dotage, we know just how unlucky she has been in love, but also what a success she has made of her professional life.

Jane Fairchild (charmingly played by the Australian actress Odessa Young) is a maid at the handsome Home Counties house of the Nivens (Colin Firth and Olivia Colman), over whom the long shadow of the Great War still falls

A foundling, raised in an orphanage, she went into service at 14, then left the Nivens' employ to work in a bookshop and eventually became a feted writer.

These flashes back and forward gradually fill in the story; it's like doing a really pleasurable jigsaw.

But the spiritual heart of the film is when Jane, left alone at the Sheringhams' after Paul has gone to join people of his own class, languidly wanders naked around the big house, further defying all the social rules she is already breaking by being his secret lover.

There's a lot of nudity in this film, including a lingering full-frontal of O'Connor, which I wouldn't mention except that his lovely performance is strikingly reminiscent of his Prince Charles in The Crown — a posh young man in love with the wrong woman — and so it's rather startling to get such an eyeful of, as it were, the crown jewels.

Olivia Colman is the cleverer piece of casting. We're so used to that toothy dazzler of hers, a smile that could light up a dark night, that not to see it at all is faintly perturbing

Plinky piano and mournful strings abound throughout, but the music is as impeccably judged as everything else and, as I say, it couldn't be more English. Which makes it all the more remarkable that the director is a French woman, Eva Husson.

So maybe I'm wrong to assume that to really get it you have to come from the land of hope and glory.

After all, the film it most reminded me of was directed by an American, Joseph Losey: The Go-Between (1971) — another frightfully English period tale of forbidden love and unseasonal heat.

There is no UK release date for Mothering Sunday yet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Suicide Squad (15)

Rating:

Verdict: Violent, but a blast

Jungle Cruise (12A)

Rating:

Verdict: Overlong family fun

Some years ago I interviewed a chortling John Cleese, who told me that a U.S. network had paid handsomely to adapt Fawlty Towers.

The executives then holed up in a hotel for three days to discuss how they were going to do it, finally emerging to share with Cleese their masterstroke: 'We've decided to take the Basil character out.'

I like to think there was a similarly intensive brainstorming session behind the titling of The Suicide Squad, the latest addition to the so-called DC Universe and a sequel of sorts to 2016's Suicide Squad.

Margot Robbie in a scene from (C)Warner Bros. new film: The Suicide Squad (2021)

Adding the definite article suggests endless workshopping, possibly overseen by expensive branding consultants.

Writer-director James Gunn is on record as saying he just couldn't think of anything else, but I don't believe him. No title that unimaginative comes without a great deal of effort.

On the upside, The Suicide Squad is an absolute blast, albeit with levels of brutality that explain why under-15s are deemed too young to see it.

I disapprove of superhero movies disenfranchising what in a saner world would be their core audience, but I understand why this one does. The decapitations and garrottings are at the tamer end of the violence spectrum.

The film soon settles into the standard superhero narrative, that familiar bionic twist on The Magnificent Seven as assorted psychos with complementary deadly skills are picked for a hazardous mission by a shady branch of the U.S. government.

Gunn tosses us a red herring or two before the team takes shape, led by a profane Londoner known as Bloodsport (Idris Elba), who has been serving a prison term for putting Superman in intensive care, and quite right too.

The idea that any of this will be regular superhero fare, however, is quickly and gleefully despatched.

Gunn made the Guardians Of The Galaxy films, so we know he likes a joyride. But The Suicide Squad, despite a largely terrestrial storyline, takes us on some truly cosmic flights of fancy, ending up with (spoiler alert, especially if you're having your breakfast with the Olympics on in the background) rats swimming inside the eyeball of a gigantic alien starfish.

The starfish has been nurtured by a British supervillain played by Peter Capaldi, his bald head studded with electrodes, and is being pressed into service by a rogue military junta on a South American island.

The Suicide Squad, answering as in the first film to flinty Amanda Waller (Viola Davis) back in the States, are ordered to overthrow the generals.

Helping Bloodsport do so are Captain Rick Flag (Joel Kinnaman), Peacemaker (John Cena), a killer shark in vaguely human form voiced by Sylvester Stallone, Ratcatcher (Daniela Melchior), and Polka-Dot Man (David Dastmalchian), whose somewhat dubious superpower is the ability to turn the dots on his suit into lethal projectiles.

He's not even very good at doing that, until he visualises his abusive mother as the target.

Gunn makes rather a theme of parent-child issues in this film, but just as you're beginning to think he might have a kind of touchy-feely checklist, he subverts expectations again.

If there's a single scene-stealer it is once more Margot Robbie's Harley Quinn, crazily weaponising her sexuality like some psychotic standard-bearer of the MeToo movement. She's a marvellous character, and Robbie plays her with manifest relish.

With steadily increasing nuttiness, the story builds to a wild acid-trip of a climax, which shouldn't be undermined even if the rampaging giant starfish reminds you ever so slightly, as it did me, of Mr Blobby of not-so-blessed memory.

And let me add a word, too, in praise of the soundtrack. Any film that opens with Johnny Cash singing Folsom Prison Blues has my immediate attention, and it rarely flagged thereafter.

Not even the cannibal piranhas of the Amazon Basin feed off themselves quite as voraciously as the dear old Walt Disney Company. (Pictured, Dwayne Johnson as Frank and Emily Blunt as Lily in Jungle Cruise)

Staying attentive through the two hours-plus of Disney's Jungle Cruise is a taller order.

But it's a slick, family-friendly adventure set in 1916 that shamelessly fuses Raiders Of The Lost Ark with The African Queen as Emily Blunt's intrepid English scientist, Lily, in search of an elusive petal with magical healing powers, is swept up the Amazon by Dwayne Johnson's rugged steamboat captain.

On their tail is the dastardly son of Kaiser Wilhelm (Jesse Plemons, hamming the Teutonic vowels for all he's worth), who sees the petal as the key to winning the Great War, while Jack Whitehall enjoys himself as Lily's prissy, scaredy-cat brother. The whole thing is directed with some pan-ache by Jaume Collet-Serra, better known for rather iffy thrillers, and I mildly recommend it as a family outing or even non-outing (it's in cinemas but also on Disney+).

That's as long as you don't object to it being inspired by a venerable Disney theme-park ride of the same name. Not even the cannibal piranhas of the Amazon Basin feed off themselves quite as voraciously as the dear old Walt Disney Company.

Sparks of genius from rock and pop's quirkiest brothers

ALSO SHOWING...

The Mael brothers, Ron (the weird one) and Russell (the cute one), tell their own story direct to camera

Shaun Of The Dead director Edgar Wright takes his first plunge into documentary-making with The Sparks Brothers (15):

Rating:

An enjoyable if greatly overextended look at the pair of alpha Maels who formed one of the quirkiest rock and pop acts of the 1970s — and that's saying something, of the quirkiest of all musical decades.

The Mael brothers, Ron (the weird one) and Russell (the cute one), tell their own story direct to camera, with contributions from fans as diverse as Haircut One Hundred's Nick Heyward, actor Mark Gatiss, and Jonathan Ross, who observes that they don't look like a band, more like two blokes 'who've been let out for the day'.

Apparently, when John Lennon first saw Sparks, he rang Ringo Starr and said that Marc Bolan appeared to be on Top Of The Pops with Adolf Hitler. Wright's film is full of oddities like that, and has fun explaining how two Californian brothers, whose careers didn't take off until they arrived in London and whose musical influences were overwhelmingly British (The Beatles, The Who, The Kinks), came to exert such enduring influence themselves.

The Most Beautiful Boy In The World (15):

Rating:

Another documentary focusing on the 1970s, tells a sadder story. You might think that the most famous Bjorn of the era was the tennis superstar Bjorn Borg or, failing that, Abba's Bjorn Ulvaeus, but first came Bjorn Andresen, who owed his startlingly sudden global celebrity to a leading part in Luchino Visconti's 1971 film Death In Venice, as the androgynously pretty teenager for whom Dirk Bogarde's ageing composer falls.

Andresen, now white-bearded, emaciated and looking as old as the hills, feels that his 'lucky break' as a 15-year-old effectively ruined his life. It's a tragic tale of alcoholism and depression, told mostly in Swedish with subtitles.

Very poignantly, we see the precise moment his fate is sealed, when Visconti, who was gay, purrs over him at a Stockholm audition. The director callously objectified Andresen, although the film dumps just as much of the blame on the boy's
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nowhere Special (12A)

Verdict: Tender and big-hearted

Rating:

Nowhere Special is the very watchable result, written and directed by Pasolini, with James Norton in the lead role as John, a Belfast window-cleaner.

A newspaper article alerted Italian film-maker Uberto Pasolini to the true story of a single father of a young son, who, after being diagnosed with terminal cancer, spent the last few months of his life in league with social services, looking for a suitable adoptive family to raise his little boy.

Nowhere Special is the very watchable result, written and directed by Pasolini, with James Norton in the lead role as John, a Belfast window-cleaner.

As four-year-old Michael, Daniel Lamont makes what is not surprisingly his feature film debut, and gives a really sweet, natural performance, not self-conscious at all.

Michael’s mother is Russian, but she has scarpered back to her own country, leaving John to do all the parenting.

The core of the film is the relationship between father and son, which seems tender and real, but is never overdone as it might be in lesser hands.

The core of the film is the relationship between father and son, which seems tender and real, but is never overdone as it might be in lesser hands.

Indeed, this could easily be a mawkish affair, but if anything it feels understated, not in any way manipulative.

Norton is terrific, and on the whole copes admirably with the Ulster vowels even if a window-cleaner with little education might sound a good deal broader in real life.

It’s slightly harder to accept him as a man with a terminal illness; the handsome and healthy looks that have had him touted as the next James Bond are as conspicuous as ever. But John does a fair bit of throwing up and dozing off, just so we know that he’s in decline.

Pasolini’s script falters a bit when it comes to the various families John meets. It feels rather like a box-ticking exercise: the rich couple, the weird couple, the chaotic couple, and so on. Nevertheless, Nowhere Special is a worthwhile film, made with sensitivity and heart.

BRIAN VINER
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Black Widow (12A)

Rating:

Scarlett Johansson gives a cracking performance as Natasha Romanoff, a whip-smart, Russian-trained killing machine in the long-awaited Black Widow Marvel blockbuster.

But she's nearly upstaged by her little sister, played by British actress Florence Pugh with oomph, wit and often hilarious childlike enthusiasm.

Black Widow has all the back-to-cinema bravura audiences could want. As two catsuit-clad female assassins, Johansson and Pugh rival the best of the supermen in Marvel Cinematic Universe with the balletic brutality of their fight sequences.

Their enemy is veteran hardman Ray Winstone playing Russian supervillain Dreykov, who is running the Black Widow assassin programme. He hams it up as he tries to drop his East End accent and sound more Eastern Bloc.

Scarlett Johansson gives a cracking performance as Natasha Romanoff, a whip-smart, Russian-trained killing machine in the long-awaited Black Widow Marvel blockbuster

Johansson first appeared as Black Widow, the Russian agent Natasha, in Iron Man 2 in 2010. Later, she swapped allegiances to America to join the Avengers, and finally reprised her role in 2019's Avengers: Endgame, where her character died. It's not exactly John le Carre, but it's sometimes hard to keep up.

Now, in Black Widow's first stand-alone film, according to the crazy logic of the Marvel Universe, we return to 2016, where Natasha is still alive – and kicking ass, big time.

Her mission is to destroy the Russians' Red Room programme, which trains and brainwashes girls, including herself, to become Black Widow killers (n.b. don't mix that up with the Red Room in Fifty Shades of Grey – quite a different matter, despite similar black leather costumes).

Compared with some of the clunking, overblown efforts in the previous Avengers films, Black Widow has shape, coherence and emotional heft, thanks to Australian director Cate Shortland, who has successfully leapt from arthouse films to this £150million CGI spectacular.

The story goes back to Natasha's origins, her childhood with her sister Yelena in rural Ohio in 1995. The scenes are shot in faded Kodachrome colours, a nostalgic view of a happy family in suburbia.

Rachel Weisz is their mother Melina, and their father is a chunky Russian played by David Harbour. But daddy turns out to be super-soldier Red Guardian, and the family is not what it seems. Dysfunctional doesn't cover it.

But let's avoid spoilers and cut to 21 years later, when Black Widow is a grown woman. Hiding out in Norway, she gets a mysterious parcel from Yelena, and goes to find her in Budapest.

But she's nearly upstaged by her little sister, played by British actress Florence Pugh with oomph, wit and often hilarious childlike enthusiasm

The girls haven't seen each other in two decades, so think they are on different sides, and a sisterly skirmish occurs, as funny as it is furious. Soon they are fighting an entire squad of Black Widows, each deadlier than the last.

Yelena takes the mickey, pointing out that her sister flicks her hair back showily after battle, and lacks superhero powers, despite being an Avenger: 'I don't think the God-from-space had to take an ibuprofen after a fight,' she says, laughing.

Actually, the two Black Widows are extraordinarily athletic, with daredevil stunts hanging on ropes from clapped-out helicopters, and traditional motorbike-to-car chases which end untraditionally. Plus a finale with all guns and space-stations blazing.

But what makes this film a cut above the usual superhero fare is the dry wit and depth of almost every character. Red Guardian's old-fashioned romanticisation of his super-soldier role; Yelena's delight at buying her first non-uniform clothing; and Melina's uncanny mental connection with – yes – her experimental pigs.

Johansson's combination of vulnerability and power gives her a magnetic screen presence, and in terms of female superheroines, she's up there with Brie Larson's Captain Marvel and easily outdoes the wooden performance of Wonder Woman. Black Widow, cancelled twice due to Covid, has been worth the wait.

÷ In cinemas from Wednesday, July 7 and on Disney+ from July 9
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@BILLIE EILISH: Happier Than Ever (Polydor)

Verdict: Understated success

Rating:

BARBRA STREISAND: Release Me 2 (Legacy)

Verdict: Hidden gems

Rating:

When making her first album two years ago, Billie Eilish wasn't a household name.

Creating music with her brother Finneas in their childhood home, she was a rising star rather than a global phenomenon.

Now, at 19, she's one of the biggest names in pop, with seven Grammys and a Bond theme under her belt.

That debut, When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?, reached No 1 in 18 countries, and she has 88 million Instagram followers. She's also been an inspiration to a host of other introspective teen stars, with Olivia Rodrigo the latest to take the charts by storm.

Given the anticipation surrounding her second album, a little apprehension would be understandable, with Eilish's trepidation heightened by her decision to hold the record back until live shows are again possible.

When making her first album two years ago, Billie Eilish (pictured) wasn't a household name. That debut, When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?, reached No 1 in 18 countries

With a U.S. tour starting next month, and UK dates in June 2022, Happier Than Ever is finally here, and the singer's young, female fans will be relieved it's a smart sequel — business as usual, but with unexpected turns to tempt older listeners.

The album's 16 songs were again written and recorded by Billie and her brother, 23, at home in LA. With no outside producers or co-writers involved, the duo's working practices weren't unduly disrupted by lockdown.

True to form, the tone is laid-back and woozy, with lots of electronic beats and hushed vocals.

Eilish stoops quietly to conquer. Intimacy and honesty remain her calling cards, but she now has more to sing about: growing up in public; the perils of fame; a broken romance.

And just as she's changed her image — baggy skater shorts and green hair have given way to a softer look — so she has matured as a songwriter.

She no longer has the air of a sulky adolescent who refuses to tidy her bedroom. 'I'm getting older, I think I'm ageing well,' she murmurs on Getting Older, her whispered voice cushioned by Finneas's deliberately wonky keyboards and a sweet, Beatles-like melody that seeps through his cutting-edge production.

Creating music with her brother Finneas (both pictured at Grammys in 2020), she was a rising star. Now, at 19, she's one of the biggest names in pop, with seven Grammys under her belt

It's one of several songs that address the darker side of success: there are deranged strangers at Billie's door, and she's forever being judged on her appearance.

Given that she made her name by capturing the everyday concerns of her fans, you might think that complaining about the ensuing fame is ill-advised, but Eilish is clever enough to add twists to the tale.

On Billie Bossa Nova, she uses the act of avoiding the paparazzi (booking hotel rooms under an assumed name) as a metaphor for a secret love affair.Her anxieties are tempered with romantic yearning on Halley's Comet, a 1960s-style piano ballad.

Elsewhere, the mood is more troubled. Your Power confronts an abusive older man, examining a concerning issue against a backdrop of strummed acoustic guitar.

Overheated tackles social media at its most sinister: 'You want to kill me? You want to hurt me?' But there's a fearlessness amid the gloom on Therefore I Am, a rap-influenced kiss-off to an attention-seeking impersonator.

Happier Than Ever loses momentum in places. Its blurry moods become repetitive on Everybody Dies and Goldwing, and there's nothing here as catchy as 2019's kooky pop single Bad Guy.

But its brightest songs add something to Billie's less-is-more approach. The beats-heavy Oxytocin is a full-blown dance number, and the title track features booming drums and guitar.

On Billie's Bossa Nova and My Future, there are hints of jazz and musical theatre — enough of a progression to confirm she's no flash in the pan.

Sixty years Eilish's senior, Barbra Streisand maintains an admirable work ethic.

Sixty years Eilish's senior, Barbra Streisand (pictured in August 2019) maintains an admirable work ethic. Barbra, 79, maintains that Release Me 2 isn't a case of second-hand roses

Having surprised fans with an album of protest songs in 2018, Broadway's greatest singing star dips into the archives for a second volume of songs she had previously shelved.

Barbra, 79, maintains that Release Me 2 isn't a case of second-hand roses, and the ten, career-spanning rarities, updated with fresh touches, are largely high-quality blooms.

The earliest track, a bright take on the 1940s standard Right As The Rain, offers a glimpse of an emerging talent. Streisand was Eilish's age when she cut the song in 1962, but her range and control are remarkable.

Despite her Broadway roots, she also embraced the singer-songwriter boom of the 1970s, covering Graham Nash and Randy Newman, and two tracks from that era surface here: she sprinkles sophisticated razzle-dazzle on Newman's Living Without You and Carole King's You Light Up My Life.

No Streisand compilation would be complete without marquee duets, and this one contains three.

A collaboration with Kermit The Frog is a novelty, but she sparkles with Barry Gibb on If Only You Were Mine and lays on the schmaltz, without being too mawkish, with Willie Nelson on I'd Want It To Be You.

GEORGE HARRISON: All Things Must Pass (Capitol/UMe)

Rating:

Verdict: Solo splendour

His creativity stifled by the dominance of Lennon and McCartney in The Beatles, George Harrison wasted no time in doing his own thing on 1970's All Things Must Pass.

With material stockpiled from as far back as 1966, his pent-up artistry produced a stunning triple LP that remains one of the best by an ex-Beatle.

Taking an eclectic cue from the gospelly My Sweet Lord and the the Motown beats of What Is Life, it encompassed blues, country-rock and Bob Dylan-inspired folk.

George Harrison wasted no time in doing his own thing on 1970's All Things Must Pass. With material stockpiled from as far back as 1966, his artistry produced a stunning triple LP

His themes included the search for enlightenment and the demise of his old band. The only flaws came on the long, largely instrumental jams at the end.

Delayed a year by Covid, this 50th anniversary reissue is a treasure trove of unreleased songs, fresh mixes and out-takes.

Out today in multiple formats, from a double CD (£17) to an 'uber deluxe' version (£860) in an 'artisanal crate', complete with music, prayer beads and gnomes like those on the original sleeve.

Among the 'new' tracks are the bluesy Cosmic Empire, the world-weary Dylan co-write Nowhere To Go, and Sour Milk Sea, one of several excellent songs rejected by The Fab Four.

All things must pass, but the most successful album ever by a solo Beatle is a gift that keeps giving.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@PRINCE: Welcome 2 America (Legacy)

Rating:

Verdict: Diamonds and pearls

BLEACHERS: Take The Sadness Out Of Saturday Night (RCA)

Rating:

Verdict: Backroom boy moves centre stage

YOLA: Stand For Myself (Easy Eye Sound)

Rating:

Verdict: Strong sequel

Any fears that the guardians of Prince's musical legacy might be scraping the barrel can be safely dispelled for now.

The late singer's third posthumous album isn't quite up to the standard of his 1980s classics Purple Rain and Sign O' The Times, but it isn't far off.

The latest dispatch from his Paisley Park vault, Welcome 2 America, is the most comprehensive piece of work to emerge since his death in 2016 from an accidental overdose of painkillers.

It was made in 2010 and mothballed as Prince went on tour, but it reiterates his genius as a soul man, rock singer and funk musician.

Welcome 2 America differs from 2018's Piano & A Microphone (a private rehearsal from 1983) and 2019's Originals (his demos of songs, such as Manic Monday, donated to others) in that it was made with a full band and is a thoughtfully sequenced set that feels polished and unified.

'Welcome 2 America is the most comprehensive piece of work to emerge since Prince's death in 2016'

In keeping with Prince's belief in the sanctity of the traditional LP — he made 39 of them while he was alive — it repays being listened to in its entirety.

The only mystery is why these 12 tracks were held back in favour of another album, 20Ten. Maybe he was simply spoilt for choice.

But 2010's loss is 2021's gain, not least because Welcome 2 America sounds as if it could have been made yesterday. Documenting the singer's concerns for a shifting society — 'George Orwell's vision of the future is here' — it touches on racial injustice, political strife, corporate greed and the evils of social media.

If that sounds like heavy going, it isn't: the album title is clearly ironic, but Prince was too cool a customer to engage in finger-wagging, and he makes his points with wit and flair, interspersing the statement songs with romantic ballads and party tunes.

The title track sets the tone by harking back to the kind of soulful social commentary pioneered by Marvin Gaye, Stevie Wonder and Gil Scott-Heron.

Peppered with jazzy interludes and wah-wah guitar, it's a series of exchanges between Prince and his backing singers Liv Warfield, Shelby J and Elisa Fiorillo — a compelling presence throughout.

'The late singer's third posthumous album isn't quite up to the standard of his 1980s classics Purple Rain and Sign O' The Times, but it isn't far off.'

Elsewhere, topics include the corporate music industry on Running Game (Son Of A Slave Master) and the notion of a utopian society on 1000 Light Years From Here.

There are nods to former greats: Curtis Mayfield on Born 2 Die's falsetto funk; Sly And The Family Stone on the rollicking, guitar-powered Yes.

Prince displays the full range of his talent. Hot Summer is a radio-friendly power-pop number along the lines of The Cars' My Best Friend's Girl. Ballad When She Comes is sung in a smooth falsetto.

There's even room for a surprising cover, with Prince turning to fellow Minnesotans Soul Asylum for Stand Up And B Strong, enhancing the band's 2006 single with twinkling piano and improvised guitar.

As with a lot of his later work, there are songs that descend into glorified jams, but even these are kept brief.

There is also, on the album's £150 box set, a live Blu-Ray video taken from a 2011 LA concert that includes hits such as Little Red Corvette and Kiss, plus Roxy Music and Bob Dylan covers.

But the most remarkable thing about these gems is just how well they've aged. Then again, Prince was partying like it was 1999 back in 1982, so perhaps we shouldn't be surprised.

As one of pop's hottest producers, Jack Antonoff made his mark working with an array of talented and famous women. In the past year, he has contributed to two Taylor Swift albums, plus records by Lorde, Lana Del Rey, St. Vincent and Clairo.

But he is a musician in his own right, too; having topped the UK singles charts as a member of indie-pop band Fun nine years ago.

His current project is Bleachers, whose third album is packed with songs of escape — from his own depression, from his native New Jersey and, ultimately, from the desperation of lockdown.

Antonoff sings and plays guitar, drums, piano and Moog, but he's joined by his touring band and some impressive guests.

Del Rey crops up twice: first on the deadpan, Velvet Underground-like Secret Life, where she plays Nico to Antonoff's Lou Reed.

She also sings on heartache anthem Don't Go Dark, while there are cameos from St. Vincent and The Chicks.

As one of pop's hottest producers, Jack Antonoff (pictured) made his mark working with an array of talented and famous women. In the past year, he has contributed to two Taylor Swift albums, plus records by Lorde, Lana Del Rey, St. Vincent and Clairo

But the artist whose inspiration hangs most heavily here is Bruce Springsteen.

The Boss appears on the brilliant Chinatown, a brooding celebration of shared New Jersey roots, while Antonoff, aided by saxophonist Evan Smith, rekindles the spirit of the early E Street Band on Jersey Shore bops such as How Dare You Want More. With summer in the air, the boardwalk beckons.

Yolanda Quartey — aka Yola — was raised in Bristol, but it wasn't until she moved to Nashville and teamed up with Black Keys frontman Dan Auerbach that she found her musical calling.

Her first album, Walk Through Fire, all rootsy Americana, was one of my favourites of 2019. Its sequel, Stand For Myself, builds on those solid foundations.

Inspired by her mum's 1970s records and 1990s pop radio, it's more expansive. Produced by Auerbach, it showcases both Yola's sentimental side and her tougher, powerhouse vocals as it takes in classic soul on Barely Alive, doo-wop on Great Divide and country on Be My Friend, a duet with Brandi Carlile.

Yolanda Quartey (pictured)— aka Yola — was raised in Bristol, but it wasn't until she moved to Nashville and teamed up with Black Keys frontman Dan Auerbach that she found her musical calling

The sense of having come through tough times is a recurring theme. Yola pledges to avoid ne'er-do-well suitors on Whatever You Want and vows to control her own destiny on the soulful title track.

We'll be hearing a lot more of her, too. She's playing rock and roll pioneer Sister Rosetta Tharpe beside Tom Hanks in Baz Luhrmann's forthcoming Elvis biopic.

All albums out today. Yola plays Stand For Myself live online at 7pm on August 4 (iamyola.com).

SINGLES: Fame forces Billie down a darker path...

Billie Eilish has been keeping new album Happier Than Ever tightly under wraps ahead of release, but the singles dropped so far hint at something darker than 2019's When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?

The latest track, NDA, is the eeriest yet. Built on a simple keyboard riff, its auto-tuned vocals deal with her growing pains and the gilded cage of fame.

'I can barely go outside, I think I hate it here,' murmurs the American teen. 'Maybe I should think about a new career.'

She also sings of dealing with stalkers who claim to be Satan and a sense of paranoia that requires her to ask potential boyfriends to sign non-disclosure agreements. Fans should rest easy, though.

With previous singles including Lost Cause, about a doomed relationship, and the assertive jazz track My Future, she is an increasingly eclectic performer.

Another superstar, Camila Cabello, is also back. Don't Go Yet, the Cuban-American singer's first new song since 2019's Romance album, is a pop track with flamenco guitar, handclaps and Latin brass, while Coldplay tap into the spirit of Pink Floyd on Coloratura, a ten-minute musical fantasy from October's Music Of The Spheres album.

And Lindsey Buckingham limbers up for his first solo album since leaving Fleetwood Mac in 2018 with new single On The Wrong Side.

Inspired by life with his ex-bandmates, the song, punctuated by finger-picked guitar, is a musically upbeat soft-rock number about growing old. His self-titled album follows in September.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ANNE-MARIE: Therapy (Major Toms)

Rating:

Verdict: Dancing through her woes

JACKSON BROWNE: Downhill From Everywhere (Inside)

Rating:

Verdict: No dip in quality

GARY KEMP: Insolo (Columbia)

Rating:

Verdict: Accomplished solo turn

Anne-Marie Nicholson’s charisma won her millions of new admirers in her first season as a judge on ITV talent contest The Voice this year.

She was engaging and supportive, and even mentored the show’s winning contestant.

But behind the smiles, apprehension was lurking — especially when it came to finishing her new album.

It’s not as if the Essex-raised singer’s career was on the line. She broke through six years ago as a guest vocalist on London dance act Rudimental’s chart-topping second LP, and honed her talent by touring with them.

Another guest spot, on Clean Bandit’s Rockabye, gave her a No 1 single. Her first solo album, Speak Your Mind, made the Top Three in 2018.

Anne-Marie Nicholson’s charisma won her millions of new admirers in her first season as a judge on ITV talent contest The Voice this year

But a combination of lockdown, second album jitters and deeper-rooted anxieties left the former karate champion, 30, feeling uneasy.

‘I hadn’t realised, until we were hit by the pandemic, just how much I needed music,’ she says. ‘Writing this album has helped me understand my feelings.’

The singer, who revealed she has been seeing a psychiatrist, doesn’t deliver a warts-and-all account.

She sings of toxic love affairs, fondly remembered ones and, on the title track, admits it’s her own insecurity — ‘I’m dysfunctional, it’s always been that way’ — that stops her from forming lasting relationships. Mostly, though, she dances her way through her troubles.

Therapy is a fiercely commercial salvo of fashionable digital beats. It spans R&B, two-step garage and generic electronic dance.

There are plenty of marquee names in supporting roles, including Little Mix, Ed Sheeran, One Direction’s Niall Horan and rapper KSI. Anne-Marie could easily have been overshadowed in such company. But singing in a sultry voice with a falsetto edge, she holds her own… just.

Don’t Play, with London DJ Nick Gale (aka Digital Farm Animals) and KSI, sets a catchy, up-tempo tone. The Little Mix track, Kiss My (Uh-Oh), beefs up the hook of female rapper Lumidee’s feisty R&B classic Never Leave You (Uh Oooh, Uh Oooh).

Sister Act’s cherry-flavoured harmonies Crowned best international group at the BRITs in May, Californian sister act Haim (pictured) are back with their first new song for more than a year in Cherry Flavored Stomach Ache. Taken from upcoming Netflix film The Last Letter From Your Lover, the tale of tarnished romance is boosted by blithe sibling harmonies and steel pans that add a calypso edge. We should be used to surprises from Elvis Costello by now, but he’s sprung another one with a Spanish version of his spiky 1978 single Pump It Up. The track features Colombian star Juanes on vocals and is taken from a Latin revamp of the song’s parent album, This Year’s Model, due in September. Californian sister act Haim (pictured) are back with their first new song for more than a year in Cherry Flavored Stomach Ache. Another veteran, Annie Lennox, is in the co-producer’s seat for Love Like That, the latest single from her daughter Lola. Having studied at the Royal Academy, Lola, 30, is establishing her own musical pedigree. The track is a summer banger with slick harmonies that lend a girl-group feel. And Soft Cell revisit Tainted Love, 40 years old this month, with an extended mix by band member Dave Ball. An electronic cover of a northern soul classic, the song was the best-selling single of 1981. Ball’s new take adds sci-fi effects without messing with Marc Almond’s original vocals. It’s out on vinyl and via streaming services. Advertisement

Beautiful, co-written by Sheeran, is a celebration of body positivity that could have done without the inclusion of a children’s choir.

Even when she’s singing of romantic strife, a glitchy dance rhythm is never far away. Tell Your Girlfriend calls out a two-timing sexter against a reggae backdrop that echoes Rockabye.

On Way Too Long, made with rapper MoStack and DJ Nathan Dawe, Nicholson admits to taking lyrical inspiration from her heartache: ‘It’s funny how I loved you, then suddenly you’re nothing but a song.’

What Therapy doesn’t do is fully transfer her girl-next-door charm into song. Amid all the crunchy electronics, there’s a refreshing reunion with Rudimental on the brassy Unlovable, but the warm, jazzy strands of her first album could have been explored further.

Therapy should keep her career ticking along nicely, but there’s surely more to come.

Bruce Springsteen once said that Jackson Browne penned ‘the songs the Eagles wished they’d written’, and those storytelling skills are prominent on his first studio album in seven years.

Downhill From Everywhere is a set of shrewd portraits that add Caribbean and Latin flavours to his trademark country-rock.

Despite being one of the bohemian rockers who shaped the idea of the modern singer-songwriter, Browne has never had a Top 20 album in the UK. His only hit single, Stay, was a cover of an old doo-wop song, although (echoing The Boss’s view) he did co-write the Eagles’ Take It Easy.

His latest is unlikely to change that, but his songwriting still bristles with purpose.

At 72, he’s aware of his own mortality. On Still Looking For Something, he sings of being ‘way out over my due date’.

Minutes To Downtown is a bittersweet tale of romance with an appreciably younger lover.

‘I didn’t think I would ever feel this way again,’ he sings. ‘No, not with a story this long and this close to the end.’ Right down to its extended guitar and keyboard solos, it’s Browne at his most affecting.

There’s droll humour on My Cleveland Heart, in which he imagines replacing our fallible, human hearts with artificial ones that can ‘take a bashing and never lose their passion’.

His tone can be hectoring. Until Justice Is Real voices his fears for U.S. democracy, but is heavy-handed. Elsewhere, he treads deftly, singing of the effect of plastic waste on the world’s oceans on the title track, and defending same-sex relationships on A Human Touch, a duet with female singer Leslie Mendelson.

Downhill From Everywhere won’t attract new fans. There’s a Latin excursion on Love Is Love, a lovely piece about a priest navigating the slums of Haiti on his motorbike, but Browne sticks largely to familiar ground.

When your songwriting remains this sharp, the downward slope is some way off.

Fans expecting Gary Kemp to return to the dance and pop of Spandau Ballet on his first solo album in 26 years — and only his second ever — should look away now.

The singer and guitarist, 61, has spent the past three years carving out an alternative career playing early Pink Floyd songs in Nick Mason’s Saucerful Of Secrets, and that’s what’s given him the impetus to make Insolo.

Waiting For The Band recalls being a teenage Bowie fan in the 1970s. There are nods to Wings and 10cc on the breezy Ahead Of The Game, and several tracks that employ strings, sax and French horn without being bombastic.

A series of rich, luxuriant ballads looking back on life, it casts an accomplished rock musician and songwriter in an entirely new light.

All albums out now. Anne-Marie plays a livestreamed concert on August 7 and starts a tour on May 3, 2022, at Dublin’s 3Arena (iamannemarie.com).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Anything Goes: Barbican Theatre, London

Rating:

Beware getting an audience on its feet before the interval. If you raise the roof too early in a show, you're going to need to top it in the second half. And that could prove tricky.

But not in the case of this ecstatic new production of Cole Porter's sassy and gloriously wicked 1934 musical.

Anything Goes, starring Sutton Foster, Robert Lindsay and Felicity Kendal, has no problem raising the rafters. In fact, it blows them halfway across town.

A crew of tap-dancing sailors and showgirls, on board an ocean liner from New York to London, don't just have the house baying before the interval, they have it stopping the show again in the second half – as well as at the finale.

Beware getting an audience on its feet before the interval. You're going to need to top it in the second half and that could prove tricky. But not in the case of 1934 musical Anything Goes

By the end, I couldn't tell if the crowd were more in love with the company, or the company more in love with the crowd.

As party girl Reno Sweeney, Foster is a leading lady crackling with style. She joined the crew after Megan Mullally (of sitcom Will & Grace) dropped out of rehearsals.

Mullally said 'my body informed me (mainly while at tap class) that I need a few rods replaced'.

Foster is a veteran of American TV comedy, too (she starred in a show called Younger). But she has the additional advantage of having won a Tony Award for playing Reno on Broadway in 2011.

More trinkets and silverware surely await her here. Ten years may have passed, but once again she carries the show with physical dexterity (including eye-popping splits) and effortless comic timing.

And that voice... Foster sounds like she's got an entire brass section in her larynx from the moment she parps up with her famous opening song I Get A Kick Out Of You.

Her mission, aboard the SS American, is to help saucy stowaway Billy Crocker (Samuel Edwards) marry his sweetheart, heiress Hope (Nicole-Lily Baisden).

Anything Goes, starring Sutton Foster, Robert Lindsay and Felicity Kendal (pictured during rehearsals), has no problem raising the rafters. In fact, it blows them halfway across town

Trouble is, Hope is the debutante daughter of a highly strung, multi-millionairess (Kendal) – and betrothed to a stuffy English toff (Haydn Oakley).

And that's all before the complication of Lindsay's leathery mobster Moonface Martin, who's disguised as a priest while on the run from the law – with gangster's moll Erma (Carly Mercedes Dyer) in tow.

Dyer revels in her role as the squeaky-voiced sex bomb while Lindsay is a gold-plated Cadillac of a mafioso (Public Enemy Number 13), his own voice transformed into a 'Noo Yoik' accented growl.

And let's not forget Gary Wilmot, bumbling about the boat as short-sighted zillionaire Elisha Whitney, reduced to using binoculars instead of bifocals when his specs are stolen.

There can be few musicals with more complicated set-ups, and just getting the long list of characters aboard the liner is a colossal undertaking. But it's a show oozing class, thanks to a team of writers who included PG Wodehouse.

The lyrics sparkle – take 'You're the national gallery, you're Garbo's salary'; or maybe 'Kiss me pretty wench, in English or in French' – and there are risque gags, too ('I don't think Erma picked the guy for the length of his pants,' says Moonface).

Kathleen Marshall's production will, however, be best remembered for the choreography.

As party girl Reno Sweeney, Foster (pictured with Robert Lindsay) is a leading lady crackling with style. She joined the crew after Megan Mullally dropped out of rehearsals

The big dance routines are a long time coming, but when they arrive, you know it. The full company tap number Anything Goes at the end of the first half sounds like the Household Cavalry is passing by.

Then, after the interval, we're treated to a full-scale riot of tumbling, clapping and jitterbugging in the nightclub – lifting the crowd to its feet all over again, to the beat of Blow, Gabriel, Blow.

If you can tear your gaze away from the footwork, the steel panels of Derek McLane's white ocean liner set are (literally) riveting.

The moon and stars smile down, and there are swanky art deco cabins below deck, too.

Quite honestly, when a show packs this much energy, talent, spectacle and swagger in the hold, nothing else goes.

Anything Goes has extended its run at the Barbican until October 31. Sutton Foster remains with the show until October 10, before flying back to NYC to begin rehearsals for The Music Man, with Hugh Jackman.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat

London Palladium

Rating:

Back in the West End – with former X Factor winner Alexandra Burke as the narrator – Joseph is best described as a hospital-strength, intravenous sugar rush.

And what fun it is, to have that rush administered in a ram-packed auditorium… or should that be a Ramses-packed auditorium?

I hadn't realised how much I missed rubbing elbows with unknown neighbours – ah, the old armrest turf war. But even better is the dawning realisation that everyone… from tiny kids to venerable grannies… is singing, clapping and jiving along in their seats to the Biblical tale of Joseph and his jealous brothers, who rob him of his multi-coloured coat and sell him into slavery.

Bearing in mind that this is one of Andrew Lloyd Webber's oldest hits, written with lyricist Tim Rice in 1968, it must really sharpen his frustration that he can't open his newest show, Cinderella.

Back in the West End – with former X Factor winner Alexandra Burke as the narrator – Joseph is best described as a hospital-strength, intravenous sugar rush

That fell victim to the pingdemic last week (a new opening night has just been set for August 18). Right now, though, it's Laurence Connor's jubilant production at the Palladium that scorches the eye and enchants the ear. And with Burke taking over from Sheridan Smith as the narrator, they have a performer who's greeted with excited cheers just for flashing her gnashers.

Nor does Burke seem in any doubt about who's the star of the show (spoiler alert: It's her).

She does favour Jac Yarrow's Joseph and Jason Donovan's Pharaoh with indulgent smiles, otherwise she bosses the evening in the manner of a Blue Peter presenter, gently stroking the air with false fingernails.

Giving it the full Whitney Houston for the string of anthemic songs, including A Pharaoh's Story, she proves she's got quick feet, too, in the company dance numbers. It's almost as if she's up for doing the whole show on her own – and even when it's not her scene, there's a nod of approval, a chuckle of recognition, or a long-lashed wink to the audience.

I wouldn't fancy her with Shakespeare, but Burke sets the tone for a production that's like a stick of rock as thick as the pillars of the Abu Simbel temples in southern Egypt.

But even better is the dawning realisation that everyone… from tiny kids to venerable grannies… is singing, clapping and jiving along in their seats to the Biblical tale of Joseph and his jealous brothers, who rob him of his multi-coloured coat and sell him into slavery

Looking past Burke, if that's possible, Yarrow seems to have settled into the show where he made his West End debut in 2019. His impeccably butch Joseph adds righteous anger to the indignation of his jail house song Close Every Door (howling with pain, as if he's strayed into Les Mis).

Meanwhile, Donovan – who played Joseph himself – proves he's a fair old pro as Pharaoh; glugging a pint-sized latte before launching into his Elvis 'The King' routine. Is there even a touch of late-Presley around his midsection?

Balancing his experience, there's a chorus of streetwise kids, who make this a proper family show.

And apart from the burger hieroglyphic in Pharaoh's palace, my favourite bits (and those of my 11-year-old moderator) remain the corny, cartoon company numbers. These include the One More Angel In Heaven hoedown; and riotous, cod-French knees-up of Those Canaan Days, when the wicked brothers lament tossing their sibling down a well.

Even after 53 years, Joseph remains a show with something for everyone – and a lot of what we all need right now: Joy!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Comedy of Errors (Garden Theatre Stratford-upon-Avon).

Verdict: A welcome return

Rating:

Like a nervous Grandma, the RSC will have you over again, but insists you stay in the garden. Specifically, in its Covid-friendly Lydia & Manfred Gorvy Garden Theatre: an intimate outdoor amphitheatre named after the billionaires who forked out for it.

On a sultry July evening — can of cold wine clutched in my fist, the splash of Avon rowers keeping a beat in the background — this production finally made it in front of a live audience, a mere year-and-a-bit later than planned.

'It has been so, so hard,' the RSC's artistic director Gregory Doran told me beforehand, slipping down his mask. 'With this theatre, we're in luck.' No roof means, distanced or not, they can still make it work, and make it safe.

The Comedy Of Errors — not the spicy Dido Harding satire you just know is coming, but that Stratford staple — is transplanted to a world which appears to be a mash-up of Middle Eastern wealth and 1980s Britain style, or lack thereof.

Like a nervous Grandma, the RSC will have you over again, but insists you stay in the garden. Specifically, in its Covid-friendly Lydia & Manfred Gorvy Garden Theatre: an intimate outdoor amphitheatre named after the billionaires who forked out for it

Think vibrant shades of teal, big frizzy hair, shoulder pads under ornate robes, and beardy soldiers with swords. Designer Max Jones has us in a tiled piazza, with festoon lights drooping round us.

The dire mishap which gives the play its title is long-lost twins with the same name, finally crossing paths in the same town… while handily dressed in the same outfits. Oh, and each with a servant who's also a long-lost twin. Also named and dressed the same. Cue comedy.

And, incredibly, it really is funny. Director Phillip Breen creates some wonderful cheeky moments around the neatly pruned text (two hours, hurrah!).

A passing waiter gives us perfect Fawlty. Our hero mistakenly squirts hand sanitiser metres into the sky out of sexual nervousness. A guru minces around with a comedy bulge — and Luciana, mid yoga pose (legs behind ears, gusset bursting) utters the line: 'First he praised my beauty, then my speech.' The old ones really are the best.

Rowan Polonski and Hedydd Dylan steal the night as Antipholus of Ephesus and his manic, pregnant wife Adrianna.

When Antipholus of Syracuse (the other twin, played by Guy Lewis) doesn't recognise her, Dylan whips into a most entertaining fury, bouncing around in heels, clutching her bump in full 'make-a-scene' mode.

Polonski gets his moment, too: a crowd-pleasingly wild breakdown, after the weight of the mix-up has left him muddied and bloodied.

The two servants don't quite match up. Jonathan Broadbent (Dromio of Syracuse) has the smarter comedy chops, even turning one speech about an obese wannabe lover into a stand-up pastiche, toying with his microphone stand and winking at the crowd: 'She is spherical… I could find countries in her.' Netherlands? 'I did not look so low.' The other Dromio (Greg Haiste) is too clownish, with gurns and children's TV intonation from a lesser production.

Tying the whole affair together is a glorious band. Well, I say band. It is four musicians somehow producing sounds of funky disco, brass and guitar using nothing but mouths and microphones.

For a balmy, luscious Warwickshire evening it was all pitched just right. Classic RSC quality, welcoming us back to close quarters with fellow theatre-lovers again: a merry example of what we've all missed, why we love it and why it matters.

The show runs in Stratford until September 26, before a tour (October 22-November 6), and a date at the Barbican (November 16-December 31). For details visit rsc.org.uk.

A tale of woe spelled out in capitals

Romeo and Juliet can be a theatrical graveyard. It's particularly vulnerable to directors who have important stuff to say. That is, sadly, the case in Ola Ince's take on the play at Shakespeare's Globe (HHHII), which seeks to turn the romance into a sociology lesson.

A digital screen at the back of the austere council estate set starts each sequence with a socio-political bullet point. Following the opening affray, we are told in block capitals 'RATHER THAN UNDERSTAND THE VIOLENCE, THE PRINCE THREATENS HIS COMMUNITY'. Followed by 'THE RATIONAL PART OF THE BRAIN IS NOT FULLY DEVELOPED UNTIL 25'. Sometimes, alas, not even then.

Mercifully, in Alfred Enoch, we have a bright, chatty Romeo. And Rebekah Murrell (pictured) makes a genuinely sparky Juliet.

Both could do with being a little less knowing, but Ince's purpose is clearly to demonstrate that if only they'd kept their feet on the ground, and enjoyed 'A SECURE ATTACHMENT TO A GUARDIAN', they might have grown up and had kids.

PATRICK MARMION
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@South Pacific (Festival Theatre, Chichester)

Verdict: A tropical treat

Rating:

Chichester Festival Theatre is back, with a big summer musical that lives up to the swooning lyrics of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein’s terrific old showboater, and provides sustenance for those of us hungering for live entertainment.

Some enchanted evening? You betcha.

What a joy it is to see a full company, led by Gina Beck and Julian Ovenden, swirling through their paces in Daniel Evans’s ravishing and well-oiled production, with gorgeous Technicolor set design by Peter McKintosh. I still think of the 1949 musical about American marines in World War II, hanging around, waiting to fight the Japanese, in terms of the sun-drenched picture postcard 1958 movie starring Rossano Brazzi and Mitzi Gaynor.

Chichester Festival Theatre is back, with a big summer musical that lives up to the swooning lyrics of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein’s terrific old showboater, and provides sustenance for those of us hungering for live entertainment

But McKintosh’s design more than lives up to that fantasy, with a sandy turntable of a stage backed with palmy vistas and warmly lit, roll-on, roll-off terraces of the island paradise, and sounds of the ocean lapping offstage.

The story about U.S. nurse Nellie Forbush at first rejecting French plantation owner Emile after discovering that his first wife was an Asian native, has everyone — on stage and off — worried about the plot’s direction of travel.

Beck’s solution is to play up the fact that Nellie is a middle American girl who’s ‘corny as Kansas in August’. Her cherry-pie voice makes her seem innocent rather than mean on her journey to repentance.

At one point, the actress (who is noticeably pregnant… she’ll be sharing the role with Alex Young from August, before Young takes over completely) asks Ovenden’s Emile about the chance of their having children. The orotund singer brims with Gallic earnestness and somehow manages to keep a straight face.

Happily, he also reveals a saucy side when, fuelled by champagne, he launches into a reprise of Nellie’s big number with the showgirls, I’m Gonna Wash That Man Right Outta My Hair.

Mindful of the sociological importance of their work, those showgirls are not the usual giggling can-can dolls. So the pleasure of overt raunchiness goes instead to the topless sailor boys.

The real strength of the show, though, lies in the songs — glorious songs! — such as Emile’s Some Enchanted Evening, and the randy boys’ number There Is Nothing Like A Dame (despatched with zestful choreography by Ann Yee).

What a joy it is to see a full company, led by Gina Beck and Julian Ovenden, swirling through their paces in Daniel Evans’s ravishing and well-oiled production, with gorgeous Technicolor set design by Peter McKintosh

We also get a tutorial on racial integration from a young lieutenant (Rob Houchen), who’s guilty of abandoning his beloved — another local girl — in his lament You’ve Got To Be Carefully Taught (to hate).

David Birrell is gratifyingly gruff as the American captain, and Keir Charles, as roguish hustler Luther Billis, treats military occupation as a money-making lark. But Joanna Ampil, as the desperate local businesswoman, is a fiery reminder that the Americans’ antics have real consequences in her bitterly sardonic number Happy Talk.

In the end, though, it’s the sunshine of the all-American, gum-chewing swagger that lights up the stage and ensures this is an evening of blissful enchantment.

Be More Chill (Shaftesbury Theatre, London)

Verdict: Zany but chill

Rating for the oldsters: Three stars

Rating for the youngsters: Four stars

Be More Chill is an American high school self-help story disguised as a whizzy cyber musical. Based on a young adult novel by Ned Vizzini, our geek hero Jeremy pops a pill to install a supercomputer in his brain that will release him from excruciating social anxiety.

Sadly, a mini dictator — dressed like Keanu Reeves in The Matrix — starts controlling his thoughts and triggers a fight for his soul.

The show aspires to be benign, weightless kitsch for the electronic age, with retina-burning, high-tech scenery by Beowulf Boritt, and automated dance routines.

Be More Chill is an American high school self-help story disguised as a whizzy cyber musical

Yet it also has a ring of truth — not least because Vizzini suffered from serious depression and killed himself aged 32 in 2013.

But you’d never guess that from Joe Iconis’s joyfully eccentric music and lyrics, which run like kooky personal statements, cataloguing the characters’ inner torment… all set to electronic rock.

And as our hero, Scott Folan is a bespectacled beanpole with a big future. Clever, playful and inventive, he has a terrific stage presence and carries the unpredictable score lightly. There are nicely dotty performances throughout, especially Miracle Chance as Jeremy’s inamorata Christine.

This is very much one for younger audiences, but for all its zany antics, it feels like it comes from somewhere real.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Constellations (Vaudeville Theatre, London)

Rating:

Verdict: Super cosmic rom-com

Constellations is a multi-dimensional love story by Nick Payne, written for two actors and set in an infinite number of universes.

The beauty of it is that you can cast almost anyone, of any age; and there may be no upper limit to the number of stars you could fix in its firmament.

Kicking off this Donmar Warehouse production, being staged at the Vaudeville, we have Zoe Wanamaker and former Doctor Who actor Peter Capaldi; and Sheila Atim and Ivanno Jeremiah.

Coupling: Peter Capaldi and Zoe Wanamaker. The beauty of it is that you can cast almost anyone, of any age; and there may be no upper limit to the number of stars you could fix in its firmament

Each pair takes turns, in different performances to play a couple who meet at a damp British barbecue. (Still to come is Motherland's Anna Maxwell Martin, performing with comedian Chris O'Dowd; and Omari Douglas and Being Human's Russell Tovey.)

Written in 2012, Constellations is a very special kind of rom-com which sets out different versions of multiple scenes between a beekeeper (him) and a cosmologist (her). They resist each other at first, then get together. They move in, move out, get married, fall ill, get better, grow worse and try to face a bitter end for one of them in an unnamed clinic abroad.

In one way, it's a baffling Rubik's cube inspired by quantum physics and the idea that we live not in a single universe but in a 'multiverse' of infinite worlds.

Here, every possible variation of every possible moment in our lives is played out in other dimensions. It may sound baffling but it taps into the infinity of our everyday hopes and fears. Even better, it's a gift for actors to showcase their talents. Capaldi and Wanamaker bring gravitas to the equation. He is wry and lived-in. She is strident yet secretly needy. But some things in the play, which was written for younger actors, don't work so well for them.

I suspect bus-pass holders of Capaldi's age do mind sleeping on the floor; and women Wanamaker's age don't move in with 24-year-old boys they have just met. It runs better for thirtysomethings Jeremiah and Atim.

Ivanno Jeremiah and Sheila Atim are pictured above. Written in 2012, Constellations is a very special kind of rom-com which sets out different versions of multiple scenes between a beekeeper (him) and a cosmologist (her). They resist each other at first, then get together

There is more life ahead of them; the stakes feel higher. Her illness is more shocking; and that makes them a more moving combination of lovers.

The play is given a dreamy quality by Tom Scutt's design, featuring a galaxy of balloons overhead — like stars, or a scattering of atoms. One scene is performed in British Sign Language, which adds an eerie interlude.

It's a beguiling 70 minutes that could run and run, with different actors, in a pan-cosmic groundhog day. Perhaps that is already happening in another dimension.

Catch Daniel Mays and David Thewlis in a revival of Harold Pinter's 1957 play The Dumb Waiter online at London's Old Vic. This is the one about two hitmen waiting to do a job in the former kitchen of a Birmingham cafe.

Jeremy Herrin's production is cunningly cast as a Laurel and Hardy double act, with undertones of Quentin Tarantino's Reservoir Dogs. Mays plays the clammy, cheeky, Hardy-ish one, getting increasingly stressed out during the 45-minute sketch.

Thewlis is the lean, leathery, Laurel-ish old hand, trying to suppress misgivings of his own. They make Pinter's mannered, sometimes illogical dialogue seem effortlessly natural. And Hyemi Shin's dingy set lends the atmosphere of a death-row cell. Pinter's gallows humour at its best.

Until tomorrow night; tickets from oldvictheatre.com. For more reviews, see Mail Online.

Also opening....

Piaf (Playhouse, Nottingham and touring)

Rating:

Verdict: More Julie Andrews than Edith Piaf

There's too much Julie Andrews in Jenna Russell's turn as Edith Piaf in Pam Gems's 1978 portrait of the rough as gravel French chanteuse.

Piaf was, after all, a punch-yer-lights-out street prostitute turned cabaret singer, discovered caterwauling in Paris's red-light district in the 1930s.

Supposedly born on the pavement, Piaf possessed an extraordinary voice that put the gutter into guttural. Although she became a global icon, her life was marred by serious injuries in two car crashes and the loss of a lover in a plane crash.

Dependence on booze, pills and heroin led to breakdowns...and the death of the woman they called 'The Little Sparrow' at the age of 47.

Hardly a noun goes unaccosted by an expletive in Gems's garrulously demotic script — although sometimes that noun is an expletive already. But there are more lyrical moments, including a duet with Piaf's friend Marlene Dietrich on Ma Vie En Rose, an achingly lonely rendition of If You Love Me, and a whopping finale, Non Je Ne Regrette Rien, calculated to make the spine tingle.

Olivier award-winner Russell certainly brings terrific musical theatre pedigree, as well as capturing Piaf's crabbed body language and furtive demeanour. But I wished she'd tossed caution into the Seine, in a show that feels more like a music hall caper than a seditious Left Bank cabaret.

Even so, I tip my beret to Adam Penford's ambitious production, featuring a billboard scaffold with the singer's name in lights above peeling posters declaring her derelict legend.

Supporting acting and singing is variable but Laura Pitt-Pulford as Dietrich and Sally Ann Triplett as Piaf's hooker friend Toine add style and swagger.

The company are challenged by having to stoke a sparse, socially distanced audience, but maybe with full houses after July 19, Russell will feel emboldened to be that bit more raucous.

Patrick Marmion

Even so, I tip my beret to Adam Penford's ambitious production, featuring a billboard scaffold with the singer's name in lights above peeling posters declaring her derelict legend

The Invisible Hand (Kiln Theatre)

Rating:

Verdict: Global economics for dummies

Global economics isn't often the subject of a play, but who knew it could be so watchable — and mordantly funny, too?

In this revival of US playwright Ayad Akhtar's political thriller (first performed at the Kiln in 2016 and again efficiently directed by Indhu Rubasingham) we follow the fortunes of hostage Nick Bright (Daniel Lapaine).

The American banker, languishing in a cell in rural Pakistan, is told he can buy his freedom by raising $10 million on the stock markets for the captors' cause.

This sets up an intriguing relationship between the banker and his guard Bashir (Scott Karim) who, under Nick's instruction, makes the deals on a computer.

But who will decide Nick's fate — his captors, or the whims of the market?

It's a clever framework within which Akhtar examines meaty subjects including the ethics of capitalism, western imperialism, global economics and personal greed, and the writer slips in a lot of information.

The play's title, which refers to the checks and balances inherent in the market (it may make some laugh ironically), is deftly explained, as is the 1944 Bretton Woods agreement, which established the US dollar as the standard for international money exchange.

Or, as Bashir might put it, a system for establishing fiscal control over developing countries such as Pakistan.

We see young guard Dar (Sid Sagar) flirt with capitalism under Nick's tutelage, and we begin to have our doubts about the altruism of Imam Saleem (Tony Jayawardena).

Bashir, meanwhile, discovers the addictive allure of playing the markets. 'Bulls make money, bears make money, pigs get slaughtered,' cautions Nick, quoting a Wall Street maxim about controlling greed. 'Not in Pakistan, mate,' replies Bashir.

Akhtar increasingly skews the evening towards melodrama as Nick seeks to exploit the divisions he notices between his captors, which frequently erupts into violent conflict.

We of course know where this is going, but Akhtar keeps us guessing how we will get there.

Until July 31

Veronica Lee

Opera

Comedy trumps tragedy, in Mozart vs Mozart…

Così Fan Tutte (Glyndebourne Festival Opera)

Rating:

Don Giovanni (Royal Opera)

Rating:

Verdict: Sussex wallops London

To hear revivals of two Mozart-Lorenzo Da Ponte collaborations on consecutive evenings is the height of luxury, especially as each is a feast of good singing.

If a clear winner emerges, with no need for a penalty shoot-out, it is partly because one production is so clearly superior: Nicholas Hytner's staging of Così Fan Tutte, with Vicki Mortimer's ingeniously adaptable set, is a delight from first note to last.

As the old roué Don Alfonso, who bets two young friends that their 'true' loves can be seduced by others, the great Alessandro Corbelli manipulates the action with magnificent aplomb, regaling us with a fine trill on the way. He is aided and abetted by lovely Korean soubrette Hera Hyesang Park as the maid Despina, a minx who adopts two disguises to overthrow her two mistresses' fidelity.

Huw Montague Rendall displays a beautiful tone as Guglielmo in Così Fan Tutte

Nicholas Hytner's staging of Così Fan Tutte is a delight from first note to last

The lovers are a well-balanced quartet, Ida Falk Winland overcoming the fiendish difficulties of Fiordiligi's arias, Julie Boulianne charming as younger sister Dorabella, Korean tenor Konu Kim lacking only a trill as Ferrando, British baritone Huw Montague Rendall displaying a beautiful tone as Guglielmo.

Covid precautions deprive us of the chorus, which means one regrettable cut, but conductor Riccardo Minasi moulds the ensembles with an expressive baton and the period orchestra plays well.

What a contrast at Covent Garden, where it is a contest as to which is more exasperating, Kasper Holten's clever-clever production or Es Devlin's irritating set with endless doors and staircases, a constantly rotating target for tedious projections. The entire evening is so oppressive and it ends lamely.

Erwin Schrott's is familiar predatory as the opera's title character Don Giovanni

Don Giovanni: The entire evening is so oppressive and it ends lamely

The main compensations are Erwin Schrott's familiar predatory Don Giovanni and Adela Zaharia's superbly sung Donna Anna. Nicole Chevalier is fully committed as Donna Elvira and Frederic Antoun as Ottavio essays stylish decorations in his arias.

Gerald Finley, who would make a natural Don Giovanni, sings and acts intelligently as the Don's comic servant Leporello, but anyone who recalls Geraint Evans will not be convinced. As Zerlina and Masetto, Zuzana Markova and Michael Mofidian are pallid.

In the pit, Constantin Trinks begins lumpily but warms up to engage stylishly with chorus and orchestra.

Tully Potter
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaz Kamwi

Name: Kaz Kamwi

Age: 26

Location: Essex

Occupation: Fashion Blogger

Who is their type on paper? 'I like meeting new people, I'm ready to be in a relationship. Why not be in a place where people are looking for the same things as me?'

Chloe Burrows

Name: Chloe Burrows

Age: 25

Location: Bicester

Occupation: Financial Services Marketing Executive

Who is their type on paper? 'I like a good build. I go to the gym. I want someone who is funny. Really funny and caring and will do nice little things for you.'

Faye Winter

Name: Faye Winter

Age: 26

Location: Devon

Occupation: Letting Manager

What is her type on paper? 'Someone that will put me in my place. Someone that makes me laugh. But also someone that takes my banter. I’m like a five-year-old in a playground, if I like you, I will make a mockery of you and laugh and joke. That is my really terrible flirting skills. I need someone who can take that.'

Rachel Finni

Name: Rachel Finni

Age: 29

Location: London

Occupation: Luxury travel specialist

Why did you sign up for Love Island? I've scraped the bottom of the dirtiest barrels, that’s how I describe my dating life. So I thought "why not? Let’s apply. If it happens, it happens".'

Lucinda Strafford

Name: Lucinda Strafford

Age: 21

Location: Brighton

Occupation: Online fashion boutique owner

Which boy do you have your eye on? I really fancy Brad. And then possibly Liam. But obviously I’m open to getting to know any of the other boys.

AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Name: AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Age: 28

Location: Hertfordshire

Occupation: Hair extension technician

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I’ve had the worst luck with men. I feel like this is the one thing I haven’t tried. I thought why not? Let’s give it a go.'

Georgia Townend

Name: Georgia Townend

Age: 28

Location: Essex

Occupation: Marketing executive

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I've been single for a really long time. Five years. I haven’t done the maths but it’s at least that. I feel like I’ve exhausted all the other options on how to meet people.'

Mary Bedford

Name: Mary Bedford

Age: 22

Location: Wakefield

Occupation: Model

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I have the worst luck, ever, with boys. Genuinely the worst ever. I always get dragged into the same circle of boys. So I was like, I need to go in another direction.'

Kaila Troy

Name: Kaila Troy

Age: 28

Location: Dublin

Occupation: DJ

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'Real life dating has not been doing me any favours at all. I’ve had it.'

Matthew Macnabb

Name: Matthew Macnabb

Age: 26

Location: Belfast

Occupation: Strategic Marketing Consultant

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I feel like I’m pretty chilled and very adventurous. I’m very laid-back in the sense I like to laugh and I don’t care too much about what people think.'

Amy Day

Name: Amy Day

Age: 25

From: Surrey

Occupation: Performer

Why have you signed up for Love Island: I’m clearly not very good at dating myself. I’m looking forward to the experience and the potential of finding someone I might not have met.

Lillie Hayes

Name: Lillie Haynes

Age: 22

From: South Shields

Occupation: Trainee accountant

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’ve definitely got my eye on Jake. He’s 100% the type of boy I would go for at home. It’s too good of a match not to just go for. Liam is definitely a dark horse for me, he’s like James Bond when you look at him, absolutely gorgeous. So he could be a very close second.

Jack Barlow

Name: Jack Barlow

Age: 26

From: East Sussex

Occupation: Racing driver/coach

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’m very much a connection type of person so I’ll be able to tell more in person. From what I’ve seen and going off their energy, Chloe has been top of my list. It’s been nice to see her be herself and not care what anyone thinks. I think she’ll be a lot of fun.

Jack Barlow

Name: Aaron Simpson

Age: 24

From: Kent

Occupation: Footballer

What is it like dating as a footballer? Does it make things easier or does it stand in the way? A lot of people have an assumption of me as being a typical player, but I got all of that out of my system when I was younger and now I’m a lot more laid-back when it comes to dating. A lot of people would assume that I go on lots of dates but I’m actually quite picky when it comes to who I date. Sometimes it can be hard to know if someone is genuine or not. My mum is really protective over me. The approval is always needed from mumsy, for sure.

Brett Staniland

Name: Brett Staniland

Age: 27

From: Derbyshire

Occupation: PhD student and model

Why have you signed up to Love Island? I've never had a serious relationship and the last 18 months has been really stagnant in terms of meeting new people and dating. Lots of my friends have settled down, had kids. I'm kind of the one that's left back from all of that. Now is the right time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alan Carr's husband Paul Drayton has broken his silence after sharing a photo of himself with a black eye following a drinking binge.

Paul, 46 - who has been married to comedian Alan since 2018 - removed the photo from Instagram within an hour on Wednesday after telling a fan 'We had a bad row' and took to Instagram the next day to insist the comedian, 45, 'has never hit me.'

Paul, who has a history of alcoholism, wrote: 'I'm feeling very fragile at the minute and would like to say that Alan would not and has never hit me.

Shocking: Alan Carr's husband Paul Drayton has broken his silence after sharing a photo of himself with a black eye following a drinking binge

'And I'm devastated that he has to deal with this today.'

Alan confirmed in a statement shortly after his husband posted the black eye image the injury was a result of him 'being back on the wagon' and he had not been involved in the incident.

He told The Sun: 'While I was away filming on location the past few weeks, Paul fell off the wagon and started drinking again.

Never: Paul, 46 - who has been married to comedian Alan since 2018 - removed the photo from Instagram within an hour on Wednesday after telling a fan 'We had a bad row' and took to Instagram the next day to insist the comedian, 45, 'has never hit me'

'When I arrived back home from Wales, Paul was covered in scratches and bruises from a drinking binge.'

The Chatty Man host added: 'We are now working together to get the help he needs to get better which is our number one priority right now.'

After a concerned fan commented on Paul's photo asking: 'What the hell happened? Sending my love,' he replied: 'We had a bad row', and added a crying face emoji.

Statement: Alan confirmed in a statement shortly after his husband posted the black eye image that the injury was a result of him 'being back on the wagon' (pictured in 2020)

Married: Paul and Alan are pictured on their wedding day back in 2020

Vegas nuptials: The pair are seen on their wedding night in Las Vegas

According to The Sun, Paul's famous friends were quick to share their concerns, with Carol Vorderman commenting: 'We love you Paul,' and Tamzin Outhwaite asking: 'When was this? Are you OK?'

The paper added that Paul's post comes three days after he shared a photo of himself wearing a vomit-stained T-shirt alongside the caption: 'This is what alcoholism does to you. My gorgeous husband took this pic.'

MailOnline has reached out to Alan's representatives for comment.

Last August, Alan revealed lockdown had tempted his teetotal husband to start drinking again.

The pair spent the pandemic isolating together on their farm outside London.

Paul went into rehab in 2018 for alcohol problems the same year he married Alan at Adele's home in LA.

Alan said: 'While I was away filming on location the past few weeks, Paul fell off the wagon and started drinking again' (pictured 2019)

Alan told the Kelly Hoppen podcast last year: 'It's been tough for Paul during lockdown. He's been saying, ''Oh, shall we get a bottle?'' and I say, ''No, we're not getting any rosé wine in''.

'He's been so good and I'm so proud of him.'

The Chatty Man host went alcohol free to support his husband but has since started drinking again.

He said: 'I like eating and drinking, but it was ridiculous before - we were cracking open a bottle of rosé because it was a Monday.

'We were out of control. It was a laugh, but looking at Paul, sometimes the party has to stop.'

He added: 'I enjoy a drink and I have it on special occasions now, it's a real treat for me.'

'With lockdown and the rise of podcasts it's reawakened my chatting.

'It's made me want to chat more to people, and I'm quite good at it and I like chatting to people.'

The couple wed in an idyllic ceremony in Los Angeles in front of just four guests in January 2018, before enjoying a relaxing honeymoon in Mexico - but have kept their relationship low profile.

His best pal Adele officiated the wedding ceremony, and he later revealed during an appearance on This Morning in April 2018 that she also paid for the entire wedding.

The couple became engaged in 2016 when they were on holiday in Indonesia.

When Paul popped the question, Alan thought he had had a dental accident while chowing down on his dessert - only to reveal his beau had hidden an engagement ring in the pudding.

Rehab: Paul went into rehab in 2018 for alcohol problems the same year he married Alan at Adele's home in LA (pictured together with Adele)

Alan has been open about Paul's battle with alcoholism and spoke about it in his book ALANATOMY.

He said: 'I want to be there for him because he's the best thing that's happened to me and I've got to support him and everything.'

Talking about his demons, Alan admitted: 'To be honest, it was a tough year for my Paul. He had a few issues with alcohol, and a lot of the time that was because I was away so much.

'I was out there, working hard, earning the money, and I neglected my personal life, really, so I feel a little bit to blame for that.'

However, Alan is adamant he has no interest in becoming a dad, and neither does Paul.

Setting the record straight on whether he planned a family back in 2015, the funnyman quipped: 'I am so not broody. I don’t have a fatherly bone in my body. I struggle with two dogs, I forget to feed them sometimes, let alone a baby.

'Plus, everyone who has kids looks terrible. I see people and say, "Are you on crack?" and they’re like, ‘No, I’ve got two kids’. Paul luckily isn’t into kids either.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Martine McCutcheon has spoken out about her battle with Lyme disease as she revealed on Instagram on Wednesday she has had a bad flare-up.

The actress, 45, who announced her diagnosis in April 2017, said she had been suffering with 'migraines from hell' but had managed to go outside from some fresh air.

Martine shared a snap in the car and penned: 'Sunshine! Hurrah! We are having a little drive as I've been having a flare up of the fibro and lyme today and I feel like I've been hit on the head by a mallet!'

'I feel like I've been hit on the head by a mallet!'Martine McCutcheon has spoken out about her battle with Lyme disease as she revealed on Instagram on Wednesday she has had a bad flare-up

'I get migraines from hell! I've managed to rest a bit and I wanted some fresh air & a little trip out - but the Sat Nav says one way & Waze says another!

'I never know which one to follow... Eyes down and concentrate! I b****y hate traffic! Sometimes Willy Waze isn't as on the ball as I'd like... Anyone else find that?

'And as Sat Nav Steve... He's on his own planet! Have a lovely evening everyone! X,' she concluded.

Only three minutes after the post went live, the Love Actually star took to the comments section to give her fans a further tip to help with the condition.

Heartfelt: The actress took to Instagram on Monday to share a candid post about her ongoing struggle with the bacterial infection

Top tip: The actress quickly took to the comments section to add that a cold shower helps with flare-ups

Beauty: The condition causes Martine to lose weight slower than the average person

'Aaaah yes I use ice - it's really effective isn't it?' she added.

'I have a cold shower everyday too and that's not easy but it's been a game changer along with my @pureiscbd it's so great when you find things that help but I will check out the gua sha - thank you! X❤️'

Alongside the personal message, the Hackney-born star uploaded a beautiful selfie where she donned a black-and-white spaghetti-strapped top.

Brave: In April 2017, the NTA winner announced her diagnosis for the very first time

Keeping her makeup to a minimum, Martine had styled her luscious brown tresses into a sharply-cut fringe.

She accessorised her look with a pair of circular gold earrings and looked towards the ground.

Martine gave an interview to Hello Magazine last year about her battle with Lyme disease, which saw her pose alongside her husband Jack McManus, 37, and their six-year-old son Rafferty.

Happy family: Martine shares six-year-old son Rafferty with musician husband Jack McManus, 37

Speaking to the publication about living with her condition during the COVID-19 pandemic, she said: 'If you have any underlying illness you can't take risks.

'As with any chronic condition you can have flare-ups. When I go outside I always have my mask and my gloves and take it very seriously.

'I have been really good emotionally for a long time and I have felt a lot calmer. It has been good to realise it is okay to do things at your own pace.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has received rave reviews for her performance in 2:22 A Ghost Story.

And Lily Allen made a very glamorous departure from the play's press night in London on Wednesday, looking fabulous in a black one-shoulder gown as she left the Noël Coward Theatre.

Complete with gorgeous feather trimming, 36-year-old Lily's sweeping gown showcased her slimmed-down frame and spilled around her velvet black boots.

Wow: Lily Allen, 36, made a very glamorous departure from the play's press night in London on Wednesday, looking fabulous in a black one-shoulder gown

Iconic: Lily wore her hair swept off her face but was sporting her iconic jet black fringe

Lily wore her hair swept off her face but was sporting her iconic jet black fringe.

She put on an animated display as she made her way through the capital, smiling for photographers and raising her arms into the air.

The Smile singer accessorised with a single gold bangle worn on her left wrist and after leaving the theatre made her way to the show's afterparty which took place at J Sheekey.

Also in attendance on Wednesday were Lenny Henry and his girlfriend Lisa Makin, who looked every inch the happy couple.

The couple, who began dating in 2012, put on a dapper display for the show, with Lenny donning a black blazer along with a matching pair of trousers which he paired with a navy shirt.

Gorgeous: Complete with gorgeous feather trimming, Lily's sweeping gown showcased her slimmed-down frame

Earrings: Lily's earlobes were adorned with beautiful earrings and she made her pout pop with a swipe of lipgloss

All in the details: The Smile singer accessorised with a gold bangle worn on her left wrist

Animated: Lily put on an animated display as she made her way through the capital, smiling for photographers and raising her arms into the air

Lisa wore a dark green midi dress which she paired with a dark grey jacket and a pair of heels.

The Broadchurch star was married to fellow comedian Dawn French for 25 years but they divorced in 2010. They have a daughter Billie, 29.

Also at the show on Wednesday was actress Charlie Brooks who donned a black dress with a sheer neckline.

Standing tall: The mother-of-two teamed her show-stopping gown with a pair of black, velvet platform boots

Rave reviews: Lily has received rave reviews for her performance in 2:22 A Ghost Story

Plot: The play's plot follows Lily's character in her fears that her house is haunted and the aftermath of a dinner party with friends

High praise: Following a recent performance, Twitter and Instagram were awash with praise for Lily and the show

Afterparty: After leaving the theatre Lily made her way to the show's afterparty which took place at J Sheekey

Radiant: Lily looked radiant when she celebrated her theatre success at the up-market fish restaurant

Performance: The mother-of-two looked in good spirits after another successful show

One audience member said: 'I had goosebumps at the end, the audience were screaming. What a play, what a show, what a cast'

Good night: Lily was seen receiving a congratulatory hug from a friend after her performance

The EastEnders star, 40, also sported a pair of black boots and added to her outfit with a grey blazer.

Former Harry Potter star Jessie Cave attended the event alongside her partner Alfie Brown.

The actress donned a bright orange floral midi dress and black boots while she styled her locks into an updo.

2:22 A Ghost Story follows Lily's character in her fears that her house is haunted and the aftermath of a dinner party with friends.

Supportive friends: Lily was joined at the afterparty by model Kyle De’Volle

Mum's the word: Lily's mum Alison Owen stepped out in London on Wednesday to support her daughter and the pair cosied up for snaps

Family: Actor Jake Wood departed the theatre with his children Amber, 16, and Buster, 13

Event: Lenny Henry and his girlfriend Lisa Makin looked every inch the happy couple as they attended the press night for 2:22 A Ghost Story

Looking good: The couple put on a dapper display for the show, which stars Lily in one of the lead roles along with EastEnders' Jake Wood

Outfit: Lisa donned a dark green midi dress which she paired with a dark grey jacket and a pair of heels

Couple: Former Harry Potter star Jessie Cave attended the event alongside her partner Alfie Brown

Show: Also in attendance at the show was actress Charlie Brooks who donned a black dress with a sheer neckline

Pose: Charlie styled her blonde locks into curls and also sported a gold necklace

Trendy: Model Laura Bailey donned a white blazer which she paired with matching trousers and a grey T-shirt

Fun: Charlie grinned from ear to ear as she arrived at the show

Following a recent show, Twitter and Instagram were awash with praise with one viewer penning: 'I had goosebumps at the end, the audience were screaming. What a play, what a show, what a cast. It's unbelievable that was her west end debut'.

Fans took to the microblogging site to write: 'WOW!! I had goosebumps at the end, @sophdoesthings was crying, the audience were screaming...

'What a play, what a show, what a cast. @LilyAllen KILLED IT!!! I am so proud of her, it's unbelievable that was her west end debut never mind opening night!...

TV presenter Hayley Palmer sported a light pink mini dress with a floral print

'Absolutely loved the play last night!! One of the best things I've seen in years - you were brilliant, as was the rest of the cast! Smiling face...'

'No spoilers but that was incredible such an amazing play loved it so much! Now Shhh I won't tell- you HAVE to book and see this !! #222AGhostStory'.

The play is by Danny Robins and will run at the Noel Coward Theatre until October.

Fashion: Model Charli Howard turned heads in a red dress with puffed sleeves

Dapper: Lenny donned a black blazer along with a matching pair of trousers which he paired with a navy shirt

Plot:2:22 A Ghost Story follows Lily's character in her fears that her house is haunted and the aftermath of a dinner party with friends (pictured with co-star Jake Wood)

The night Lily Allen screamed the house down in theatre chiller: PATRICK MARMION reviews 2:22 A Ghost Story as the pop star makes her West End debut

ByPatrick Marmion for the Daily Mail

Her raucous past saw her struggle with drugs and alcohol. After celebrating two years of sobriety, however, Lily Allen last night made a triumphant West End debut.

The mother-of-two starred in the opening of supernatural thriller '2:22 – A Ghost Story' in which she plays Jenny, who thinks her house is haunted. The pop singer, 36, recently posted on social media: 'Two years drug and alcohol free today! Getting clean is the BEST thing I ever did... come see me in the play I've been working on.'

Here, PATRICK MARMION gives his verdict on her performance at London's Noel Coward Theatre...

2:22 A Ghost Story

Noel Coward Theatre, London

Rating:

There isn't much that pop star Lily Allen hasn't had a go at. But all of that sex, drugs and rock and roll may have just been a curtain-raiser.

Now she's gone and turned her hand to the stage – straight in at the deep end with her West End debut in a new play that opened amid much excitement last night.

I say 'deep end', but it isn't Shakespeare. It's a supernatural spinechiller in which she plays Jenny – a typical North London yummymummy who thinks the house she's having converted with steel joists and big windows might be haunted… she hears a man tramping around the stripped floors of her baby's bedroom at exactly 2:22am every night.

Now she's gone and turned her hand to the stage – straight in at the deep end with her West End debut in a new play that opened amid much excitement last night

Her cynical, boorishly self-righteous husband Sam (Hadley Fraser) doesn't believe her. He's got an explanation for everything. The lights went out?

Yeah right… ghosts are scared of electricity – 'just like the Amish!' But Jenny is convinced and persuades their two dinner party guests to wait up and see for themselves… at 2:22.

American shrink friend Lauren (Julia Chan) has experience of ghosts herself from her childhood. And Lauren's feisty working-class builder boyfriend Ben (Jake Wood from EastEnders) reckons he may have had a previous life in the French revolution – so he's up for it too.

This isn't the most challenging role that Allen will face should she tread the boards again.

It's a case of following the formula to deliver the goose bumps. But deliver she does. She can scream at the screech of a fox and she can do furious flare-ups too – 0-60 in a fraction of a second.

Maybe her waif-like figure in an hour-glass dress beneath dangerously sharp cheek bones could do with a little modulation in her voice. But there is subtlety too.

She pays careful attention to the action, she has terrific stage presence and only bumps into the furniture on cue.

Crucially, Danny Robins' play is cleverly constructed with a nice sting in the tale – although maybe there's a little too much well-researched debate on the reality of things that go bump in the night.

Likewise, Matthew Dunster's production lays on a few too many Hammer Horror thunderclaps and fox screeches. But he certainly has us screaming and laughing by turns as a digital clock counts down.

Did it refrigerate my vertebra too? You betcha!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She keeps her legions of social media followers entertained with a variety of sizzling snaps.

And Chloe Ferry set pulses racing once more in a daring lingerie post she shared on Wednesday.

The Geordie Shore star, 25, displayed her jaw-dropping figure in a neon green two-piece with a sheer detail and a floral print.

Wow: Chloe Ferry set pulses racing once more in a daring lingerie post she shared on Instagram on Wednesday

Styling her brunette locks into an updo, Chloe also donned a silver necklace for the stunning snaps.

Fixing the camera with a sultry stare, the reality star completed her look with a smokey eye.

Chloe captioned the snap: 'Our true nature is luminous⚡️'.

It comes after Chloe recently put on a busty display in a blue sheer suspender set that left little to the imagination.

Stunning: The Geordie Shore star, 25, displayed her jaw-dropping figure in a neon green two-piece with a sheer detail and a floral print

Chloe, who models for Nikki Intimates Lingerie, exuded confidence as she showed off her sensational figure from several angles.

Posing against a royal blue suede headboard, the Celebs Go Dating star flaunted her curves, her long curled locks falling effortlessly down her back.

Chloe opted for her signature makeup - a touch of bronze, thick eyelashes and nude lipstick to her pout.

Flawless: It comes after Chloe recently put on a busty display in a blue sheer suspender set that left little to the imagination

Sultry: The Nikki Intimates Lingerie model exuded confidence as she showed off her sensational figure from several angles

Confidence: Posing against a royal blue suede headboard, the Geordie Shore star flaunted her curves, her long curled locks falling effortlessly down her back

She penned the sizzling post: 'There's no such thing as too much lingerie. The @nikkiintimates 50% off summer sale is now live, ad'.

Wayne Lineker was quick to show his appreciation, calling Chloe 'the best', adding that Ibiza 'misses her.'

Chloe also used her Instagram Story over the weekend to promote the upcoming single she's releasing with Wayne, Mila Falls and Damon Hess.

Support: Wayne Lineker was quick to show his appreciation, calling Chloe 'the best', adding that Ibiza 'misses her'

'Guys, it is one week till mine, Wayne's, Damon's and Mila's song comes out,' Chloe told her followers.

'If you could please show us all your support - we are so excited about it, everyone's loving it so far.

'Swipe up now to have a little listen,' she said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Katie Price's son Harvey has reportedly been accepted to a £350,000-a-year residential college after moving to a transitional home earlier this year.

It's the same college the former glamour model, 43, and her son, 19, were seen visiting on her BBC documentary Harvey & Me.

A source told The Sun: 'Harvey has been accepted into the National Star College.

Change: Katie Price's son Harvey has reportedly been accepted to a £350,000-a-year residential college

'She had her heart set on the college since they visited in her BBC documentary Harvey & Me.'

The publication reports the fees are eligible for government funding because of Harvey's complex needs however it is not known if Katie's application for financial aid has been approved.

MailOnline has contacted a representative for Katie Price for comment.

In January, Katie made the 'heartbreaking' decision to place Harvey in a residential home three hours from where she lives in order to help him become more self-reliant.

College: It's the same college the former glamour model, 43, and her son, 19, were seen visiting on her BBC documentary Harvey & Me

During an interview on Studio 10 in Australia, she said: 'It's not because I don't want to see him, but I have to give him a chance to have an independent life and not let him lead me all the time.'

In February, Katie gave fans a guided tour of Harvey's transitional home as he prepares for a life of semi-independence at a residential college.

The former glamour model opened the doors to his modest two bedroom property in a YouTube video shared with subscribers.

Giving cameras unlimited access to the house, Katie, 42, admitted it was still a work in progress as they were yet to finish the painting and decorating.

Cone on in: In February, Katie gave fans a guided tour of Harvey's transitional home as he prepares for a life of semi-independence at a residential college

But every effort has been made to ensure it's a home from home for Harvey, 18, with a wide-screen TV installed in the living room and the main bedroom filled with his favourite toys.

With Harvey living alone for the first time, Katie revealed they had taken a series of precautionary steps to ensure he does not harm himself, or damage the house.

These include the installation of cameras in the living room and bedroom, giving Katie and her partner Carl Wood the opportunity to remain in touch with Harvey without living under the same roof.

The fridge has also been modestly filled to ensure Harvey, who also struggles with obesity, does not snack on junk food throughout the night.

Guided tour: The former glamour model opened the doors to his modest two bedroom property in a YouTube video shared with subscribers

Elsewhere Katie admitted she has made a resourceful use of the living room doors by draping them with washing - meaning they won't be damaged should Harvey slam them during a violent outburst.

'This isn't where we live,' Katie stressed as the tour came to an end. 'This is where Harvey lives, ready for his transitional move to college.

'It's quieter for him, he gets used to his own space and there's obviously room if someone stays the night, or if I stay, and we're only over the road - and he absolutely loves it.'

Harvey - whose father is retired footballer Dwight Yorke, 49 - is on the autism spectrum and was born with disabilities including partial blindness, ADHD and Prader-Willi syndrome, which causes an excessive appetite.

He was also born with septo-optic dysplasia - a condition that means the development of his optic nerve was unpredictable.

Fees: The fees are reportedly eligible for government funding because of Harvey's complex needs however it is not known if Katie's application for financial aid has been approved

Katie added that Harvey will live in the facility until he is 25 while studying at college, and believes the transition will help him to make more friends.

She said: 'So say on weekends, if he's got friends there and they want to go to the cinema, he might want to do that instead of coming to see me - it just gives him that option.

'He wants me to cuddle him all the time. He's got to learn to do things without me.'

Weight battle: Harvey was born with multiple disabilities including blindness, ADHD and Prader-Willi syndrome, which causes an excessive appetite

Katie has also been campaigning to get a law through Parliament that would prosecute anyone caught sending abusive comments online, after months of Harvey being relentlessly trolled online.

The star said she wants social media platforms to require the use of ID so users can't hide behind anonymous accounts when they post comments online.

Katie has been campaigning for 'Harvey's Law' to be created to make online trolling a specific criminal offence.

Katie is also mother to Junior, 15, and Princess, 13, with her ex-husband Peter Andre, 47. She also shares son Jett, seven, and daughter Bunny, six, with former spouse Kieran Hayler, 33.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amber Davies has reportedly split from her boyfriend Nick Kyriacou for the second time just one month after they got back together.

The former Love Island star, 24, is said to have already unfollowed Nick on Instagram after deciding to end their on-off romance.

A source told The Sun: 'Sadly they couldn't make it work second time around and broke things off again.

Split: Amber Davies has reportedly split from her boyfriend Nick Kyriacou for the second time just one month after they got back together

'Amber is really heartbroken and unfollowed Nick as she couldn't bear to see him on social media.'

Amber and Nick previously split after they moved in together during lockdown and found their relationship had become 'too intense too soon'.

They decided to try again and take things slowly but have now parted ways once more.

MailOnline has contacted representatives for Amber Davies for comment.

Breakup: The former Love Island star, 24, is said to have already unfollowed Nick on Instagram after deciding to end their on-off romance

Amber took to her socials at the time of their first split, revealing that nothing 'dramatic' triggered their break-up but 'life is too short to be anything but the best version of yourself.'

She also penned to her Instagram followers: 'I feel like break ups are always looked at like a bad/sad time but honestly... Sometimes you just have to call a spade a spade.

'When two people come together it's amazing yes, but also tough.

'You have to adapt and compromise and something you just have to accept it's not meant to be.

A source said: 'Sadly they couldn't make it work second time around and broke things off again. Amber is really heartbroken and unfollowed Nick as she couldn't bear to see him on social media'

'It only hurts if you allow it to hurt. Everything in life is a lesson, good and bad. Take your life lessons and move forward.'

Amber found fame by winning ITV2's Love Island with now ex-boyfriend Kem Cetinay, who's now in a relationship with trainee lawyer Lexi Hyzler, in 2017.

They split 132 days after scooping the £50,000 cash prize, with Amber going onto have brief romances with One Direction's Liam Payne and Perri Kiely from dance group Diversity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@George and Amal Clooney could soon be facing privacy issues at their £12million Berkshire mansion as a neighbouring theatre has applied to convert the space into housing.

If successful, the The Mill at Sonning, which is situated next-door to the Clooneys Grade II-listed home, will be turned into semi-detached houses that would oversee the couple's sprawling property.

The news will no doubt come as a shock to the couple, who helped keep the theatre company stay afloat during the pandemic with a substantial donation last October.

Exclusive: George and Amal Clooney face privacy issues at £12m Berkshire home after theatre (that they helped save from closure) plans to convert into houses overlooking their garden

Generous: The news will no doubt come as a shock to George and Amal, who helped keep the theatre company stay afloat during the pandemic with a substantial donation last October

Despite the celeb couple's contribution, the playhouse is still struggling and recently applied for planning permission to convert its rehearsal and visiting actors' accommodation into two semi-detached residential dwellings, ’specifically to provide additional financial support to the theatre in order to ensure its future.’

According to the planning statement, ‘the pandemic caused the Theatre to close its doors in March 2020 - the business is in dire straits and has been on the verge of closing completely.'

However, the new planning app may not be quite as pleasing for George, 61, and Amal, 43, who've always given their full support to the theatre.

The proposed two-storey properties will each have three bedrooms, an open plan kitchen and lounge, and a balcony on the top floor. Yet the balconies will be overlooking the river and, more significantly, the Clooneys property.

Back on its feet: The Hollywood A-lister, 59, and the barrister, 42, donated towards The Mill at Sonning Theatre (pictured) last year to help keep the struggling business afloat

The theatre’s planning application acknowledged it was a potential trouble spot, stating in its Design & Access Statement:

'It is worth noting that although there will be views out over the river, there is already a relatively high and dense screen of trees on the opposite bank, edging Mill House, and as such we do not foresee that there will be any negative impact on either privacy or visual amenity experienced by the owners of Mill House as a result of these proposals.’

However, in colder months, that screening of bushy trees is usually more threadbare.

Proposals: Despite the celeb couple's contribution, the playhouse applied for planning permission to convert into two semi-detached residential dwellings

Plans: The proposed two-storey properties will each have three bedrooms, an open plan kitchen and lounge, and a balcony on the top floor

A notice letter was sent out to the couple’s residence by South Oxfordshire District Council, but they didn’t make a complaint.

The Theatres Trust aren’t happy with parts of the plans, concerned about noise levels coming from the theatre and future income dipping due to no rehearsal space.

It said: 'The applicant notes that acoustic measures will exceed "standard requirements" and we suggest this is conditioned to safeguard the theatre’s activities into the future and protect it from complaints and restrictions being imposed on it.

'Although sympathetic to the theatre’s need to review its options to ensure it will be sustained into the future, particularly given the extreme challenges arising from the pandemic, it must be careful not to undermine its future viability.

'The rehearsal space constitutes part of the theatre’s cultural and social offer and this will be lost; it is also potentially a source of income for the theatre if open to outside groups.'

History: The late Tim and Eileen Richards found The Mill - which was a derelict building - in 1977, and opened the theatre in 1982

The plans have also irked the Environment Agency, who objected on three counts that there was ’no assessment of the risks to nature conservation’, an ‘inadequate buffer zone’ to the river bank, and the ‘absence of an acceptable Flood Risk Assessment’.

Amal and George's property was hit with floods in February this year and January 2020, which left their grounds swamped with muddy water.

In response, the theatre changed their plans for the properties to be situated further from the river and produced an ecology report. There’s also been an application to Natural England for a bat licence and proposals now include bat roosting areas.

The council targeted June 2 for a decision date, which is now two months overdue.

Background: The Mill is now run by Tim and Eileen's daughter, artistic director Sally Hughes, who has received help from the Clooneys in the past

The late Tim and Eileen Richards found The Mill - which was a derelict building - in 1977, and opened the theatre in 1982.

It is now run by their daughter, artistic director Sally Hughes, who has received help from the Clooneys in the past.

In 2018, Sally won approval for a development of five properties after the celebrity couple lodged no objections.

She had the pair over to watch performances and allowed them to use her car park for the many contractors who were renovating their nine-bedroom, eight-bathroom mansion, which they bought in 2014 and moved into three years later.

The theatre owner built the flats to help pay a £1 million bill caused by woodworm at the theatre — a converted 18th-century flour mill on a small island in the Thames.

In October, the Mill announced on Facebook, special praise for the Clooneys and playwright Ray Cooney, whose comedies are often performed there.

It said: 'Since July, when the theatre celebrated its 38th birthday, The Mill has only been able to operate its adjoining restaurant with reduced seating, but this together with fundraising and donations from Mill Angel supporters and Hollywood star George Clooney and his wife Amal, who are near neighbours and regular attenders, have been a lifeline to ensure the venue's survival.’

'Artistic Director Sally Hughes singles out special praise for the playwright Ray Cooney, whose legendary farces are performed regularly at the venue.'

History: The late Tim and Eileen Richards found The Mill - which was a derelict building - in 1977, and opened the theatre in 1982

Last year, it was reported that George and Amal, who share twins Ella and Alexander, four, were building a shed for 'security purposes' in the grounds of their sprawling listed mansion home.

In a planning request to the local council, their new addition - complete with what appears to be a toilet - is described as a simple, single-storey timber construction with a pitched roof clad in cedar shingles.

The duo's abode, which stands on an idyllic stretch of the Thames, is secluded by trees on acres of land - but it appears they are keen to beef up security as the famous home attracts more tourists.

It will be built in the style of a garden shed near their gravel driveway at the Georgian property.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She takes on a leading role of Watts in the near-future Sci-Fi blockbuster.

And Thandiwe Newton, 48, certainly made a show-stopping entrance on Wednesday evening as she hit the red carpet at Reminiscence's UK premiere at London's BFI IMAX.

Cutting a slim figure in a black maxi dress, featuring an eye-catching green ruffled neckline, the actress commanded attention in the unmissable number.

Classy: Thandiwe Newton stunned in a green-collared black maxi dress as she led the stars at the Reminiscence premiere in London on Wednesday

Elevating her height with a pair of black-strapped heels, the BAFTA winner gave her best power pose, placing her onyx-nail-painted hand firmly on her left hip while shooting a pout.

With her sleek brown tresses tied back in a middle-parting, Thandiwe accessorised her waist with a pair of classic black belts.

The Westworld star sported a smoky eye makeup look and wore a pair of emerald green earrings to complete her ensemble.

Beauties: The Westworld star sported a smoky eye makeup look, while Rebecca Ferguson, who takes on the role of Mae in the blockbuster, looked phenomenal in a tiger-print dress

Strike a pose: Thandiwe certainly made a show-stopping entrance as she hit the red carpet at London's BFI IMAX

Fashion forward: Cutting a slim figure in a black maxi dress, featuring an eye-catching green ruffled neckline, the actress commanded attention in the unmissable number

Confident: Donning a pair of black pump heels, the Swedish actress's makeup had been applied flawlessly and her short dark blonde tresses fell gracefully in curls

Meanwhile, her co-star Rebecca, who takes on the role of Mae in the blockbuster, looked phenomenal as she modelled a glossy tiger-print maxi-dress.

Stunning a crowd of onlookers, the 37-year-old oozed confidence in a corset-style strapped top and clutched a charcoal purse with both of her hands.

Donning a pair of black pump heels, the Swedish actress's makeup had been applied flawlessly and her short dark blonde tresses fell gracefully in curls.

Centre of attention: Hollywood A-Lister Hugh Jackman, 52, who stars in the movie as Nick Bannister, looked typically suave as he joined his female co-stars for the event

Suited-and-booted: Wearing a timeless grey suit and white shirt, accessorised with a light brown tie, the Aussie star had groomed his brown locks into a smart quiff

Team: Rebecca (left), Hugh and Thandiwe (right) make up Reminiscence's star-studded line up

Hollywood A-Lister Hugh Jackman, 52, who stars in the movie as Nick Bannister, looked typically suave as he joined his female co-stars for the camera-flash-filled event.

Wearing a timeless grey suit and white shirt, accessorised with a light brown tie, the Aussie star had groomed his brown locks into a smart quiff.

Beaming for the crowd of onlookers, the Wolverine actor placed his left hand in his pocket as he kept firmly in position in a pair of shiny black leather shoes.

All-black: Jonathan Nolan (left) looked debonair in a black suit. Also in attendance was Mojean Aria (right), who paired a cowboy hat with a black Burberry suit and khaki polo shirt

Smiles: Lisa Joy (left) put on a risqué display in an extremely high-cut onyx gown while Harpz Kaur (right) kept it casual in a light-blue denim zip-up sleeved-dress

All good here: Amir Khan shot a thumbs-up to the cameras while donning a navy polo shirt and Jonathan Nolan looked debonair in a black suit

Also in attendance was Mojean Aria, who paired a cowboy hat with a black Burberry suit and khaki polo shirt.

Amir Khan shot a thumbs-up to the cameras while donning a navy polo shirt and Jonathan Nolan looked debonair in a black suit.





Lisa Joy put on a risqué display in an extremely high-cut onyx gown while Harpz Kaur kept it casual in a light-blue denim zip-up sleeved-dress.

Erim Kaur flashed a beam to onlookers while sporting a high-cut black ruffled dress.

Stars: Damien O'Brien combined a pair of charcoal jeans with a white crew-neck T-shirt and black bomber jacket, while Erim Kaur flashed a beam to onlookers

Glamorous: Ikram Abdi Omar looked stylish in an all-black ensemble and orange heels

Trendy: Luke Catleugh (left) wore his hand in his grey suit pocket, which he paired with a black crew-neck T-shirt. Jack Howard (right) cut a grey suit, which he wore above a classic white shirt

Damien O'Brien combined a pair of charcoal jeans with a white crew-neck T-shirt and black bomber jacket. He accessorised his look with an eye-popping red baseball cap.

Jack Howard cut a grey suit, which he wore above a classic white shirt.

Luke Catleugh wore his hand in his grey suit pocket, which he paired with a black crew-neck T-shirt.

Ikram Abdi Omar was also spotted posing up a storm on the blue carpet in an all-black ensemble and and orange heels.

Gripping: The movie, which releases on August 20th, takes place in the near future where Miami has been flooded by rising seas

The movie, which releases on August 20th, takes place in the near future. Miami has been flooded by rising seas and Nick Bannister (Hugh Jackman), a lonely army veteran, offers clients the chance to relive any memory they wish.

When the mysterious Mae (Rebecca Ferguson) enters his life, a passionate love affair erupts.

However, when a different client's memories involve Mae in a string of violent crimes, Nick must venture through a dark past to unravel the truth about his lover.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He has played the role of Reggie Jackson in Call The Midwife since 2017.

And trailblazing Down's Syndrome star Daniel Laurie comes from an acting family, as his late father has been revealed as Leslie Grantham who played 'Dirty Den' Watts in EastEnders.

Actor Daniel, 25, has also starred in popular shows such as Vera, Stella and Finding Alice.

Family: Call the Midwife star Daniel Laurie's famous father has been revealed as Leslie Grantham who played 'Dirty Den' Watts in EastEnders (Daniel is pictured)

All together: Leslie married Jane Laurie in 1981 and had three sons - Daniel (centre), Spike (right) and Jake (left)- before they divorced in 2013, with Daniel choosing to use his mother's surname

Leslie married Jane Laurie in 1981 and had three sons - Daniel, Spike and Jake - before they divorced in 2013, with Daniel choosing to use his mother's surname.

Talking about when she found out she was pregnant with him, Jane explained: 'I told him [Leslie] I was expecting another baby - and that I was sure it had Down's Syndrome.

'He was shocked, because a third child had simply never been on the agenda, but when I suggested perhaps we should have a test to find out about the Down's Syndrome, Leslie shook his head and said firmly: 'Whatever we get, it's our baby'.'

In a 2006 interview with the Daily Mail, Jane praised Leslie as a 'fantastic' dad, saying: 'When he was just a few days old, Leslie looked down at the baby and said 'you know, there are some hard things in life, but this isn't one of them'.'

Although Leslie himself was notoriously private when it came to his family life, the late actor did speak about his son occasionally.

Speaking about Daniel having Down's syndrome during an interview with The Guardian in 2003, Leslie hailed his son as 'fantastic', saying: 'We didn't know [he had Down's syndrome] before he was born, but it wouldn't have made a difference. He's fantastic.'

Seven years earlier during an interview with The Mirror, he said he is 'proud and very lucky to have been given Daniel'.

Leslie added: 'He's obviously got some problems, but they're negligible compared with other people's. My philosophy is that even a blind man knows when the sun's shining. Measured by that, Danny's got no problems at all.'

He continued: 'I have three of the best kids around. They drive me mad, but I'm also lucky to have a wife who is a superb mother.'

After Danny was born, Leslie became a fund-raiser for the Down's Syndrome Association.

'It's adults who need to realise how special these children are,' the EastEnders star said. 'His brothers are fantastic with him - a lot better than most adults.'

Tragic: Leslie (pictured) sadly passed away in 2018 after a battle with lung cancer at the age of 71

During Call the Midwife's sixth season, Daniel joined playing the part of Reggie who goes to live with his uncle Fred Buckle after his mother's death.

His time on the show explored the taboos and stigma attached to the arrival of a child with Down's syndrome in the 1960s, with fans praising the 'powerful' and 'sensitive' story line.

During a 2014 interview, Daniel spoke about having Down's syndrome, saying: 'Basically having Down's syndrome is kinda cool. To me it's absolutely cool. I so yeah, that's how I've got Down's syndrome… and you absolutely crack me up.'

Leslie sadly passed away in 2018 after a battle with lung cancer at the age of 71.

The TV star had just before his death returned to the UK for treatment after living for some time in Bulgaria.

Marriage: Leslie and Jane are pictured together in 1989 eight years after tying the knot

Unit: Jane is pictured with her three sons L-R Spike, Daniel and Jake in 2007 who she shares with Leslie

A statement from his representative announcing his death said: 'We formally announce the loss of Leslie Grantham, who passed away at 10.20am on the morning of Friday 15th June 2018.'

Grantham had been visited by close friends from TV in the weeks before his death and he told some he had terminal cancer.

Grantham became famous playing Watts in EastEnders, originally from 1985 to 1989.

A 1986 Christmas Day episode drew an audience of more than 30 million viewers, who watched as Watts handed over divorce papers to on-screen wife Angie.

Love: Leslie is seen off by his wife Jane as he leaves his home in Wimbledon in 2004 before their divorce

Role: Grantham became famous playing Watts in EastEnders, originally from 1985 to 1989 (pictured with on-screen wife Angie)

Smile: Jane is pictured with two of her three sons Daniel and Spike on a family holiday in 2018

His character was apparently killed off in 1989 but made a shock return to Albert Square in 2003.

Grantham had originally been a soldier, having enlisted in the British Army in 1965 and being sent to West Germany with the Royal Fusiliers.

In 1966, however, he was involved in a struggle with a taxi driver he was attempting to rob in Osnabruck, Lower Saxony.

The driver, Felix Reese, was shot in the head and died and, in 1967, Grantham was convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment.

It was during his time behind bars - he spent ten years in British jails - that he first took to acting.

Speaking about his past in 2016, Grantham said: 'Life isn't a straight line. It's like travelling the motorway. Every now and then, you have to take a diversion. Unfortunately, some of my diversions have been quite catastrophic. But I'm safe in the knowledge that what I do now is good.

Story: Grantham had originally been a soldier, having enlisted in the British Army in 1965 and being sent to West Germany with the Royal Fusiliers (pictured in 2016)

'Of course I have regrets, but you can't go round wearing a hair shirt all your life, otherwise you'll never get out of bed in the morning. I f***** up, now I'm going to move on.'

In 2004, Grantham was exposed by a Sunday newspaper after he took part in webcam chats while performing a sex act.

He apologised to his family for the embarrassment but later said he was 'set up'.

Grantham said he was so devastated after the scandal that he attempted suicide.

Success: Daniel (centre) has played the role of Reggie Jackson in Call the Midwife since 2017
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For confidential support in the US - call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255

For confidential support in the UK - call Samaritans for free on 116 123 or visit www.samaritans.org

Eminem's ex-wife Kim Scott was hospitalised following a suicide attempt on July 30, reports TMZ.

Police and emergency workers are said to have responded to a call of a suicidal person at 46-year-old Kim's Michigan home, with Kim restrained by deputies due to being so 'combative and violent' that medics were unable to assess her.

Kim and Eminem, real name Marshall Mathers III, 48, share biological daughter Hailie Jade, 25. Eminem also adopted Kim's daughter Whitney, 18, from a previous relationship, and Kim's late twin sister Dawn's daughter Alaina, 27.

The website reports when help arrived, Kim was cut, with 'several small lacerations on the back of her leg.'

Claim: Eminem 's ex-wife Kim Scott was hospitalised following a suicide attempt on July 30, reports TMZ (pictured at the second wedding in 2006)

It was claimed Kim was taken to hospital to undergo a medical and psychological evaluation, but is now at home recovering.

Kim and Eminem married in 1999, only to proceed with a nasty divorce two years later during their famously stormy romance.

They remarried in January 2006 but had broken up again by April. Their relationship and Eminem's rise to global fame inspired his hit movie, 8 Mile.

Eminem and Kim's volatile relationship is one of rap music folklore - the controversial rapper has frequently taken verbal shots at his on-off lover during his recording career - rapping about killing her, her drug use and infidelity.

Past: Kim and Eminem married in 1999, only to proceed with a nasty divorce two years later. They remarried in January 2006 but had broken up again by April. Their relationship and Eminem's rise to global fame inspired his hit movie, 8 Mile (pictured 2004)

Sighting: Kim was last seen in public in August 2018 in Macomb, Michigan (pictured)

Their daughter: Kim and Eminem, real name Marshall Mathers III, 48, share biological daughter Hailie Jade, 25 (pictured)

HOW EMINEM REFERENCED HIS FEUD WITH KIM IN HIS RAPS Eminem didn't hold back when divulging details about his turbulent relationship - rapping in explicit detail about his troubles with Kim 1998: '97 Bonnie & Clyde The song details Eminem taking daughter Hailey for a ride with Kim in the trunk of his car before dumping her in a lake Lyrics: Da-da made a nice bed for mommy at the bottom of the lake / Here, you want to help da-da tie a rope around this rock? (yeah!) 2000: Kim While it came out two years later, Kim was written before '97 Bonnie & Clyde and details how he would murder her Lyrics: You were supposed to love me!! / Now bleed b***h, bleed! Bleed b***h, bleed! Bleed! 2002: Hailie's Song The song is a tribute to the daughter they share, but Eminem references his ex throughout Lyrics: Now look, I love my daughter more than life in itself / But I got a wife that's determined to make my life livin' hell 2002: Say Goodbye To Hollywood Eminem references his tough time in the spotlight and hints that he considered taking his own life, before referencing his feud with Kim Lyrics: I thought I was tough enough to stick it out with Kim / But I wasn’t tough enough to juggle two things at once 2002: 'Till I Collapse Eminem references Kim being charged with felony cocaine possession and two driving violations on Monday stemming from a traffic stop Lyrics: My thoughts are sporadic, I act like I'm an addict / I rap like I'm addicted to smack like I'm Kim Mathers 2003: Sing for the moment Eminem used the lyrics to hit back at claims he promotes violence, yet references his fight with bouncer John Guerrera who he saw kissing Kim Lyrics: I'm a criminal, how the f**k can I raise a little girl? I couldn't, I wouldn't be fit to / You're full of s**t too Guerrera; that was a fist that hit you 2004: Like Toy Soldiers While most of the lyrics describe Eminem's attempts to defuse violence in the hip-hop community, he randomly references Kim's infidelity Lyrics: So ticky-tock, listen as the sound ticks on the clock / Listen to the sound of Kim as she licks on the c*ck 2004: Mockingbird The song is another that addresses Eminem's relationship with Kim but seems heartfelt and expresses regret over their split Lyrics: We did not plan it to be this way your mother and me /But things have got so bad between us I don't see us ever being together ever again 2004: Puke Eminem references his many relationships over the years and discusses the tattoo he got for Kim Lyrics: I can't believe I went and did this stupid s**t again / My next girlfriend, now her name's gotta be Kim 2005: When I'm Gone Eminem laments primarily state of his relationship with his daughter, Hailie, and his regret over her witnessing her parents fighting Lyrics: I'm pushin' Hailie on a swing, she keeps screamin', she don't want me to sing / You're makin' mommy cry, why, why is mommy cryin 2010: Going Through Changes Eminem has avoid rapping about Kim for years and now seems to be feeling reflective as he discusses his lingering feelings for her Lyrics: I still love your mother, that’ll never change, think about her every day / We just could never get it together hey, wish there was a better way 2017: Bad Husband Eminem now apologises to Kim and even refers to himself as a 'scumbag' for hitting her during their turbulent relationship Lyrics: I’m sorry, Kim, more than you could ever comprehend / Leaving you was fucking harder than sawing off a f**king body limb Advertisement

In 1989, when she was 13 and running away from home, Kim and sister Dawn met a then 15-year-old Eminem and the sisters promptly moved into his mom's trailer park with him as his foster sisters.

Six years later, Hailie, who, along with her mother, is the subject of many of the singer's greatest hits - was born.

In 1997 track Bonnie & Clyde from The Slim Shady LP, Eminem rapped about taking his daughter on a ride-along to dump his wife's body in a lake.

Battle: It was claimed Kim was taken to hospital to undergo a medical and psychological evaluation, but is now at home recovering (pictured 2007)

In track 'Kim' which appears on 2000 album The Marshall Mathers LP, and written while the pair were having marital problems two years previously, the star rapped about killing Kim and putting her in the trunk of his car.

In 2000, after the track's release Kim took Eminem to court to try to stop him from rapping about her anymore, and sought $10million in compensation for 'the intentional infliction of emotional distress'.

She also sought to prevent her then-estranged husband from having even partial custody of Hailie - then four.

The pair later reached a settlement in the case and agreed to joint legal custody of Hailie.

However just two years later, the Grammy winner took a shot at Kim's drugs arrest on track 'Till I Collapse' from album The Eminem Show.

Close: Hailie maintains a close bond with her father Eminem (pictured in an Instagram tribute)

He said: 'My thoughts are sporadic, I act like I’m an addict. I rap like I’m addicted to smack like I’m Kim Mathers.'

His feelings mellowed in 2010 with Recovery album track 'I'm Going Through Changes' with the star rapping to their children: 'I still love your mother, that’ll never change, think about her every day

'We just could never get it together hey, wish there was a better way. For me to say it, but I swear on everything. I’d do anything for her on any day.'

The remorse continued onto 2017's critically acclaimed album Revival, where Eminem finally apologised to Kim on track 'Bad Husband'.

He said: 'But I’m sorry, Kim. More than you could ever comprehend. Leaving you was f*****g harder than sawing off a f*****g body limb

Stormy: Eminem and Kim's volatile relationship is one of rap music folklore - the controversial rapper has frequently taken verbal shots at his on-off lover during his recording career - rapping about killing her, her drug use and infidelity (pictured 2000)

Kim has previously spoken of how she and the Stan hitmaker repaired their bond and became'best friends', saying in 2015 'He's been real supportive,' she says. 'We're really close. We're just trying to raise our kids together and make it as normal for them as possible.'

In 2016, Kim admitted that her single-car crash on an empty road near her home in October the previous year was in fact an attempt to end her own life.

'It was intentional,' Kim told Detroit's Channel 995 radio show Mojo in the Morning.

I'm sorry: The remorse continued onto 2017's critically acclaimed album Revival, where Eminem finally apologised to Kim on track 'Bad Husband' (pictured 2020)

'I never expected to make it out alive,' she said, adding that she had 'been clean for 10 years.'

An emotional Kim added people think 'just because we have money, that it makes us happy.'

'Yeah, I can pay bills. Yeah, I can get my kids whatever they ask for and it's great to see them happy. But you lose friends, you lose family, you have no one you can trust you can speak to,' she said.

Witnesses saw Kim drive her black Escalade into a ditch, where it smashed into a pole and flipped upside down with her trapped inside.

'I sat at the end of a road where I knew that no one else but myself would get hurt.

'Yes I drank, yes I took pills and I hit the gas and aimed for a pole.'

Just months later in January 2016, Kim's twin sister Dawn Scott was found dead in the Motor City Trailer Park after a heroin overdose. She was said to be estranged from Kim at the time of her death.

For confidential support in the UK - call Samaritans for free on 116 123 or visit www.samaritans.org

For confidential support in the US - call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They often have a wide variety of guests on the show.

And, Eamonn Holmes, 61, struggled to hold it together as taxidermist Chloe Lee, 25, sat with her dead pet cat named Nicki on the This Morning couch, on Wednesday, in a segment titled: 'I stuffed my dead cat'.

While the presenter remained composed, viewers were left 'traumatised' as Chloe explained how she first got into the practice aged 14 using a 'blunt knife' on a dead squirrel.

Taxidermy is the art of preparing, stuffing, and mounting the skins of animals with lifelike effect.

What!? Eamonn Holmes, 61, struggled to hold it together as taxidermist Chloe Lee, 25, sat with her dead pet cat named Nicki on the This Morning couch, on Wednesday

The young taxidermist explained to Eamonn and wife Ruth Langsford, 61, that Nicki died when she was aged 16, saying: 'I had her since she was a kitten. It was one of our cats that had her so I've had her from day dot.

'I get so much comfort [from the stuffed animal]. I hated the fact of parting with the animal, burying them and never seeing them again.

'Having her in the corner of the room being able to stroke her if I want to is really great.'

Chloe also revealed that she stuffed the cat herself, explaining in graphic detail the process and how she had a mental barrier to get over.

'I stuffed my dead cat!' Taxidermy is the art of preparing, stuffing, and mounting the skins of animals with lifelike effect

Composed: While the presenter remained composed, viewers were left 'traumatised' as Chloe explained how she first got into the practice aged 14 using a 'blunt knife' on a dead squirrel

Dead cat: The young taxidermist explained to Eamonn and wife Ruth Langsford, 61, that Nicki died when she was aged 16

She said: 'But because I've been doing taxidermy for a while…her being pretty, remembered and loved is what got me through.'

Asked why she didn't have someone else stuff her cat, Chloe insisted: 'Another taxidermist doesn't know Nicki like I know her, I have close good reference pictures of her.

'Mostly I saw her sleeping and so I wanted that (position). Plus her being my first cat I was worried about doing open eye in case I got that wrong.'

Chloe has now been doing taxidermy for 11 years, revealing that her interest was first sparked when she was in a garden centre and there was a stuffed bird. That led on to finding out about taxidermy was and asking questions.

She explained: 'Back then it wasn't really in fashion, and I would buy things with my pocket money and worked my way up.

Oh my! Chloe also revealed that she stuffed the cat herself, explaining in graphic detail the process and how she had a mental barrier to get over

Show and tell: Chloe has now been doing taxidermy for 11 years, revealing that her interest was sparked when she saw a stuffed bird in a garden centre (Pictured: Chloe's stuffed rabbit)

'I want to say I never kill anything and never would. I get donations and roadkill. It's surprising what kind of phone calls I get. There are some who actually do like the idea of it being quirkier, but mostly like the natural look.

'I always grew up thinking of waste and I didn't want to see these animals as maggot food. Taxidermy isn't for everyone and that's fine.

Chloe revealed that her first taxidermy project was when she was aged 14 and found a little squirrel which had died outside.

She explained: 'I thought it's so beautiful I can't let it go to waste. I had a really blunt knife. I think I was curious and the need to want to preserve this little animal drove me to do it.'

In another awkward twist, celebrity chef Nisha Katona could be heard trying to fire up a gas stove in the background ahead of her cooking segment, while Chloe was talking.



Professional: Chloe revealed that her first taxidermy project was when she was aged 14 and found a little squirrel which had died outside (Pictured: Pets which Chloe has stuffed)

Thinking back: 'I had a really blunt knife. I think I was curious and the need to want to preserve this little animal drove me to do it,' explained Chloe of her first taxidermy experience

Viewers took to social media to voice their concern over the taxidermy segment, with one person tweeting: 'Was there a trigger warning for this taxidermy bit? Because there definitely should have been #ThisMorning.'

'Would have been nice to get a warning. It's too raw to see something like that after losing a pet #ThisMorning,' added someone else.

'Quite traumatised looking at this stuffed cat and then looking at my alive cat right next to me!! just how could you!!! ITV get her off #ThisMorning,' fumed another viewer.

One fan of the show tweeted: 'She had a BLUNT knife... This is creepy. all I'm seeing is someone who valued that animal as a possession and not as a life #ThisMorning.'

'Just imagine having your dead pet just there on the floor stuffed just looking at you... It's a bit selfish to let your pet die in peace and bury it instead of stuffing it for your own pleasure... It's creepy as f**k #ThisMorning,' slammed someone else.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Les Dennis has taken a playful swipe at his ex wife Amanda Holden with a joke about her affair with Neil Morrissey.

The comedian, 67, was married to the presenter, 50, for eight years from 1995 to 2003 but in 2000 Amanda cheated on him with Men Behaving Badly actor Neil, 59.

The pair gave their romance another go in 2001 but a year later ended their marriage.

Awkward: Les Dennis has taken a playful swipe at his ex wife Amanda Holden with a joke about her affair with Neil Morrissey (Amanda and Les on their wedding day in 1995)

Speaking on Christopher Biggins' podcast, Les talked about when he used to star in pantomimes alongside the late American actor Mickey Rooney shortly after his divorce.

Before each show the theatre would play Christmas songs, including Frank Sinatra's famous hit Have Yourself A Merry Little Christmas.

Les said: 'Mickey would get very angry, because of course, Frank Sinatra ran off with Ava Gardner (Mickey's wife).

Exes: The comedian, 67, was married to the presenter, 50, for eight years from 1995 to 2003 but in 2000 Amanda cheated on him with Men Behaving Badly actor Neil, 59 (pictured in 2018)

Close: Amanda and Neil are pictured in the romantic comedy Happy Birthday Shakespeare together

'It would've been like me having to listen to Bob The Builder every night.'

The quip was in reference to the fact that Neil was the voice of Bob on the children's show for 14 years.

In 2013, Amanda opened up about her affair with Neil, telling Good Housekeeping: 'I don't believe women have affairs for no reason.

Ill-fated romance: Amanda and Les gave their relationship another go in 2001 but a year later ended their marriage (pictured in 2002)

Funny: Les' quip was in reference to the fact that Neil was the voice of Bob on the children's show for 14 years

'Neil rightly or wrongly got loads of stick. I feel like it was my fault - I was the one who was married.

'I want to change the general perception of him, as he was very caring and very loving and very worried about me because I lost so much weight. He used to cook for me and look after me and babysit the dogs.'

She also told the Daily Mail of the affair: 'I brought it on myself, I appreciate that, but nothing will ever be as bad again. It was a very dark time. It got to the point where I felt I could hardly breathe.

'Les proved to be my saviour. Ironically. So the person I'd hurt the most in the world was the one who was there for me.'

Frank: In 2014 Neil finally said sorry to game show host Les for the affair he had with his then-wife Amanda on Piers Morgan's Life Stories

In 2014 Neil finally said sorry to game show host Les for the affair he had with his then-wife Amanda.

The star, who has previously said he had not apologised to Les, made the admission on Piers Morgan's Life Stories.

He said: 'I feel sorry for how the situation was dealt with and I feel sorry for how emotional Les seemed to become. It was very difficult for him and for that I'm very sorry.'

His comment came after he was asked by Piers if he had ever apologised to Les, to which he replied: 'No, I didn't. I'm not positive over what there is apologise about. I don't know what the whole situation was, to be perfectly fair to everybody.'

When asked why he has never spoken about it before, the father-of-one shared: 'I think enough was said about it. This was a very short fling. I didn't have representation at the time, in terms of PR and this was the first time I'd really come under the cosh.'

The actor and Amanda embarked on an affair while starring in Happy Birthday Shakespeare on BBC.

Amanda went on to marry record producer Chris Hughes, with whom she has two daughters - Lexie and Hollie.

Les also got married again – to Claire Nicholson in 2009. They have two children together – Eleanor and Thomas.

Les was previously married before tying the knot to Amanda in 1995 and has an adult son Philip from the relationship.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Greg Wise has been announced as the tenth celebrity contestant on Strictly Come Dancing.

The Sense and Sensibility actor, 55, was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and revealed he finally decided to sign up to honour the five year anniversary of his sister Clare's death from cancer.

Speaking about his motivation, Greg - who is married to Emma Thompson - explained: 'Clare was a huge disco diva and we sent her out of this life in a disco ball coffin to banging 80s music.'

New contestant: Emma Thompson's husband Greg Wise signs up to Strictly in honour of his late sister who loved the show so much she was buried in a glitterball coffin

He continued: 'She's prodding me massively to do it. Clare will enjoy watching her little brother do it. She'll be sitting on my left or right shoulder depending on how well I'm doing

Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013 and started a witty and heartfelt blog detailing her battle with the disease.

She was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015 the disease dug into her bones and she was told it was incurable. There were tumours in her arms, ribs, spine and skull.

Greg cancelled a family holiday in Greece and moved into his sister Clare’s London flat in the final three months of her life, in order to be her full-time carer, before her death in 2016 aged 51.

Tragic: Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013, was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015 the disease dug into her bones and she was told it was incurable (pictured in 2013)

On the night she died Greg wiped her face, told her he loved her and gave her permission to go when she wanted. She died one minute later, holding his hand.

Greg said in a statement: 'My beautiful sister was a huge disco queen. She left our world almost exactly 5 years ago in a glitter ball coffin.

'This is for her. My gorgeous Diva sis, who would have been insane with excitement that her little bro was doing this.

'I will channel her, as her bro can’t dance - but I’m thrilled to be dipping my toes, knees, hips and arms into this wonderful world, and hope to make her proud, and obviously make her laugh...'

Cute couple: Greg added that his wife Emma Thompson was 'stupidly excited' that he would be appearing on the show (pictured in 2020)

Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown, Cranford, Walking on Sunshine and his breakout role in Sense and Sensibility.

Greg also wrote box-office hit film Last Christmas with his wife, Emma, and the book Not That Kind of Love with his late sister Clare.

He revealed that wife Emma was 'stupidly excited' he would be appearing on the show.

Speaking on This Morning, he continued: 'It's going to be so important having her there. She's done three films back-to-back this year, so she's exhausted now anyway.

Motivated: Speaking about his motivation, Greg explained, 'Clare was a huge disco diva and we sent her out of this life in a disco ball coffin to banging 80s music'

Nerves: He also admitted he is 'more nervous' about having the spotlight on him - due to him being a part of the dance show - than he is about taking to the dance floor

He also admitted he is 'more nervous' about having the spotlight on him - due to him being a part of the dance show - than he is about taking to the dance floor and strutting his stuff.

When it was suggested there would be a lot of attention on him during his Strictly stint, he said: 'Yeah, which is one of the things I'm slightly more nervous about than the actual dance steps.

'But it's about being out there and exposing yourself as someone who can't dance, and learning.'

One to watch: Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown (pictured) Cranford and his breakout role in Sense and Sensibility

Moments earlier, Matilda 'Tilly' Ramsay was revealed as the ninth contestant.

The CBBC presenter - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and her famous father also made a cameo as he recorded a clip to show to her.

In the video, Gordon, 54, cheekily warned Tilly, 19, not to date any of the dancers, while Tilly admitted she was 'terrified' of the challenge that lies ahead.

Strictly Come Dancing 2021: Gordon Ramsay's daughter Tilly, 19, was the NINTH contestant announced - as her dad warned her not to date any of the dancers!

Tilly revealed she'll be fitting in her appearance on the show around her studies, as she starts university in September, but said she's 'excited for the challenge' of making it all work.

Speaking on the show, Tilly said of the show: 'It's slightly terrifying. Obviously my mum and dad knew.

'I've tried dancing when I was younger, ballet and stuff, but I wasn't very good so I moved to football camp.

'Remembering choreography terrifies me. I'm looking forward to the glitz and the glamour, and learning something new - that's always fun.'

Proud parent: The CBBC presenter - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning (pictured together in a throwback)

This Morning hosts Eammon Holmes and Ruth Langsford then surprised Tilly with a video message from her parents, in which dad Gordon said: 'Wishing you all the very best. Proud of you girl.'

Tilly's mum Tana then quipped, 'Glad it's her and not you [Gordon]. Tilly you're incredibly brave. Good luck,' before Gordon jumped in to warn: 'And don't date those dancers!'

Tilly often shares dancing videos with her dad on TikTok and said she believes Gordon secretly wants to take part in Strictly, but he would be 'too scared' to go through with it.

She said: 'I think he does, but I think he'd be too scared to. Trust me when I say he's not the best dancer. Sorry, dad!"

Speaking on the show, Tilly said of the show: 'It's slightly terrifying. Obviously my mum and dad knew'

Tilly said in a statement: 'I’m so excited and grateful to be joining the Strictly family! I’m always up for fun new challenges and this will be my biggest adventure yet!

'I’m going to put my heart and soul into this and can’t wait to get my dancing shoes on and show my Dad how it’s really done! Bring on the glitz, glamour and sequins!'

After the announcement, Gordon took to Instagram to gush: ' So proud of this one @tillyramsay youngest dancer ever ! good luck darling❤️ @bbcstrictly'.

Sweet: This Morning hosts Eammon Holmes and Ruth Langsford then surprised Tilly with a video message from her parents, in which dad Gordon said: 'Wishing you all the very best'

Chef, social media influencer and TV presenter Tilly has over 9.5 million followers on TikTok, where she regularly posts funny videos of herself and dad Gordon.

She presented Matilda and the Ramsay Bunch on CBBC, which saw her cooking and having adventures along with her family, for which she received three Children’s BAFTA nominations.

In 2017 she published her first cookery book, inspired by the show, titled: Matilda & The Ramsay Bunch: Tilly's Kitchen Takeover.

Tilly and her Dad also hosted a regular cooking item on This Morning, Big Chef Little Chef.

Tilly said: 'Remembering choreography terrifies me. I'm looking forward to the glitz and the glamour, and learning something new - that's always fun'

Multi-tasker: Chef, social media influencer and TV presenter Tilly has over 9.5 million followers on TikTok, where she regularly posts funny videos of herself and dad Gordon

It comes after Katie McGlynn and Dan Walker were confirmed as the latest contestants on the 2021 series of Strictly Come Dancing.

The former Corrie star, 28, and journalist, 44, were announced as being the seventh and eighth stars set to compete on the hit show during Tuesday's BBC Breakfast.

They will join Dragons' Den star Sara Davies, Rhys Stephenson, AJ Odudu, GBBO's John Whaite, Robert Webb and Tom Fletcher in the impressive line-up.

Joining the show! Katie McGlynn (pictured) and Dan Walker were confirmed as celebrity contestants on the 2021 Strictly Come Dancing line-up on Tuesday

Katie said: 'It's been so hard keeping it a secret, but I can finally say that I'm getting ready to shake my shimmy and become part of the Strictly family!

'I'm really not a dancer, but I'm so excited to learn a new skill on this crazy journey and cannot wait to slip into some sequins along the way.

'Although I do get to have so much fun as an actress, a lot of my roles have involved quite serious and challenging storylines, so I'm fully ready to let my hair down and do something different, even if it is completely outside of my comfort zone.

'I can't promise that I'll be the best, but I'm going to give it 110 per cent on the dance floor! As long as I don't fall over I'll be happy.'

Star-studded! Journalist Dan, 44, is the eighth star confirmed to take part in the show

New challenges: Dan's part in the competition comes after he announced he was stepping down as presenter of Football Focus (pictured on the show) following 12 years at the helm

Katie is best known for her role as Sinead Tinker in Coronation Street, for which she was BAFTA nominated and won a National Television Award for Best Serial Drama Performance in 2020.

The actress was also a regular in Waterloo Road, appeared in BBC One dramas The Syndicate and Moving On and currently stars in Hollyoaks as mysterious newcomer Becky Quentin.

While Dan, who recently quit Football Focus after 12 years at the helm, appeared via video for the big reveal as he's on holiday after presenting the Olympics in Tokyo.

He said: 'I only told my kids last weekend so they're not very happy with me either, hardly anyone has been in the circle. I'm very sorry I was told it would make great telly if I didn't tell you Louise! [his co-presenter, Minchin]'

Exciting news: Dan appeared via video, much to the surprise of Katie and his BBC Breakfast co-hosts, for the big reveal because he's on holiday after presenting the Olympics in Tokyo

Dan continued: 'My 20 years of contemporary dance training are helpful! I'm one of those people I've danced at three weddings and two school discos.

'I'm enjoying the experience when it starts of actually learning to dance. I'll be honest I'm not making room on any shelves in my house for the glitterball.'

And turning his attention to a pro partner and getting on the dancefloor, Dan said: 'I will accept anyone if they will accept me!

'I'm 6ft 6 so the question often asked is can anyone that tall look half decent on the television when trying to dance, just anyone who is tall enough, and doesn't mind the odd stray elbow in the back.'

The TV host also chatted about his pal Shirley Ballas, adding: 'Shirley is always a pro isn't she? We did a Comic Relief thing together, and she was really upset so I did a Paso Doble thing with one of the rugs and it really made her laugh.

Bring it on: Katie admitted that she's 'really not a dancer, but I'm so excited to learn a new skill'

Tragic: Katie is best known for her role as Sinead Tinker in Corrie, for which she was BAFTA nominated and won a National Television Award for Best Serial Drama Performance in 2020

Up for a challenge: Looking ahead to the competition, Dan joked that he's 'not making room on any shelves in my house for the glitterball'

Unexpected: Dan didn't tell his BBC Breakfast co-host Louise Minchin about his Strictly gig

'It won't affect our friendship as I hope this won't affect our friendship Louise.'

However it seems like Dan's real judges might be his children, with him revealing their reactions: 'My children said this, one said "oh this is exciting", another one said "don't dance with your mouth open", and the third said "don't go out in week one".

'It's just going to be, as you well know you need a bit of fun and we've been sat on our sofa for the past year and dealing with some horrible stories so I think it will be nice for our kids to be able to watch something that's not a matter of life and death.'

Dan added: 'Last Christmas I sat down with the children and they said "dad, we'd love you to do some TV we'd like to watch, Saturday Mashup and Strictly", hopefully I won't embarrass them too much!

'It has the magic to make everybody smile': Katie also praised Strictly for 'pulling everybody' together with its 2020 series during the pandemic

It's all feathers and sequins from now! Katie was revealed to much fanfare, with dancers creating a dramatic entrance for the actress

Stunning: Katie rocked a green and white wrap dress styled with summery white heels for the announcement on Tuesday

All smiles: She could not hide her excitement after leaving the London studios following the big reveal

'I have no idea where the tiny bit of talent will take, I'm just going to enjoy it, have a bit of fun, my phone is full of people who are very angry I never told them about this!'

Katie, who didn't know a second announcement was happening, then added: 'I'm so excited. I think last year everybody pulled together for Strictly and it was a kind of a blessing, and I think this year it has the magic to make everybody smile.'

The latest announcements come after Sara Davies was revealed as being set to compete - joking that she can't wait to see the 'impact of training on her mum tum'.

The Dragons' Den star, 37, could not hide her excitement as she was confirmed to be a celebrity contestant and chatted on Good Morning Britain on Monday.

Speaking about the show, Sara said: 'My Mam and Dad are going to be so excited. I'm really nervous because so far the producers keep asking me if I can dance.

Joining the line-up! Sara Davies was revealed as the sixth contestant set to compete in this year's Strictly Come Dancing on Monday

'Truth be told – I haven't got a clue! I've not danced since I did ballet lessons when I was little. The business world has taught me that tenacity, drive and determination deliver results, I hope that I can bring that to the dancefloor.

'And I'm excited to see the impact of all those hours of training on my mum tum.'

Sara was the youngest ever dragon on the panel of entrepreneurs on BBC show Dragons' Den, when she joined in 2019.

A businesswoman, her company Crafter's Companion, which she started as a student, now employs almost 250 people worldwide and has earned her the affectionate nickname of the Crafting Queen.

She is the recipient of over 30 business awards and, in 2016, she was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) for services to the economy.

From the boardroom to the ballroom! The Dragons' Den star, 37, (pictured on the show) admitted she's not too confident about her dancing skills but is excited for the challenge

Got any tips? Kate, who has also competed on Strictly, reassured Sara that she didn't have much dancing experience before taking part either

While chatting to GMB's Kate Garraway on Monday, Sara also revealed that she's always wanted to try out her dancing skills on Strictly since being a 'little girl'.

Sara added: 'It just looks like the most amazing experience but it always felt like a pipe dream. Then I joined Dragons' Den and Deborah [Meaden] had done it and I didn't dare to dream, but hoped one day maybe.'

The businesswoman also discussed plans for a live studio audience being able to watch the stars compete in the 2021 Strictly series.

Sara said she's hoping that small family bubbles will come watch, gushing that it 'will make my parents life' as they'd be so excited to see her dance on the show.

Speaking about the plans for an audience, Sara revealed: 'I really hope so.

'We're still waiting for a lot of the plans, but I believe they are going to be allowed a small studio audience. So maybe family bubbles. I just want my mum and dad to be able to come and watch. It will make their life.'

Keep dancing! CBBC presenter Rhys Stephenson was recently announced as the fifth star on the line-up

Taking to Instagram Rhys wrote: 'IT'S HAPPENING, Strictly 2021!!! I'm shaking! I can't wait to get started on this iconic show'

It comes after CBBC presenter Rhys Stephenson, 27, was announced as the fifth celebrity to take part in the new series of Strictly Come Dancing.

Rhys said he is 'buzzing' to be a part of Strictly and 'can't wait' to start rehearsals for the show, set to air this autumn.

The presenter revealed his signing on Newsround on Friday and said: 'I have dreamt about being on this show, and I know for a fact that it is going to exceed every expectation.

'I cannot wait to experience it all: the costumes, the orchestra, even Craig's glare. I am ready.'

As well as presenting CBBC live, Rhys as also presented some of the biggest shows across the CBBC slate, including Blue Peter and Saturday Mash-Up!, and appeared on The Dengineers and Newsround.

Outside of presenting, Rhys is an ambassador for Place2Be, a charity which provides mental health services in schools.

Making history: Great British Bake Off winner John will be one-half of the show's first all-male partnership

Yay! After the announcement, he took to Instagram to tearfully celebrate the news: 'Oh my god, you guys, I'm actually crying real tears because of how nice you're all being'

Sharing his news on Instagram, the presenter wrote: 'IT'S HAPPENING, Strictly 2021!!! I'm shaking! I can't wait to get started on this iconic show, I want it all, the sequins, the costumes, Craig's glare, BRING IT.'

Elsewhere in line-up news, Great British Bake Off winner John has revealed he will be one-half of the show's first all-male partnership.

After much controversy during the show's 17 year run over the prospect of a same-sex pairing, Strictly is finally addressing the call for change with John delightedly praising the 'great step forward in representation and inclusion'.

He said: 'What's exciting for me, is that I'm going to be one half of the first all-male partnership, which is a great step forward in representation and inclusion.'

John later took to Instagram to thank fans for their support, as he broke down in tears while talking into the camera.

John went on: 'I'm so grateful, excited, and nervous to be joining the Strictly family...

'I've been wearing sequins and jazzy attire since I was three years old and can't wait to hurl myself, full throttle, around the most glamorous dance floor on earth...

'Whoever it is I'm paired with, I hope they are up for a challenge as I want our routines to include lots of spectacular lifts!'

After the announcement, he took to Instagram to tearfully celebrate the news: 'Oh my god, you guys, there's so many nice messages already and I've only just come off air and I'm actually crying real tears because of how nice you're all being....

'I'm so excited to be on Strictly, it's a dream come true and it's even more of a dream to be doing the first all-male partnership and I hope that there are kids watching who look up and think, 'It's okay to be who you are'.

'So thanks for all the messages, I'm going back to bed, lots of love!'

John won the third series of The Great British Bake Off, in 2012, at the age of 23. John has presented various TV shows and currently has a weekly cooking segment on Steph's Packed Lunch.

He has written for a variety of newspaper and magazines on the topics of food and mental health, and has published five cookery books. John also runs his own cookery school, John Whaite's Kitchen.

Back then: John won the third series of The Great British Bake Off, in 2012, at the age of 23 (pictured in 2016)

John used his GBBO fame for good, when he won the show and began fighting for LGBTQ rights. He appeared on the cover of the UK gay culture magazine Attitude with his now husband-to-be, Paul Atkins, to whom he became engaged in 2017.

He spoke about his experience of coming out, saying: 'I didn't really know any gay people because it was still a bit of a touchy subject, especially being a working class northern lad – it wasn't often discussed...

'But I really admired my friends at drama who were all very 'fabulous darling' and they really helped me through it. I definitely want to marry Paul (my partner of five years – not Paul Hollywood!) because I adore him and respect him so much...

'I know I don't want to be with anyone else and I have tested what else is out there! When it comes to cake, I'll be making lots of our families' favourites!'

Tough: John spoke of how post-GBBO fame impacted him after going on a downward spiral and even speaking of the behaviour of BBC in his woes

John spoke of how post-GBBO fame impacted him after going on a downward spiral and even speaking of the behaviour of BBC in his woes.

He said: 'Some days I'd wish I had never been on the show, because in reality, it totally derailed me from a steady lifepath. I could blame the production company or the BBC.

'It would be simple to point the finger and say they gave me no advice on how to manage the transience of the industry, or how to comprehend the temporariness of my appeal.

'They didn't, and perhaps in the wake of reality TV star meltdowns and suicides, there should be a serious reform of the way contributors are prepared for, and guided through, their post-show life.

'But I don't think it would have made an ounce of difference even if they had. Addiction to the razzle dazzle came naturally to the youthful me...

Line-up: It comes after the first three names have been announced for Strictly Come Dancing 2021 [pictured McFly's Tom Fletcher (L) and presenter AJ Odudu (R)]

Starring role: Peep Show actor Robert Webb is also taking to the floor

'What I failed to remember though, was that age-old mantra: be careful what you wish for. Because as the next batch of Bake Off stars emerged, my appeal shrank. Year on year, the working days became fewer and financial offers were smaller.

'The life to which I had become accustomed slowly dissolved. With more days alone at home, waiting by the phone like an anxious 1980s teenager urging their crush to call, my already depressed state of mind worsened...

'I drank more than I should have and posted unwisely on Instagram and Twitter. If I knew then what I knew now, would I do it all again? Absolutely. But I'd approach it so differently.'

Last week, the first three names were announced for this year's show.

McFly pop star Tom, Peep Show actor Robert and presenter AJ were revealed on Wednesday's edition of The One Show, with the rest of the names set to be drip-fed to fans over the next couple of weeks.

Big shoes to fill! Tom's McFly bandmate Harry Judd won Strictly n 2011 [L] while Robert squeezed into a shiny leotard to take the title of Let's Dance For Comic Relief in 2009 [R]

Music and dancing: Tom is on quarter of boy band McFly [pictured last week with Dougie Poynter and Danny Jones]

Tom, 36, has big shoes to fill on Strictly. His McFly bandmate Harry Judd won the show in 2011. And Tom's wife Giovanna Fletcher is the reigning champion of I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here!

Robert, 48, is sure to feel the pressure too, after he squeezed into a shiny leotard to take the title of Let's Dance For Comic Relief in 2009, performing What A Feeling from '80s film Flashdance, beating the likes of Keith Lemon and Paddy McGuinness to the title.

2021 has been a busy year for AJ, 33, who has featured on 14 TV shows, including Cooking With The Stars and Celebrity Karaoke Club. She has appeared as a panelist on Strictly Come Dancing: It Takes Two in the past, too.

The three contestants were unveiled one by one with The One Show presenter Alex Jones revealing they were given the code names of Buzz Lightyear (Tom), Spoongebob Squarepants (Robert) and Marge Simpson (AJ).

Excited: Tom was the first celebrity announced and said: 'I'm so pleased the news is out it's been so hard keeping it secret'

Cackling: Tom also shared his sister's hilarious reaction to the news on Instagram, where it seemed she was beside herself with laughter

The veteran dance show was famously disrupted in 2020 thanks to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

But it seems things are back to normal in 2021 - apart from one or two factors still deemed too tricky to navigate amid the global health crisis.

Show boss Sarah James told The Mirror: 'We're so thrilled that Strictly will be returning for a full-length series this year, and know how much viewers are looking forward to getting their full Strictly fix and seeing the return of much-loved specials.

'We are all so sad that we won't be able to get to Blackpool this year but can't wait to be back dancing at the one and only Blackpool Tower Ballroom in the future.'

The Blackpool episode ordinarily takes place near the end of the series, but was axed last year with restrictions throwing up logistical difficulties on the production.

'Undertone of terror': Robert was the next star announced, along with a hilarious clip of his 2009 Comic Relief performance

Overjoyed: AJ was the third contestant announced and told how she kept her participation in the series a secret from her mother Florence, who was watching at home

But 2021 will include the show's themed weeks - such as movie week, musicals week and Halloween week.

Last year, these were scrapped, proving too complicated to manage amid the pandemic. The show's Christmas special will also be back, with the show set to start in its usual early-autumn time slot, rather than in October, like last year.

It's said rather than a fewer number of celebs, the full 15 will be taking part again, having cut this to 12 last series.

Still a no-go: Blackpool has been axed AGAIN due to the ongoing pandemic

There are also plans to reinstate the live audience too - another aspect disallowed last season.

Isolation will remain in place for the professional dancers. This will see them sent to a hotel near the Strictly studios in Hertfordshire several weeks ahead of the show's return.

The celebs will also not have the usual three-week gap between being paired up with their pros and dancing for the first time on live TV. This has been reduced to one week thanks to logistical factors.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Daisy Lowe put her ample assets on display as she slipped into not one, but two swimsuits to take a dip in a hot tub on Wednesday.

Showing off her enviable curves in a hot pink one-piece in a racy Instagram video, the 32-year-old model flashed a cheeky smile to the camera, while Etta James' Fire played in the background.

Daisy proceeded to whip her fringed brown locks round to show off her exposed back in the strap-designed number.

Sizzling: Daisy Lowe, 32, put her ample assets on display in plunging red and pink swimsuits as she made an outfit change while frolicking in a hot tub in an Instagram post on Wednesday

The Elite-signed model took a deep breath before plunging her head below the water level, using editing software to make a spectacular instant outfit change.

Re-emerging in a ruby red swimsuit, Daisy ran her hand through her soaking dark chocolate locks, going on to seductively apply a matching shade of red lipstick.

To conclude her enticing clip, the daughter of singer Gavin Rossdale laughed into the distance while splashing around in the water, before sinking herself under one final time.

Beaming: Showing off her enviable curves in a hot pink one-piece, the 32-year-old flashed a cheeky smile to the camera

Hot stuff: Daisy proceeded to whip her fringed brown locks round to show off her exposed back in the strap-designed number

In the caption, she penned: 'I hope you are making the most of the English summertime FINALLY- I am playing in our @royaltubs hot tub which @jordanjaysaul managed to build from scratch…. My hero.

'I am wearing my favourite costumes by @agentprovocateur & @daizy_shely and I had to stick on a red lip by @valentino.beauty (None of this is an ad… just the things that are making my heart soar today).'

Daisy is currently dating Jordan Saul, who works as a new home consultant for an estate agent.

They were spotted for the first time together in June 2020 - despite being under government-ordered lockdown for 10 weeks.

Having fun: Daisy captioned this alongside her post

Striking: Daisy ran her hand through her soaking dark chocolate locks, going on to seductively apply a matching shade of red lipstick

And it has been a busy summer for the couple as they made an appearance at Bvlgari's summer party in London along with the Dazn x Matchroom VIP launch recently.

Daisy took to Instagram in June to mark their first anniversary and reveal to her followers how she met her beau with a sweet post where she called Jordan her 'hero'.

She captioned the upload: 'A year ago today I went to meet @misstilda for a walk on the Heath…. But I was running a little late- Mercury was in retrograde [crying laughing emoji].

'When I arrived, Monty ran straight towards a very handsome Belgium shepherd, attached to this handsome dog was a rather handsome man.

Looking sharp: It has been a busy summer for the couple as they made an appearance at Bvlgari's summer party in London along with the Dazn x Matchroom VIP launch recently

'I dawdled around having some dog chat… we ended up walking together for a couple of hours, what a dog walk!'

She continued: 'Here we are a year later, through countless lockdowns, adventures, disasters and triumphs. You @jordanjaysaul have been my hero.

'Through and through. Thanks for feeling like home & always making me giggle even when I really don’t want to! It’s my absolute favourite making you laugh so much your legs give way….

'I am very happy I was 5 mins late to meet Tilds that day & I am so very grateful you are mine. Happy anniversary my pain in the ass. I love you ♥️.' [sic]
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For someone boasting an estimated net worth of £148 million, one would expect his wedding to be something of an extravaganza.

However it seems that Ed Sheeran, 30, and Cherry Seaborn's, 29, big day in 2019 was something of a small matter.

Speaking to fellow musician Jessie Ware, 36, on her Table Manners podcast, the singer-songwriter lifted the lid on the secret nuptials to his childhood sweetheart.

'No one knew, no one came to it': Ed Sheeran reveals he and wife Cherry Seaborn hurried home after their 'tiny affair' wedding to have a curry in the middle of the night (pictured in 2018)

'Me and Cherry's actual wedding was a tiny affair, with hardly anyone there,' Ed began.

'We did it at night, at a random day in the middle of January, in the middle of nowhere,' the Sing hitmaker added.

Ed even admitted the ceremony took place in the middle of the night - and the newlyweds hurried home for a curry afterwards.

'No one knew, no one came to it, we lit candles and we got married, went back and had a curry.'

Low-key: The megastar even admitted the ceremony took place in the middle of the night and they hurried home for a curry afterwards (Ed and Cherry pictured in 2017)

A few months later, though, the four-time Grammy winner and his doting wife did hold a star-studded bash, where he maintained his privacy by banning mobile phones.

Ed told Jessie: 'The wedding party was more a celebration of us and our friends. I didn't want pictures getting out and I'm surprised they didn't.

'Everyone was very present. My friend Josh wore a triple denim suit and Stella McCartney had gone up to him and said she liked his suit, and he was quite p***ed.

'She said, "I'm Stella," and he said, "What, like Stella f***ing McCartney?"

'And she was like, "Well, yeah."'

The happy couple welcomed their firstborn daughter Lyra back in September 2020 and Ed recently revealed he would 'love' to have more children with Cherry.

Famous pals: A few months later, though, the four-time Grammy winner and his doting wife did hold a star-studded bash (pictured in 2018)

Wow: Ed revealed Stella McCartney attended the wedding party, which was held months after the intimate nuptials (Stella pictured last month)

Speaking on the Open house Party podcast in June, Ed revealed he would be 'super grateful' to add more members to his family.

The West Yorkshire-born star said: 'I would obviously be super grateful to be able to have any more kids, but I think girls are far superior to boys. As a boy myself, I feel like I can say this.

'I feel like we were so lucky to be able to have one that I think I would obviously love more. But I think we're so lucky to just have one. So if nothing else happens, I'm so happy, basically.'

Speaking as a new parent, Ed said that it felt like he joined a 'club' after the birth of his daughter Lyra.

Ed said: 'It's weird you say club, because I think that whenever you become a parent you enter into this club that all the other parents are in and everyone understands each other.

'My mum will babysit Lyra for the evening and we'll go out for a drink with someone who is also a parent.

'Then we'll be like, "Oh, well, we're going to go back now," and there's no pushback on that. It's just like, "Yeah, cool, totally understand."'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Malin Andersson has shared a nude photo of herself in the bathtub as she wrote a passionate message about domestic abuse.

The former Love Island star, 28, who is expecting a baby with boyfriend Jared, looked incredible as she showcased her growing bump in the Instagram snap.

Malin explained how she was living through domestic abuse at the hands of her ex Tom Kemp when she was pregnant with her first child Consy, who tragically passed away at four weeks old in 2019.

Radiant: Malin Andersson has shared a nude photo of herself in the bathtub as she wrote a passionate message about domestic abuse

She wrote: 'It isn't until you are amongst peace that you realise what your life used to be like.

'Sometimes my life right now feels too good to be true. I don't like delving into my past unless it's to make a point & help you all to understand transition and strength - and this time I would like to compare how different my pregnancies are.

'Firstly, I have never been with anyone so loving and attentive.. that makes my soul shine and brings out only the best in me.

'I know this sounds so cringe as I write it - but when something so pure lands into your life, it almost feels alien if you've never experienced it before.

Exciting: The former Love Island star, 28, is expecting a baby with boyfriend Jared

'My pregnancy so far has been stress free, calm and peaceful.. and a lot of that is down to me having a loving and stable relationship. One that has great communication and understanding - and most of all patience.

'I look back 3 years ago to when I was pregnant with Consy, and how volatile my relationship was then; and how I would wake up each day with severe anxiety, panic attacks and stress.

'With every argument and attack would come the tensing of my stomach and the knowing that my little girl could feel all the pain I felt too.

'It saddens me to think that I thought that was 'love' - and it breaks my heart knowing I let myself endure the emotional and physical pain whilst carrying something so precious - but this is what you call domestic abuse.'

Malin encouraged any of her followers who may be experiencing domestic abuse to go and seek help.

Candid: Malin explained how she was living through domestic abuse when she was pregnant with her first child Consy who tragically passed away at four weeks old in 2019

She wrote: 'Domestic abuse does not discriminate. If you are pregnant it can actually get worse.

'Domestic abuse during pregnancy puts a pregnant woman and her unborn child in danger. It increases the risk of miscarriage, infection, premature birth, low birth weight, foetal injury and foetal death.

'If you are pregnant and being abused, there is help. Your abusive partner is not only potentially endangering your life, but also the life of your unborn baby.

'With this, I am sending you all so much love. The transition my life has endured has been surreal - I never thought I would make it through the heartache and agony.

'But I'm here. I'm thriving. I'm smiling. And I've survived it.'

Speaking out: It comes after Malin revealed she was scared to reveal her pregnancy and sometimes fears her baby won't make it after she tragically lost daughter Consy

It comes after Malin revealed she was scared to reveal her pregnancy and sometimes fears her baby won't make it after she tragically lost daughter Consy.

Malin said she has been going to therapy to deal with 'unresolved feelings' around her daughter's passing.

She wrote: 'Hey. It feels like I've been here with you before. I have. I'll be honest, 3 years ago feels like a blur to me.. but feeling a new human growing inside me again feels so familiar. It scares me.

'So I'm here to welcome you on my journey with my rainbow baby. I know that sharing how I feel resonates.. and I want those that are struggling to conceive, or have lost a baby and are trying, pregnant with their rainbow baby or feel like their happy ending hasn't come yet - to see a clearer view through my life.

'And that actually we must trust the timing in everything. I haven't spoken to you much yet on how I've felt.. to be honest it's been a very weird journey so far. I was hesitant to even reveal my pregnancy.

'I have this inner hurt, this pain & that voice in my head that tells me this isn't real.. that my child won't survive - that something bad will happen. I've been very quiet.

Pregnancy: The star also shared a photo of herself in a vest and leggings on her Instagram Stories and wrote: 'Boobs - sore, big, veiny and for some reason the feeling of pregnancy feels so magical.'

'Malin quiet? That's strange - the queen of positive thinking.. waking up each day with not much to say. Just hope in her heart that baby will make it another day..'

Malin added that she appreciates every minute of life and is hoping for the best, adding that Consy is 'integrated' in her.

She said: 'See the reality is, we never really know what life can throw at us - we must remain present & mindful.. appreciate every minute. For sure I hope for the best, but I can't help past trauma creep up on me. She's integrated in me.

'Consy lives through me each day. I see her brown eyes open one last time.. and it gives me fear.. fear of the unknown. So what do I do? I've been going to therapy; remaining consistent.

'This has brought up a whole lot of unresolved feelings & pain that I seemed to have blocked out.. don't get me wrong I have the most amount of love and joy in my heart - but as I said.. I'm only human.'

The reality star added that she gets 'goosebumps' when she thinks about welcoming her child.

Relationship: Malin said she has been going to therapy to deal with 'unresolved feelings' around her daughter's passing (pictured with her boyfriend Jared)

She wrote: 'We tend to always think the worst. When I realise what's growing inside me, I get goosebumps, I have to have a double take. Isn't it sad that sometimes things seem too good to be true? Well maybe, just maybe they aren't.

'I keep telling myself that this is my time.. And for f****n' sure - it is. Believe in your time. I'm here to tell you that your ending is only your beginning. Ma.'

The star also shared a photo of herself in a vest and leggings on her Instagram Stories and wrote: 'Boobs - sore, big, veiny and for some reason the feeling of pregnancy feels so magical.'

Malin revealed she was expecting a baby earlier this month when she a snap of her baby bump, with her hands and her boyfriend Jared's hands resting on it.

Consy was born seven weeks premature in December 2018 and was being treated at Great Ormond Street hospital, but sadly passed away aged four weeks on 22 January 2019.

Malin wrote: 'I have this inner hurt, this pain & that voice in my head that tells me this isn't real.. that my child won't survive - that something bad will happen'

Since then Malin has struggled with further strife, reportedly left terrified after her violent ex recently broke his licence conditions meaning he has been sent back to prison.

Tom Kemp, 28, was jailed at Aylesbury Crown Court in September after admitting to actual bodily harm, which left the reality star 'black and blue' but was released three months later in January.

The Sun recently reported that Tom - who was serving the remaining term on Home Detention Curfew - recently visited the area that the Love Island star lives.

He was then reportedly sent back to prison after failing to comply with the rules he was set as he continued to serve part of his sentence in the community.

A source told the publication: 'Malin was really shocked when she heard he had been in her area.

Tragic: Her daughter Consy was born seven weeks premature in December 2018 and was treated at London's Great Ormond Street hospital, but sadly passed away on 22 January 2019

'She had really hoped his prison sentence would mark the end of having to think about him ever again.

'The whole thing has been incredibly stressful, but Malin is very strong and just hopes he's learnt his lesson now.'

A source also told MailOnline: 'Malin was glad to hear that Tom had been sent back to prison for breaching his license conditions, but to learn that he only returned for a week due to his sentence coming to an end concerns her.

'She feels that far too often the justice system fails survivors of domestic violence and ultimately believes that this contributes to the reason why perpetrators continue to abuse.'

Tom, was jailed at last year after following an attack in which he broke her hand.

Scary: Malin has struggled with strife, reportedly left terrified after her violent ex Tom Kemp recently broke his licence conditions meaning he has been sent back to prison (pictured together in 2019)

TV star Malin previously accused the 'narcissist' of being abusive in Instagram posts in 2019 and shared pictures of herself with a cut cheek and bloodied nose.

But Tom, from Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, denied the claims at the time, branding her a 'liar with mental health issues'.

The former couple had an on-off romance, splitting briefly during her pregnancy, amid claims Tom had been unfaithful to her, but reconciling shortly before the birth.

In March they split again, with Malin admitting it was better to end things between them as she and her partner struggled with their grief.

In October, Malin told how she believes the physical abuse Tom subjected her to while she was pregnant was a factor behind her daughter's death at just one month old.

Awful: Tom Kemp, 28, was jailed at Aylesbury Crown Court in September after admitting to actual bodily harm, which left the reality star 'black and blue' but was released three months later in January (Malin pictured with her injuries - taken at the time)

She revealed Kemp 'slapped and punched' her while she was six months pregnant, causing her to fall on her back and her stomach to hit the side of a bed.

Speaking to The Sun, Malin said she is convinced the incident contributed to Consy's death as after a few days, she noticed she wasn't moving around as much.

A month later, the movements reduced again and Malin insisted Kemp drive her to the hospital where doctors discovered Consy's irregular heartbeat, leading her to have an emergency cesarean that day at Great Ormond Street Hospital.

She said: 'When Tom threw me about, I'd tense my stomach so much, I could feel her pausing inside me. The doctors didn't understand what happened to her, but I know in my heart.'

Injuries: Tom left Malin with broken bones and bruises in a violent tirade

In June last year, Malin posted a lengthy Instagram post, captioned: 'The third and final lot, I am NOT a victim anymore.'

Calling their romance 'toxic and unhealthy', she said 'it has been an ongoing battle to emotionally let go as dealing with the grief from both my mum and daughter I've had him as my comforter.'

Accusing Kemp of emotional and physical abuse she said: 'Including being spat at, hit, pushed, kicked, scratched, spoken down to, controlled, manipulated, cheated and so much more I experienced the worst pain yet to come last night.'

Malin claimed she had received a phone call from a woman asking why the star had been texting her 'boyfriend.'

She wrote: 'After a calm and collected call with her we had finally came to the confirmation they have been speaking since January (when our daughter was in intensive care).'

Shocking: Tom, was jailed at last year after following an attack in which he broke her hand (pictured are the injuries to her face)

'While I've been focusing on my mental health I've been receiving multiple emails, calls, texts from one extreme to the other (I'm a bad mum, my mum hates me I'm going to hell to the extreme of I love you I can't be without you etc.

'This ladies is a fine example of a narcissistic man.

'I will NOT be another victim to domestic violence, I will not be beaten mentally or physically when I've fought through so much worse than this.

Adding that she was 'exhausted, heartbroken and confused' she urged her followers to 'listen to your gut and learn to love yourself.'

If you are a victim of domestic abuse, call Refuge's freephone, 24-hour National Domestic Abuse Helpline on 0808 2000 247

If you have been affected by the death of a baby please call Sands on 0808 164 3332 or email helpline@sands.org.uk
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chris Hughes and his pro golfer girlfriend Annabel Dimmock have gone Instagram official.

Beneath a photo shared on 24-year-old Annabel's Instagram, former Love Island star Chris, 28, sweetly wrote: 'Yours,' as she planted a kiss on his cheek and wrapped her arm around him.

Anna - who has played six seasons on the professional golfing circuit - captioned the sweet snap: 'Handsomes,' and made sure to tag her new beau in the post.

Love is in the air: Chris Hughes, 28, and his pro golfer girlfriend Annabel Dimmock, 24, have gone Instagram official

Sweet: Beneath a photo shared on Annabel's Instagram, former Love Island star Chris sweetly wrote: 'Yours,' as she planted a kiss on his cheek and wrapped her arm around him

Chris looked typically stylish in the picture, and wore a black hoodie while looking directly down the camera's lens.

Brunette beauty Anna also wore a black jumper and styled her hair in a chic half-up, half-down do.

The pair appeared to have been enjoying a date at Thorpe Park when the photo was taken, with Anna tagging the theme park as her location.

London native Anna is a successful golfer, having turned professional in 2016.

Career: Annabel is a successful golfer, having turned professional in 2016

Looking good: The athlete boasts over 33,000 followers on her Instagram

MailOnline has reached out to Chris' representatives for comment.

It comes nearly three months after Chris was seen putting on a cosy display with fellow Love Islander Maura Higgins at Thorpe Park.

The hunk famously split from Jesy Nelson in April 2020, and revealed months later that life after their break-up was 'a s**tstorm'.

He added that they decided to call time on their 16-month relationship because they 'grew apart'.

Beauty: In one stunning snap on her social media, Anna donned a plunging black dress on a night out with her pals

Chris explained that 'not everything is meant to last' but added that he's happy they're still good friends in an interview with New magazine in April.

Chris told the publication: 'It's just one of those things — people grow apart and things happen.

'Not everything is meant to last and the world would be very weird if everyone who went out with someone was with them for the rest of their lives.'

Three months later: It comes nearly three months after Chris was seen putting on a cosy display with fellow Love Islander Maura Higgins at Thorpe Park

Honest: Speaking about Jesy, Chris said 'not everything is meant to last' but added he's happy they're still good friends (pictured with the former Little Mix singer before their 2020 split)

He added that he's happy to still be on good terms with his ex, saying: 'I'm just grateful and fortunate that Jesy's still a very good friend of mine.'

Chris also turned his attention to the future, saying that for him it's important to find the 'right person' and that can't be 'rushed'.

The hunk also shared some candid details about his past relationship earlier in April, admitting that it was 'difficult' when they first broke up.

He told The Sun: 'It was difficult. Sometimes you just grow apart. There have definitely been days when I wake up and things haven't felt great.

'The period 12 months ago was really tough. There were days where I was waking up and our split was the first thing I was thinking about.

'I had to try my hardest mentally to break the cycle. Life was a s**tstorm.'

Jesy and Chris went public with their romance in January 2019, when they were seen enjoying a steamy date in a kebab shop, after weeks of rumours around the union.

The pair called it quits in April last year, with insiders revealing to MailOnline at the time that Jesy broke up with Chris over the phone in the midst of their separate self-isolation amid the nationwide coronavirus lockdown.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Matt has been dumped from the Love Island villa after Priya chose to couple up with new guy Brett over him.

Viewers saw Priya agonising over which boy to pick as she had bonded with both of them over the last few days.

However, much to Matt's surprise, she ended up picking Brett, saying she feels 'really comfortable with him'.

Going home: Matt has been dumped from the Love Island villa after Priya chose to couple up with new guy Brett over him

Announcing her decision, Priya said: 'It's been a really tough decision because two incredible boys have shown interest. I feel like with one of the boys, conversation flows really easily.

'I'm really comfortable with him and it helps that I could stare into his eyes all day. The boy I'd like to couple up with is Brett.'

Despite his disappointment at being dumped, Matt wished Priya and Brett well as they embark on their romance.

He said: 'It's cool, you did what was true to yourself and I respect it, best of luck to the both of you.'

Choice: Much to Matt's surprise, she ended up picking Brett, saying she feels 'really comfortable with him'

Emotional: Viewers saw Priya agonising over which boy to pick as she had bonded with both of them over the last few days

Speaking in the Beach Hut, an emotional Priya said: 'It's bittersweet because Matt is such a good guy. I've so many positive things to say about him.'

Leaving the villa, Matt admitted he was surprised Priya chose Brett over him as he thought they had a 'strong connection'.

He said: 'Priya's decision tonight was a shock to me, I felt like we had a really strong connection. They're like my family in there. I love those guys, that's the toughest part.'

In his exit interview, Matt admitted he wasn't sure if Priya was always honest with him during their time together in the villa.

Priya said: 'It's been a really tough decision because two incredible boys have shown interest. I feel like with one of the boys, conversation flows really easily'

She added: 'I'm really comfortable with him and it helps that I could stare into his eyes all day. The boy I'd like to couple up with is Brett'

He said: 'It definitely took me by surprise. I felt like she was honest with me at certain times and then she wasn't at other times. I only knew her for a certain amount of time and you can't understand a person fully in that time.'

Earlier during the show before the recoupling, Matt admitted he would be surprised if Priya didn't choose him.

He said: 'I feel it's going my way, it's the way she acts with me. She holds my hand, she makes an effort. I get the affection. I'd be very surprised if tonight swings her mind.'

Matt was originally coupled up with Kaz who he broke things off with after learning she still had feelings for Tyler.

Upsetting: Priya began to tear up after she chose Brett as she knew it would mean Matt was sent home

Asked if he connected with any of the other girls in the villa, he said: 'I felt like it was pretty much Kaz from the start.

'I did like Millie if I'm honest but I didn't want to get involved in that situation and I'm happy I didn't because we're good friends and I love Liam.'

Matt also insisted he has no regrets about his time in the villa, saying: I'm a no regrets type of guy.

'You learn from what you go through and I'm very proud of myself and how I've acted and how I've treated people. I think the course of action I took led me to where I am now and I'm happy with where I am.'

Farewell: Matt bid a fond farewell to his fellow islanders, describing them as his 'family'

Reaction: Viewers took to social media to react to the recoupling with many sad to see Matt going home

Viewers took to social media to react to the recoupling with many sad to see Matt going home.

One fan wrote: 'Aww Matt bless him,' while another said: 'Not Matt, God why, my God in heaven, just why?'

Former contestant Joshua Ritchie wrote: 'One thing you can say about Matt, he's a true gent you know, very respectful bet he's a top guy to be fair.'

Another fan gave a different point of view, writing: 'Really don't get the hate Priya is getting for not picking Matt. You people want her to choose someone she doesn't like?'

Trouble: There's seems to be trouble ahead for Liberty and Jake as viewers saw her question their relationship in a preview of Thursday's episode

Meanwhile, there's seems to be trouble ahead for Liberty and Jake as viewers saw her question their relationship in a preview of Thursday's episode.

Liberty was seen speaking about Jake to one of the girls in the garden, saying: 'If he's taking me form granted, hes not for me.'

The blonde beauty was then seen being hugged by Chloe as she appeared to get emotional, saying: 'I just feel like I've been having a really rocky week.'

Love Island continues tomorrow at 9pm on ITV2 and ITV Hub. Episodes are available the following morning on BritBox.

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Joan Smalls turned up the heat on Wednesday when she shared sizzling new photos of herself rocking a bikini top beneath a stylish shorts and shirt combo.

Wearing her blouse undone to better showcase her rock-hard abs, the model, 32, looked straight down the camera's lens in her latest Instagram photos.

Standing on a dock surrounded by luxury St Tropez boats, Joan kept the sunshine at bay behind a chic pair of black sunglasses and teamed her outfit with a pair of box-fresh trainers.

Wow: Joan Smalls, 32, turned up the heat on Wednesday when she shared sizzling new Instagram photos from St Tropez of herself rocking a bikini top, shorts and a shirt

Wearing her hair swept off her face, the runway star pursed her lips for fans and accessorised with two delicate necklaces.

She also shared a close up shot of her chest, ditching her shirt and giving her followers a better look at her beautiful jewellery.

Joan wore her glossy brunette hair loose for the final photo.

The runway sensation is currently holidaying with her boyfriend Henry Junior Chalhoub in St Tropez and the pair was seen putting on a very cosy display while enjoying a couple's workout aboard a luxury boat on Tuesday.

All in the details: The runway star pursed her lips for fans and accessorised with two delicate necklaces

They were seen together for the first time last August when they were snapped on a luxury yacht getting close, but it was said at the time that their relationship was platonic.

Joan had been dating Modellounge founder Bernard Smith since 2011 - however they had not been pictured together since earlier in 2019.

Seen in Miami together in January 2019, things looked to be going strong between Joan and Bernard - with her posing for beach snaps while he played photographer.

Box-fresh: Joan kept the sunshine at bay behind a chic pair of black sunglasses and teamed her outfit with a pair of box-fresh trainers

They were seen cuddling up on a sun-lounger people-watching together, looking very at ease.

They briefly split at the start of their relationship, however, Bernard was able to win back her heart and the pair had been together since.

It appears that somewhere in early 2019, the couple called it quits.

Joan has become known for her statuesque physique, strutting the runway multiple times as a Victoria's Secret Angel.

Speaking about how she stays in shape, she previously told Vogue: 'I work out almost every day and I mix it up: I do Thai kickboxing, I have a personal trainer, I work out at my gym.

'I actually like working out. It's such a stress reliever when you're just focusing on yourself and not thinking about anything else except the music and your body.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Love Island stars Francesca Allen and Lucie Donlan were both spotted heading to Manchester restaurant Rosso on Wednesday.

Francesca, 25, made sure all eyes were on her impressive abs, stepping out in a tiny white bandeau top teamed with high-waisted cream trousers.

Blonde bombshell Lucie, 23, looked equally stylish, opting for a leopard print two-piece layered over a busty black corset top.

Wow: Love Island stars Francesca Allen, 25, and Lucie Donlan, 23, were both spotted heading to Manchester restaurant Rosso on Wednesday

Bombshell: Blonde bombshell Lucie looked typically stylish, opting for a leopard print two-piece layered over a busty black corset top

Teaming her all-white outfit with a pair of delicate open-toe heels, boutique owner Francesca appeared in high spirits when she stepped out with a friend in the middle of the week and made sure to flash photographers a smile.

Surfer Lucie looked equally happy to be out on the town and added height to her frame in a chic pair of black heels.

Both women were also toting gorgeous handbags, with Francesca tucking hers beneath her arm and Lucie carrying her white clutch in her right hand.

Lucie's glamorous outing comes weeks after she was forced to contact the police after receiving daily death threats from trolls online.

Gorgeous: Francesca made sure all eyes were on her impressive abs, stepping out in a tiny white bandeau top teamed with high-waisted cream trousers

Speaking about the harassment for the first time last month, she told The Sun: 'It's made me really anxious. When I came off the show, I was so busy that I never really had time to look at my phone. But this year it felt much harder to escape the comments.'

Lucie revealed the daily death threats were from the same accounts each day and the comments made her feel nervous enough to contact the police.

Of the ordeal she said: 'I'm lucky, I've got great people around me. As well as my family and boyfriend, Maura [Higgins] is great to talk to because she's so strong.'

Happy: Surfer Lucie looked equally happy to be out on the town and added height to her frame in a chic pair of black heels

The star has been dating winter Love Island star Luke Mabbott, 25, for a year after sliding in his DMs when he left the show single.

Lucie also revealed in the candid interview that she thinks Luke is husband material and everything she has been looking for in a man.

Lucie previously told MailOnline she fancied Luke as soon as she saw him on the winter season of Love Island.

She said: 'I fancied him when I first saw him walk into the villa. I saw him and was like ''wow, he's perfectly my type''.

Hair down: Lucie wore her hair loose and was also sporting an immaculate, bright white pedicure

'I watched him the whole time he was on the show and I just thought he was perfect. He was such a lovely gentleman as well.

'When I saw he was single I messaged him. I saw he was single and I just thought ''I've got to shoot my shot'' – you've got to go for what you want.

'The day we first met we just knew it was meant to be which is really crazy when you meet someone at first.

'He brings out the best in me because I haven't stopped smiling since we met.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's previously stunned fans with his impressive weight loss.

And Lenny Henry was proudly showcasing his slimmed-down figure as he joined his girlfriend Lisa Makin for the press night for 2:22 A Ghost Story at the Noel Coward Theatre in London on Wednesday.

The comedian, 62, put on a dapper display for the show, which stars Lily Allen in one of the lead roles along with EastEnders' Jake Wood.

Looking good! Lenny Henry showcased his slimmed-down figure (right in 2010) at the press night for 2:22 A Ghost Story (left) at the Noel Coward Theatre in London on Wednesday

Lenny, who unveiled his impressive weight loss in 2018, donned a black blazer along with a matching pair of trousers which he paired with a navy shirt.

Meanwhile his partner Lisa, who began dating Lenny in 2012, donned a dark green midi dress which she paired with a dark grey jacket and a pair of heels.

The Broadchurch star was married to fellow comedian Dawn French for 25 years but they divorced in 2010. They have a daughter Billie, 29.

2:22 A Ghost Story follows Lily's character in her fears that her house is haunted and the aftermath of a dinner party with friends.

Event: The comedian was accompanied by his girlfriend Lisa Makin as they attended the play's opening alongside several other stars

Looking good: The couple put on a dapper display for the show, which stars Lily Allen in one of the lead roles along with EastEnders' Jake Wood

Outfit: Lisa donned a dark green midi dress which she paired with a dark grey jacket and a pair of heels

Following a recent show, Twitter and Instagram were awash with praise with one viewer penning: 'I had goosebumps at the end, the audience were screaming. What a play, what a show, what a cast. It’s unbelievable that was her west end debut'.

Fans took to the microblogging site to write: 'WOW!! I had goosebumps at the end, @sophdoesthings was crying, the audience were screaming...

'What a play, what a show, what a cast. @LilyAllen KILLED IT!!! I am so proud of her, it’s unbelievable that was her west end debut never mind opening night!...

Former flame: Lenny was married to fellow comedian Dawn French for 25 years but they divorced in 2010 (Dawn pictured in 2020)

'Absolutely loved the play last night!! One of the best things I’ve seen in years - you were brilliant, as was the rest of the cast! Smiling face...'

'No spoilers but that was incredible such an amazing play loved it so much! Now Shhh I won’t tell- you HAVE to book and see this !! #222AGhostStory'.

The play is by Danny Robins and will run at the Noel Coward Theatre until October.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's currently enjoying a sun-drenched getaway in Formentera with his wife Vivian and their daughters Alaϊa and Naila.

And a beaming Nico Rosberg put his athletic physique on display when he enjoyed a dip in the sea with his bikini-clad wife and two children on Wednesday.

Wading into the water wearing a pair of white swimming trunks, the retired German-Finnish racing driver, 36, playfully picked four-year-old Naila up and swung her around in circles before planting a kiss on his wife's lips.

Holiday: Nico Rosberg, 36, put his athletic physique on display when he enjoyed a dip in the sea with his bikini-clad wife Vivian and two children on Wednesday

Designer Vivian, also 36, looked gorgeous in a chic ruffled two-piece and chatted away to little Alaϊa, five, as Nico and Naila splashed around.

Keeping the sunshine at bay behind sunglasses, Vivian wore her long blonde hair loose and also donned a white baseball cap.

Nico was seen sweetly grabbing his wife's arm as they shared a romantic kiss in the sea.

The star driver retired from racing in 2017 and has spent the years since making the most of more quality time with his family.

Sweet: Nico was seen sweetly grabbing his wife Vivian's arm as they shared a romantic kiss in the sea

He left motor racing shortly after winning the 2016 Formula One World Championship and at the time expressed his excitement at being able to spend more time with his family.

'I am pleased I now have time to spend more time with both my daughters and my wife Vivian. The challenges since my retirement have been exciting, but this has been by far the most exciting challenge of them all,' he said.

Nico further explained: 'There was a time when my only mission in life was to win the championship. Now that it's done, I can make more time for the other passions.

'It's the ideal moment. Now the interaction starts – this is when it gets really fun and emotional. I'll always need competition, that is ingrained in me.'

Playful: Wading into the water wearing a pair of white swimming trunks, the retired German-Finnish racing driver playfully picked four-year-old Naila up and swung her around

He concluded: 'But I love my family very deeply. In my mind, I'm the luckiest man on the planet.'

Nico and Vivian welcomed their first child Alaϊa in 2015, and had daughter Naila in 2017, with Nico telling MailOnline after the birth: 'Being the father to two beautiful little girls has been the best experience of my life so far.'

Nico first met Vivian when they were children, as Nico's parents are friends with Vivian's family.

After drifting apart for several years, the pair reconnected in 2003 and soon became romantically involved, marrying in July 2014.

Before his retirement, Nico was sponsored as the Mercedes Benz driver on an £18million a year contract, and won the world champion F1, beating his rival British racer Lewis Hamilton.

Before that, Hamilton won the championship twice, in 2014 and 2015. The drivers - who grew up together racing go-karts – had a publicly turbulent relationship and clashed numerous times on track.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dame Barbara Windsor's widower Scott Mitchell cut a dapper figure when he stepped out in London on Wednesday.

Scott, 58, cut a dapper figure when he arrived at the Noel Coward Theatre for the press night of 2:22 A Ghost Story, teaming a smart beige blazer jacket with a crisp navy shirt and dark-wash jeans.

Scott's wife Barbara died in December at the age of 83 following a long battle with Alzheimer's and Scott - who she was married to from 2000 until her death - spent her last seven days at her bedside.

Dapper: Dame Barbara Windsor's widower Scott Mitchell, 58, cut a dapper figure when he stepped out in London on Wednesday

Former actor Scott appeared in high spirits when he stepped out mid-week and smiled for photographers before taking his seat.

He teamed his outfit with a polished pair of black boots and adorned his fingers with two gold rings.

Scott joined the likes of Charli Howard and Charlie Brooks at the event.

2:22 A Ghost Story is a supernatural thriller starring Lily Allen, Julia Chan, Hadley Fraser and Jake Wood.

Sad: Scott's wife Barbara died in December at the age of 83 following a long battle with Alzheimer's and the pair were married from 2000 until her death (pictured in 2009)

The plot follows Lily's character in her fears that her house is haunted and the aftermath of a dinner party with friends.

The play is by Danny Robins and will run at the Noel Coward Theatre until October.

Scott's night out comes after the widower joined Barbara's family in scattering her ashes in the grounds of Golders Green Crematorium on Friday, which would have been the iconic actress' 84th birthday.

In a moving tribute to the late Carry On actress, who died last December following a long battle with Alzheimer's disease, a new plaque was unveiled in her honour.

Smart: Scott teamed a smart beige blazer jacket with a crisp navy shirt, dark-wash jeans and polished black boots

Sitting in the West Courtyard of the crematorium, alongside other plaques to showbiz greats including Norman Vaughan, Ronnie Scott and Marc Bolan, it affectionately read: 'She was a good bird.'

Dame Barbara had said that was how she'd want to be remembered when she appeared on Piers Morgan's Life Stories back in 2010.

Scott was joined by a small group of close family and a friend as he scattered the actress' ashes in private gardens in the north London crematorium, following a simple service which included two poems and a prayer.

Dame Barbara was laid to rest at a socially-distanced service back in January, attended by the great and the good of the entertainment world including David Walliams, Christopher Biggins and Ross Kemp.

She was diagnosed with Alzheimer's in 2014 and a fundraising page set up in her memory has raised more than £160,000.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Love Island's Priya Gopaldas will be left torn between Matthew MacNabb and new bombshell Brett Staniland in Wednesday's episode, where a dramatic recoupling will dump one boy from the show.

The medical student has been growing close to 26-year-old Matthew since she entered the villa earlier this week.

However, her head may well be turned after new bombshell and PhD student Brett takes her on a date.

Shock: Priya Gopaldas will be caught in love triangle with Matthew MacNabb and new bombshell Brett Staniland on Wednesday's Love Island

Arriving at their date, Priya admits: 'I'm very glad you picked me.

'I do feel like you need to have that connection. You need to be on the same level emotionally.

'I like someone who is intelligent and athletic. I usually go for confidence on the outside but a sweetheart on the inside,' the 23-year-old adds.

Brett boasts: 'My PhD is in exercise and physical activity and it's connected to cardiovascular diseases.'

Love triangle: Priya has been growing close to Matthew (left) but her head may well be turned after new bombshell and PhD student Brett (right) takes her on a date in Wednesday's show

Beaming: Arriving at their date, Priya admits, 'I'm very glad you picked me'

In reply, Priya questions: 'By the end of the year, you'll essentially be a doctor?'

The 27-year-old concludes: 'Fingers crossed.'

Following the date, Priya tells Chloe Burrows she is still keen to get to know strategic marketing consultant Matt, and doesn't want to make her decision 'too quickly'.

However, time doesn't appear to be on her side as the Islanders are set to re-couple once again.

Common interests: By the end of the year, Brett should qualify as a doctor

Loved up: Following the date, the pair look smitten as they return to the villa

While they are relaxing in the garden, Faye Winter receives a text which reads: 'Islanders. Tonight, there will be a recoupling. The girls will each choose which boy they want to couple up with.

'The boy not picked to be in a couple will be dumped from the Island. #grabaman #girlboss.'

The power lies with Priya, but who will she choose between Brett and Matthew?

Love Island airs on Wednesday at 9pm on ITV2, ITV Hub, Virgin Media One and Virgin Media Player.

Tense: Time doesn't appear to be on Priya's side as the Islanders are set to recouple once again

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stephen Graham has shared the first official image from his and fellow Liverpudlian Jodie Comer's upcoming Channel 4 drama, Help.

Posting the picture on Twitter, the actor, 48, took to social media on Tuesday to say: 'Coming soon @Channel4 Jodie @jackthorne & @marcmunden. Thank you to each and every person who helped to make this.'

Help follows nursing home carer Sarah (played by 28-year-old Jodie) who finds her calling looking after a patient named Tony (Stephen) whose mind is slowly deteriorating from early-onset Alzheimer's.

Exciting: Stephen Graham, 48, has shared the first official image from his and 28-year-old Jodie Comer's upcoming Channel 4 drama, Help (pictured during filming in June)

First look: Stephen's image featured two close-up stills of himself and Jodie on either side of a full-length image of Jodie in character

Stephen's image featured two close-up stills of himself and Jodie on either side of a full-length image of Jodie in character.

The drama is set in Liverpool and centres on the relationship between the young care home worker and her patient as they deal with the effects of the pandemic.

It will tell the story of Sarah's relationship with Tony – a 47-year-old man with the degenerative condition – as the care home struggles to cope with the spread of the virus.

A release date for the series has yet to be announced.

When Channel 4 first announced the drama in November, Stephen - whose credits include This Is England and Line Of Duty - said: 'I've wanted to work with Jodie for ages, and together we're hugely passionate about shining a light on one of the biggest tragedies of our time and the people at the heart of it.'

Stephen wrote: 'Coming soon @Channel4 Jodie @jackthorne & @marcmunden. Thank you to each and every person who helped to make this'

Plot: Help follows nursing home carer Sarah (Jodie) who finds her calling looking after a patient named Tony (Stephen) whose mind is slowly deteriorating from Alzheimer's

Jodie added: 'For us to be able to explore such a relevant and emotive story through the eyes of such beautifully real characters, and in our home city of Liverpool, is a real honour.'

The duo also lauded show creator Jack Thorne, as Jodie went on: 'I am, of course, thrilled to finally be working alongside Stephen and the supremely talented Jack, Marc and those at Channel 4...

'We're determined to do justice to so many of the untold stories and heroes that have been affected as a result of this crisis and to handle them with care.'

Echoing her sentiments, Stephen said 'Jack is one of the greatest and most truthful writers of our generation and in Help he has crafted a profoundly important piece of social realism'.

Help will be directed by Marc Munden, whose credits also include Utopia and National Treasure.

Care homes have been one of the hardest-hit areas during the COVID-19 pandemic, with many residents separated from loved ones for months.

Close: Jodie and Stephen also share a close off-screen relationship, with Jodie revealing during her 2019 BAFTA speech (pictured) that they share the same agent, Jane Epstein

Jodie and Stephen also share a close off-screen relationship, with Jodie revealing in 2019 that they share the same agent, Jane Epstein.

During her acceptance speech for Leading Actress at that year's BAFTAs, she told the audience: 'Stephen, if I didn't owe you a pint before then, I do now.

'Thank you for the generosity you showed me all those years ago and for introducing me to Jane.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaz Kamwi

Name: Kaz Kamwi

Age: 26

Location: Essex

Occupation: Fashion Blogger

Who is their type on paper? 'I like meeting new people, I'm ready to be in a relationship. Why not be in a place where people are looking for the same things as me?'

Chloe Burrows

Name: Chloe Burrows

Age: 25

Location: Bicester

Occupation: Financial Services Marketing Executive

Who is their type on paper? 'I like a good build. I go to the gym. I want someone who is funny. Really funny and caring and will do nice little things for you.'

Faye Winter

Name: Faye Winter

Age: 26

Location: Devon

Occupation: Letting Manager

What is her type on paper? 'Someone that will put me in my place. Someone that makes me laugh. But also someone that takes my banter. I’m like a five-year-old in a playground, if I like you, I will make a mockery of you and laugh and joke. That is my really terrible flirting skills. I need someone who can take that.'

Rachel Finni

Name: Rachel Finni

Age: 29

Location: London

Occupation: Luxury travel specialist

Why did you sign up for Love Island? I've scraped the bottom of the dirtiest barrels, that’s how I describe my dating life. So I thought "why not? Let’s apply. If it happens, it happens".'

Lucinda Strafford

Name: Lucinda Strafford

Age: 21

Location: Brighton

Occupation: Online fashion boutique owner

Which boy do you have your eye on? I really fancy Brad. And then possibly Liam. But obviously I’m open to getting to know any of the other boys.

AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Name: AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Age: 28

Location: Hertfordshire

Occupation: Hair extension technician

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I’ve had the worst luck with men. I feel like this is the one thing I haven’t tried. I thought why not? Let’s give it a go.'

Georgia Townend

Name: Georgia Townend

Age: 28

Location: Essex

Occupation: Marketing executive

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I've been single for a really long time. Five years. I haven’t done the maths but it’s at least that. I feel like I’ve exhausted all the other options on how to meet people.'

Mary Bedford

Name: Mary Bedford

Age: 22

Location: Wakefield

Occupation: Model

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I have the worst luck, ever, with boys. Genuinely the worst ever. I always get dragged into the same circle of boys. So I was like, I need to go in another direction.'

Kaila Troy

Name: Kaila Troy

Age: 28

Location: Dublin

Occupation: DJ

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'Real life dating has not been doing me any favours at all. I’ve had it.'

Matthew Macnabb

Name: Matthew Macnabb

Age: 26

Location: Belfast

Occupation: Strategic Marketing Consultant

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I feel like I’m pretty chilled and very adventurous. I’m very laid-back in the sense I like to laugh and I don’t care too much about what people think.'

Amy Day

Name: Amy Day

Age: 25

From: Surrey

Occupation: Performer

Why have you signed up for Love Island: I’m clearly not very good at dating myself. I’m looking forward to the experience and the potential of finding someone I might not have met.

Lillie Hayes

Name: Lillie Haynes

Age: 22

From: South Shields

Occupation: Trainee accountant

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’ve definitely got my eye on Jake. He’s 100% the type of boy I would go for at home. It’s too good of a match not to just go for. Liam is definitely a dark horse for me, he’s like James Bond when you look at him, absolutely gorgeous. So he could be a very close second.

Jack Barlow

Name: Jack Barlow

Age: 26

From: East Sussex

Occupation: Racing driver/coach

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’m very much a connection type of person so I’ll be able to tell more in person. From what I’ve seen and going off their energy, Chloe has been top of my list. It’s been nice to see her be herself and not care what anyone thinks. I think she’ll be a lot of fun.

Jack Barlow

Name: Aaron Simpson

Age: 24

From: Kent

Occupation: Footballer

What is it like dating as a footballer? Does it make things easier or does it stand in the way? A lot of people have an assumption of me as being a typical player, but I got all of that out of my system when I was younger and now I’m a lot more laid-back when it comes to dating. A lot of people would assume that I go on lots of dates but I’m actually quite picky when it comes to who I date. Sometimes it can be hard to know if someone is genuine or not. My mum is really protective over me. The approval is always needed from mumsy, for sure.

Brett Staniland

Name: Brett Staniland

Age: 27

From: Derbyshire

Occupation: PhD student and model

Why have you signed up to Love Island? I've never had a serious relationship and the last 18 months has been really stagnant in terms of meeting new people and dating. Lots of my friends have settled down, had kids. I'm kind of the one that's left back from all of that. Now is the right time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He caused a stir with his unsuccessful attempts to find love in the villa, famously friendzoning several interested ladies.

And Love Island's Hugo Hammond has defended his indecisiveness following his exit from the ITV2 show as he admitted he wasn't prepared to 'compromise' for love, insisting: 'I‘ve got a type and I know what I’m looking for.'

During an interview with Christine Lampard on Wednesday's Lorraine, the teacher, 24, also addressed his shock 'tragic' comment he made in the presence of love interest Amy Day when talking about his time on the show.

'I know what I’m looking for': Love Island's Hugo Hammond has defended his indecisiveness following his exit from the ITV2 show as he admitted he wasn't prepared to 'compromise' for love

Appearing via video link, Hugo discussed the multiple friendship couples he found himself in during his time on the show, after rejecting the advances of Sharon Gaffka, AJ Bunker and Georgia Townend.

He told Christine: 'I think potentially I didn’t really want to compromise for love. I‘ve got a type and I know what I’m looking for and I wouldn’t say I was picky, but I just didn’t get that spark that a lot of the other boys were looking for with their girls.

'I asked them, "After one or two chats was it something you could see long term?" and I just unfortunately didn’t get that feeling.'

Oh dear! During an interview with Christine Lampard on Wednesday's Lorraine, the teacher, 24, also addressed his shock 'tragic' comment he made in the presence of love interest Amy Day when talking about his time on the show

Hugo also took the opportunity to discuss the 'tragic' comment he made when discussing his Love Island journey, which saw Amy, 25, pull a face as she stood next to him.

Clearing things up, Hugo explained: 'That was more of a reflection of my journey in there. Obviously I’d been there for so long.

'I’d tried it with quite a few girls and then some bombshells came in for me and didn’t work out, so that wasn’t a reflection of Ame’s herself but more a reflection of me and my journey, and what I’d been through in there.'

Chat: He told Christine: 'I think potentially I didn’t really want to compromise for love. I‘ve got a type and I know what I’m looking for and I wouldn’t say I was picky, but I just didn’t get that spark'

Explanation: 'I’d tried it with quite a few girls and then some bombshells came in for me and didn’t work out, so that wasn’t a reflection of Ame’s herself but more a reflection of me'

Also addressing his former 'job done' remark after kissing Amy, he said: 'The job done was meant to be something you just think, but unfortunately it just slipped out!

'I’ve seen some of the papers saying, ‘It took him five times to do it’, but that wasn’t the case. It was generally just me being a little bit silly. I was relieved. I was so nervous before that kiss - I was just finally relieved that I found a connection with someone. I was just happy.'

And following his arrival back to the UK, there had already been speculation that there could be romance for Hugo (who is still in quarantine) after a flirty exchange between the two on a recent Instagram snap of his.

Whoops: Also addressing his former 'job done' remark after kissing Amy, he said: 'The job done was meant to be something you just think, but unfortunately it just slipped out!'

No romance: Shutting down any Francesca Allen rumours, Hugo said: 'Nothing there, that was just a comment on an Instagram post so unfortunately just speculation'

Shutting down any rumours, Hugo said: 'Nothing there, that was just a comment on an Instagram post so unfortunately just speculation.'

However, he did reveal that that other ladies have indeed shown an interest as he added: 'but my DMs have been rather full since leaving the show so maybe I’ll have more luck on the outside world than I did on the inside of the villa.'

Expressing a potential interest in new girl Priya Gopaldas, he added: 'I saw Priya and having seen bits and bobs of her over the last few episodes, she looks like a great girl and I would have loved to get to know her but unfortunately I’ll have to wait a couple of weeks to do that.'

It comes just days after Hugo and Amy clashed in a post-villa chat, with Amy branding Hugo 'fake' for 'friend-zoning' her shortly after they were booted out of the Love Island villa last Thursday.

Drama: It comes just days after Hugo and Amy clashed in a post-villa chat, with Amy branding Hugo 'fake' for 'friend-zoning' her shortly after they were booted out of the Love Island villa last Thursday

In scenes aired during Sunday's Aftersun, Hugo and Amy were first seen sitting down together for a pre-recorded chat while still in Mallorca before making a live appearance via videolink on the show from their respective homes.

Sitting opposite Hugo while still in Spain, Amy lambasted Hugo for his behaviour, saying: 'It's the Hugo show, that's all it is,' and adding: 'I think we need to clear up a few things because I feel like I had my time wasted a little bit, staying with you.'

The bombshell continued: 'I thought there was something there. We leave the villa, and you just flipped and friend-zoned me. You've come across quite fake now.'

Hugo was quick to fire back: 'I completely disagree with you on that front,' with Amy quipping: 'Course you do.'

Attempting to explain himself, Hugo continued: 'We had the chat in there about how we had come to a cross road on our journey and I think that was clear to both of us but apparently not.'

Hugo insisted: 'I completely disagree with you on that front,' with Amy quipping: 'Course you do'

Taken back, Amy responded: 'I wasn't part of that conversation. That was massively lost in communication.

'I never had a conversation with you where it was, ''we would go this way or we would go this way''. It was, ''let's stop having the pressure on us''.'

At that moment, Hugo started laughing, much to Amy's dismay.

'You're so patronising,' she said, adding: 'Why are you laughing? This isn't funny.'

Love Island and Aftersun host Laura Whitmore later spoke to both Hugo and Amy via videocall, with Hugo berating his former flame for spending the first in Casa Amor in Tyler Cruickshank's bed and explaining that her actions made him feel as though he was merely a 'green card into the villa'.

Love Island continued Wednesday at 9pm on ITV2 and ITV Hub.

Explanation: Attempting to explain himself, Hugo continued: 'We had the chat in there about how we had come to a cross road on our journey and I think that was clear to both of us'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They welcomed their first child, a baby boy called Brody, in May.

And TOWIE's Georgia Kousoulou, 29, and her beau Tommy Mallet, 29, are now set to share their pregnancy and first weeks as parents with fans in a spin-off show.

In a first look trailer for the upcoming two-part special, called Georgia & Tommy Baby Steps, the couple are seen preparing to welcome their son in hospital and sweetly joking that the little one takes after his dad.

From baby bump to baby Brody! Georgia Kousoulou and her millionaire beau Tommy Mallet are seen adjusting to their first weeks as parents in the first trailer for their new spin-off show

In the teaser, the couple are seen sitting on their sofa while Georgia is still pregnant with the clip then showing them with beloved dog Monkey and their baby son.

Millionaire shoe entrepreneur Tommy opens the trailer by introducing himself, which makes his girlfriend laugh, before announcing 'and then there was four' once they're joined by the smaller members of their family.

The new dad is later seen opening two huge boxes of baby items and admitting that 'this is pretty daunting' as Georgia's due date approaches.

He is later heard saying 'it's an emotional rollercoaster' at the end of the trailer.

New mama: The TOWIE star, 29, is seen pregnant with her little boy and doting on the adorable tot in the short teaser video

Other clips show Georgia in a hospital gown ahead of Brody's delivery and declaring that welcoming her little boy was the 'most amazing experience of my life'.

Fans are also set to see the couples first few weeks with Brody at home as in another funny moment the tot is seen 'shouting his head off' in his carseat with doting dad Tommy asking: 'Who do you take after?'

Georgia then quickly replies to her boyfriend, as she jokes: 'You!'

Sharing the trailer to Instagram on Wednesday, Georgia penned: 'GEORGIA & TOMMY BABY STEPS.. out next month over 2 nights.

Getting ready: Georgia appeared to be in good spirits as she danced around in a hospital gown

Labour: Another clip saw her declare that having Brody was the 'most amazing experience'

Adjusting to parenthood: The happy couple also joked that Brody took after his dad when he was 'shouting his head off' in his carseat

Newborn: Brody was born in May, with Georgia and Tommy sharing regular updates with fans

'Exact date coming soon.. AGHHHH can't wait for you to see it! It's so raw & honest & everything in between! Tag me in your videos when you see the advert woohoooo!!'

Georgia has been regularly posting updates with her 1.4m followers and recently shared an empowering message about her post-baby body.

The 29-year-old shared candid photos of herself in a white crop top and grey sweatpants, referencing her stretch marks and c-section scar in the post's caption.

Georgia admitted that while she 'cried' upon seeing her stretch marks after the birth, she now feels 'proud' at having grown a beauty healthy baby', and encouraged other mothers to not feel pressure in 'bouncing back' quickly.

Exciting: Georgia shared the clip to her Instagram, gushing that the show is 'so raw & honest'

Not long to go! The star revealed the spin-off show will air over two nights in September

Honest: Tommy is heard admitting 'this is pretty daunting' and that this 'it's an emotional rollercoaster' in the trailer

'THE REALITY.. all I heard when I was pregnant was 'you'll bounce back, you're young" etc. It got in my head and I probably did think I would to an extent,' Georgia began.

'So you can imagine the first time I looked in the mirror eight weeks ago, I'm not going to lie.. I freaked out, my body wasn't my body I was used to no more. I had big stretch marks, I am wider and obviously a c-section scar, I remember just crying.'

Georgia went on to reveal how she's now feeling 'proud' at what her body has achieved, nearly two months after giving birth.

'NOW eight weeks on this is me, I've done no exercise and ate what I want, when I can. I now look at my body and I'm proud. I'm proud I have grown a beautiful healthy baby, I'm proud I have got through the first eight weeks,' she said.

Candid post: It comes after Georgia admitted that she 'cried' upon seeing her stretch marks and c-section scar - but is now 'proud at having grown a beautiful baby'

Raw: The first-time mum went on to reveal she's feeling 'proud' at what her body has achieved

Georgia went on to say that while she would love to fit into her size 10 Zara clothing, she's giving herself 'minimum a year' to drop the pounds as she's focusing on herself and her baby.

The reality star urged society to 'stop using these phrases' of bounce back for women, and encouraged other mothers to not feel any additional pressure.

'It's taken us nine months to grow a baby, why are we expecting our bumps to go straight away? Let's just encourage mum to look after themselves, their mental health and their babies.

'Let's stop adding more pressure on women, it's hard enough!' she continued.

Georgia welcomed son Brody on May 5 with boyfriend Tommy and announced his arrival with a series of adorable Instagram posts.

Georgia looked radiant as she cradled her little boy, who was wrapped in a soft white blanket, while laying in a hospital bed alongside her beaming beau.

Clearly proud of his new baby boy, Tommy penned at the time: 'Now my life is full! Welcome to the world young.'

Doting new mother Georgia replied to the comment, and said: 'The best thing that's ever happened to us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Halle Berry looked bloodied and battered in the first images released ahead of her new Netflix martial arts movie Bruised.

The actress, 54, also revealed how she broke ribs while filming her directorial debut, and that she wasn't supposed to star in it originally,

She told Entertainment Weekly that she took over the main role from Blake Lively, who the project had been conceived for.

Shocking: Halle Berry looked bloodied and battered in the first images released ahead of her new Netflix martial arts movie Bruised

Halle stars in the film as disgraced MMA fighter Jackie Justice, who has to face one of the rising stars of the MMA world while caring for her six-year-old son.

The actress completely transformed for the role, getting into the 'best shape of her life' physically while also sporting extensive prosthetic injuries.

One snap shows Halle sporting a painful looking black eye and bloodied nose while in the ring fighting an opponent.

One to watch: Halle stars in the film as disgraced MMA fighter Jackie Justice, who has to face one of the rising stars of the MMA world while caring for her six-year-old son

In her EW interview, she said: 'They gave me the script and I loved the story, but it was written for a twentysomething Irish Catholic white woman.

'I couldn't get it out of my mind, so I thought, is it possible that this could be reimagined for someone like me? Because I think I have a take on it that could actually work – making it about a middle-aged black woman, someone fighting for a last chance rather than another chance.'

The Oscar-winning star continued: 'When you're young we all get chances, they're a dime a dozen. But when you're at a certain stage in life it becomes more impactful and meaningful, right?

'So about six months later when (Lively) decided in her own time that it wasn't for her, I went to the producer, Basil Iwanyk, who I'd just done John Wick 3 with, and gave him my pitch. And he said, 'Great, we love that idea. Now go find a director.''

Ouch! After getting into the best shape of her life for the role, she told the outlet she broke two ribs on the first day of shooting

The X-Men actress met with a dozen potential directors but the avid combat sports fan felt that nobody could fulfil her view of the project and decided to get behind the camera herself.

Halle recalled: 'I had to go back and say, 'I've tried really hard, but what's in my head, no one else sees. This is going to sound really crazy because it's crazy for me to even think it, but I think I should direct this.''

After getting into the best shape of her life for the role, she told the outlet she broke two ribs on the first day of shooting.

Unlike when she fractured her ribs during the shooting of 2019's John Wick: Chapter 3 — Parabellum, she pushed through the pain.

Going strong: Halle said she is 'proof' that the entertainment industry is changing for women over 40

Speaking of her injury on the set of Wick, she said: 'I told the director about it, they told the insurance. We had to shut down for months and it was a big ordeal. On this, because it was an independent movie, we didn't have a big budget.

'The director in me said, 'I didn't come this far and work this hard to go home!''

She also said that she is 'proof' that the entertainment industry is changing for women over 40, just days ahead of her 55th birthday on Saturday.

While Hollywood is notorious for ageism, the Oscar-winning actress raved that her career is still thriving after wrapping Bruised.

'It used to be when you were 40 your career was done … and I mean really done. Or you had to wait until you were old enough to play a grandma, and then you could have another bite at the apple, right?,' she told EW.

She added: 'I mean, I couldn't think that I'd be playing an MMA fighter at 54 years old. Yet I did, so it's got to be changing. I'm proof of that.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eleanor Tomlinson has been seen for the first time filming season two of The Offenders on Tuesday.

The actress was seen on location in Bristol with co-stars Christopher Walken and Stephen Merchant.

The former-Poldark starlet, 29, looked pretty in a floral blouse, tied in at the waist with a sash.

On location: Eleanor Tomlinson has been seen for the first time filming season two of The Offenders on Tuesday

She donned a sweeping black skirt which fell to her ankles, and added wedge peep-toe heels to the look tied with a red ribbon.

Eleanor wore her russet mane in gentle waves around her features and her costume was decorated with various items of statement jewelery.

She added porcelain make-up to complete the ensemble, with deft brushes of bronzer.

She was seen chatting to cast and crew on the set in the bright sunshine, sharing a laugh with her colleagues.

Getting to work: The former-Poldark starlet, 29, looked pretty in a floral blouse, tied in at the waist with a sash

New scenes: The actress was seen on location in Bristol with co-stars Christopher Walken [L] and Stephen Merchant [R]

Looking good: The star let her flame-haired locks fall loose down her shoulders

Chic: She donned a sweeping black skirt which fell to her ankles, and added wedge peep-toe heels to the look tied with a red ribbon

Into character: Eleanor wore her russet mane in gentle waves around her features and her costume was decorated with various items of statement jewelery

The cast were seen at a funfair, with bright bunting strewn around above them.

Stephen was seen with a painted face, sporting a snout and red lips.

78-year-old Hollywood star Christopher, who plays Frank - 'an inveterate scoundrel trying to reconnect with his family' - in the series, was seen being led to the set by a member of the crew.

Also on set was former EastEnder Claire Perkins who plays one of the seven offenders.

Beauty: She added porcelain make-up to complete the ensemble, with deft brushes of bronzer

In good company: She was seen chatting to cast and crew on the set in the bright sunshine, sharing a laugh with her colleagues

Setting: The cast were seen at a funfair, with bright bunting strewn around above them

On set: Actor Christophe was spotted filming scenes with the others

The show focuses on seven strangers forced together to complete a community payback sentence in Bristol.

The show is new to the BBC and Amazon Prime, with season one yet to air this year, and season two already being shot.

The Office co-creator Stephen wrote the show, with absent Eleanor playing Gabby, an 'aristocratic celebutante whose glamour and life of leisure masks deep-rooted problems'.

In a recent interview, she said of her character: 'Gabby is a social-media influencer with a drink and drug problem.

All made up: Stephen was seen with a painted face, sporting a snout and red lips

New show: The show is new to the BBC and Amazon Prime, with season one yet to air this year, and season two already being shot

Back-to-back: The show is new to the BBC and Amazon Prime, with season one yet to air this year, and season two already being shot

'She is wild and uncontrollable and, without being unkind, blissfully unaware of the lives of others around her, which makes her outrageously funny to play.'

Filming began last year but was postponed because of Covid.

Discussing his forthcoming series, Merchant - who comes from Bristol, where the show is based - admitted production was initially hampered by the spread of coronavirus in 2020.

He told The Sun: 'Like so many other productions, we'd just begun filming when COVID-19 struck and we had to shut-down.

Scribe: The Office co-creator Stephen wrote the show

Newcomer: Also on set was former EastEnder Claire Perkins who plays one of the seven offenders

'I'm delighted that we're now finally able to resume filming with this incredible cast and finish this long-standing passion project.

'This is the first series I've made in my hometown of Bristol and I'm so excited to showcase the city and utilise the amazing local talent.'

Filming ground to a halt after just 12 days due to health concerns, but work has since continued in earnest as Britain's third national lockdown starts to ease.

Reflecting on the BBC's unorthodox decision to commission a second series before gauging the popularity of the first, producer Kenton Allen told Deadline: 'We said, 'We'll write Season 2 if you commission Season 2'. We were able to rewrite Season 1 to reflect what we know is going to happen to the characters in Season 2. We were able to deepen it and layer it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tom Zanetti has penned a moving tribute to his late girlfriend Lizzie on the 11th anniversary of her tragic death.

The DJ, 32, took to his Instagram Stories on Tuesday where he shared an emotional message to his former love, in which he heartbreakingly admitted: 'The wishes or crying just won't bring you home!'

Elizabeth Rose Pickavance passed away in 2010 aged just 20 in a car crash on the M62 near Gildersome when she was driving home from work in Manchester.

Heartbreaking: Tom Zanetti, 32, penned a moving tribute to his late girlfriend Lizzie on the 11th anniversary of her tragic death, which he shared to his Instagram Stories on Tuesday

Celebs Go Dating star Tom wrote: 'Today is the day that you went to heaven, it's unfair you was taken so young. It hurts so bad and we all want you back, it's worse knowing it can't be undone.

'The wishes or crying just won't bring u home, we have to cope with you being apart.

'But we'll never forget you, your so very loved, and you will always live on in our hearts [sic].'

His heartfelt post comes just two weeks after Tom paid tribute to his late girlfriend Lizzie on what would have been her birthday.

Tragic: Elizabeth Rose Pickavance passed away in 2010 aged just 20 in a car crash on the M62 near Gildersome when she was driving home from work in Manchester

Emotional: Tom shared an emotional message to his former love, in which he heartbreakingly admitted: 'The wishes or crying just won't bring you home!'

Taking to Instagram to mark the special day, he shared a lovely picture of his late partner as he gushed: 'Memories can't be taken'.

Sharing a snap of his late love to Instagram Stories, Tom penned: 'Happy birthday Elizabeth Rose Pickavance.

'We all miss you, will always love you and forever wish. I could have seen how you grown into the perfect lady with each year older. Memories can't be taken.'

Tom has previously marked the anniversary of her death with tribute posts on social media and also spoke about his grief in 2018 following the death of Love Island star Sophie Gradon's partner Aaron Armstrong.

In his heartbreaking speech, Tom said: 'So, Sophie Gradon, a few weeks ago was a reality TV star and she killed herself. I don't know why because I didn't know her...

'Memories can't be taken': Less than two weeks ago, Tom paid tribute to his late girlfriend Lizzie on what would have been her birthday

Always remembered: Elizabeth Rose Pickavance passed away in 2010 aged just 20 in a car crash on the M62 near Gildersome when she was driving home from work in Manchester

'Just found out her boyfriend's [death]... he was gutted about what happened. I've just been reading Aaron's Instagram, the posts about what he was writing before he took his own life and it reminded me so much of how I felt about what happened when my girlfriend died...

'A lot of the things he was saying were so similar to what I was saying. I feel like it's so sad... as well and I wanted to put a message out...

'If you're going through something like that when you lose someone you love, who you spend all your time with, there's nothing worse...

'So helpless, so confusing, so impossible and I wanna let people know you can get through it and it feels impossible and things do. It gets easier and if you ask someone who's going through depression...

'You need to ask for help and speak to someone you love and get everything off your chest or speak to a professional who you don't know from Adam and just get everything you need off your chest and just iron out the creases in your mind...

'Taking your own life is not the answer there's helplines you can call for free counselling on the NHS. Taking your own life is not the answer because you're gonna leave other people with your loss...

'I know that doesn't matter at the time. It's really hit home and broken my heart to see what that boy was going through...

'Let me send this message to you tonight please speak out and don't be shy, please speak out and talk to somebody a lot. People love you.'

Candid: The DJ also spoke out about his girlfriend's tragic death after learning of Love Island star Sophie Gradon's boyfriend's passing in 2018 (pictured with Lizzie in a throwback snap)

Lizzie died at the wheel of her car on the M62 near Gildersome, when she was returning from work in Manchester and appeared to fall asleep at the wheel before hitting a tree. Doctors were unable to save her after she was taken to hospital.

Tom, who lived with Lizzie in Belle Isle, also lost his grandfather on the same stretch of motorway in May 2009.

Through the years, Tom has shared touching images of Lizzie with heartbreaking captions as he paid tribute to her.

In 2016 he penned: 'I don't want to go into detail on how or give a big emotional speech because everyone who knew her and who knows me and my family knows how bad we miss her and she is very loved everyday...

Throwback: Tom has often marked the anniversary of Lizzie's death with tribute posts and also spoke about his grief in 2018 following the death of Sophie Gradon's partner Aaron Armstrong

'So many things always pop up to show me her beautiful spirit is still around. Losing someone you love is the worst most helpless feeling you can ever experience, but take it from me after losing many people I care about - in time it does get easier to cope with and u will learn to deal with and accept it...

'You will be able to smile thinking of the amazing memories they gave you and the times you spent together. You will think of the lessons they taught u and the affect they had on you as a person rather than dwelling on the pain that they are gone...

'It's not easy and the pain won't ever leave but anyone u lose who loved you would want you smiling I think. So smile if you can. God bless you Lizzie, you will always be in our hearts and on our minds xxxx Thankyou for everything. (sic)'

For confidential support call the Samaritans on 116123 or visit a local Samaritans branch, or see samaritans.org for details.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her Instagram profile is jam-packed with sultry, bikini-clad snaps.

And Sophia Peschisolido, 24, set pulses racing on Tuesday as she took to the app once again to treat her followers with a sizzling shot from her Marbella getaway.

The daughter of Baroness Karren Brady flashed cleavage in a blue crisscross halter top and matching knotted beach skirt from PrettyLittleThing.

Beauty: Karren Brady's daughter Sophia Peschisolido set pulses racing as she flashed her cleavage in a blue halter top during her Marbella getaway on Instagram on Tuesday

Putting her sun-kissed midriff on display, the heiress also flashed her toned pins while posing barefoot.

The influencer's glossy chestnut locks cascaded down her shoulders in beachy waves while she posed sultrily with her hands tugging on her skirt.

The sultry posts come after she revealed late last year that her businesswoman mother Karren, 52, approves of her lingerie and bikini shots, and even gets involved in their development.

Hot stuff: The daughter of Baroness Karren Brady flashed her cleavage in a blue crisscross halter top and matching knotted beach skirt from PrettyLittleThing

Sophia shared in a Q&A: 'She takes some of my pics for me (not all the time as she's busy) and I send every pic I post to her beforehand to get her opinion on what to post.

'She's very proud of me and she encourages me. she is the best. Blessed with the best parents!!' (sic)

Elsewhere in her discussion, the Instagram personality spoke about how she deals with social anxiety, a condition she described as her 'biggest struggle in life'.

The beauty wrote: 'I'm just trying to push myself out of my comfort zone a little bit at a time. Slow and steady and I just try to reassure myself.

'Also try talk myself out of panicking. It's a tough process but we move. Also remembering that you're not alone and a lot of people suffer with the same thing x.' (sic)

The Apprentice aide Karren shares her eldest child and son Paolo, 21, with ex-footballer husband Paul Peschisolido, 49.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's a body positivity advocate who champions women who embrace their curves.

And Honey Ross showed off her latest fashion look in a radiant mirror selfie on Instagram on Wednesday.

Donning a bright orange babydoll dress, the 24-year-old flashed her legs in the eye-catching number, which she accessorised with a black textured handbag.

Glowing: Jonathan Ross' daughter Honey looked went for a leggy look in an orange frilly babydoll dress in an Instagram Story post from Wednesday

Co-ordinating her damp wavy tangerine locks with the £810 Brogger dress, the daughter of chat show host Jonathan Ross sported a pair of round glasses and kept her makeup to a minimum.

The influencer elevated her height in a pair of pale pink heels and shot a pout towards herself in the mirror.

Honey recently came close to a wardrobe malfunction as she shared a slew of snaps in a low-cut gingham dress on Tuesday.

Putting on a very busty display in the ensemble, she sipped on orange wine at the bar Silver Lining.

Pour it up: Honey put on a busty display in a gingham summer dress as she sipped on orange wine at Silver Lining in London

She was joined by a friend in the East London hotspot, and the pair appeared to be in good spirits in the shots.

In the first of the three snaps, Honey posed up a storm with her orange wine in her hand while her friend offered up a closer look at the bottle, which was cheekily named Little B*****d'.

In another photo, the pair larked around for the camera, with Honey placing her hand under her chin as she beamed broadly.

Good times: Honey (right), who is the daughter of TV presenter Jonathan Ross, was joined by a friend (left) in the East London hotspot, and the pair looked in good spirits in the snaps

Honey was not joined by her boyfriend Zane Saz on the outing, after she shared a raunchy picture with Zane's hand down her skirt.

In the image shared with her Instagram followers, Honey teased her midriff in a baby blue and white floral crop top and skirt.

Honey wrote an article last year for The Sunday Times Style mag detailing the difficulties she's faced in her dating life.

Cheeky: The post comes after last month Honey posted an image with her boyfriend Zane Saz's hand down her skirt

She explained that men would frequently try to chat her up on social media, but would never do the same offline.

'Strangers and mutuals alike are privately trying to get my attention. But note the word "privately": most of these men who message and follow me would never publicly like or comment on my pictures.'

She believed that being attracted to someone who's 'fat' is still seen as taboo - branding men's desire for larger bodies as 'their dirty secret'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sid Owen has praised his Revolution co-star Al Pacino for 'taking him under his wing' during his troubled childhood.

Speaking on Wednesday's Loose Women, the Ricky Butcher actor, 49, who, aged 13, starred in 1985 film Revolution with icon Al, praised the star for making every day on set a 'masterclass' - days after revealing the star had considered adopting him.

Sid also discussed how a snap decision to sign up for a drama group 'saved his life' after a heartbreaking childhood which saw his father abandon him and his mother die from cervical cancer when he was aged eight.

Praise: Sid Owen has praised his Revolution co-star Al Pacino for 'taking him under his wing' during his troubled childhood

He said: 'I got to work with Al Pacino and it was the best job in the world. I wasn't aware of who he was back then. I thought he was Sylvester Stallone. I never got to watch Scarface or The Godfather. Every day on set with him was a masterclass.

'He took me under his wing and I had to go see him every day religiously to run lines. He'd buy me the Atari console to keep me out of trouble.'

The star added that acting had given him an outlet for his anger at a time when he was grieving and had run-ins with the law.

He said: 'Very weirdly, where I grew up there was a drama group which I joined at a very young age which helped me channel my energy and anger into acting - I'd take my mind off things and play characters.

Icon: Speaking on Wednesday's Loose Women, the Ricky Butcher actor, 49, who, aged 13, starred in 1985 film Revolution with icon Al, praised the star for making every day on set a 'masterclass' - days after revealing the star had considered adopting him (pictured in the film)

'It sort of saved my life.'

Sid also credited his role in the Hollywood blockbuster with getting his part in EastEnders.

He said: 'I probably got the job because I worked with Al Pacino! It took me about a year to settle in. It was such an iconic show when I joined it.

'I was pinching myself when I walked on set and wanted to get Pat and Sharon's autograph. I was so nervous. I found it hard to smile and talk.'

In his emotional memoir, From Rags to Ricky, the EastEnders star, detailed how he developed a close bond with the Scarface actor while filming his debut film role aged 13 - and how Al 'considered adopting him' because he had no parents.

Sid's father David was an alcoholic who left the family home when the star was just six years old, while his mother Joan died from cervical cancer in 1979 when she was 35 and Sid eight. Sid was raised by his aunt Carol and her husband Michael.

So sad: Sid also discussed how a snap decision to sign up for a drama group 'saved his life' after a heartbreaking childhood which saw his father abandon him and his mother die from cervical cancer when he was aged eight

Sid revealed the first audition involved him reacting to the line 'I have to tell you your mum’s died' - which brought back the raw emotion of his mother's death, and cemented his role in the film as Ned Dobb, the son of Pacino's character.

In an extract published in The Sun, he writes: 'When I started on Revolution, there was a lot for us to work through together to make our father-and-son relationship convincing, so we got into a routine where every day I’d go to his trailer and we’d run lines, whatever we were doing that day.

'He knew I had no parents and was from a difficult background, though we didn’t really talk about it.

'He didn’t have kids of his own then and I found out later he had considered adopting me. One time he said: “Come out to New York when this is finished.”

Close bond: In his emotional memoir, From Rags to Ricky, the EastEnders star detailed how he developed a close bond with the Scarface actor while filming his debut film role aged 13 - and how Al 'considered adopting him' because he had no parents (pictured 2019)

Sid revealed the pair had stayed in touch, with the soap star taking his first serious girlfriend to stay with Pacino and his then-partner Diane Keaton in the 1980s - and still catching up 'every now and then.'

Revolution, which cost £19million to make, was a box office bomb, grossing only £258,000.

Sid also credited acting for saving him from a life as a 'jailbird', and said he found his purpose after joining a drama group for children in Islington, close to his home.

As a child, Sid had already got involved in burglaries and was given warning he would be prosecuted aged 10 when he and a friend broke into a school.

Stayed in touch: 'He didn’t have kids of his own then and I found out later he had considered adopting me. One time he said: “Come out to New York when this is finished' (pictured in the film)

Talented: Sid also credited acting for saving him from a life as a 'jailbird', and said he found his purpose after joining a drama group for children in Islington, close to his home (pictured 2000)

After that wake-up call, Sid downgraded his criminal activities to shoplifting, and said acting brought a stop to the theft altogether.

Discovering a love and natural talent for acting, he landed his first role in a TV series called The Further Adventures Of Oliver Twist when he was eight, before the big screen followed.

Sid has detailed his poverty-stricken childhood, which included his dad 'robbing banks and beating up the kids' in further extracts from his memoir.

He wrote about his difficult upbringing, which included an absent father and a terminally ill mother.

In an extract published by The Sun, Sid first narrates the story of how the family were about to jet off on their first proper family holiday to Mallorca, and when just as they were about to take off, their father got arrested on the tarmac.

Past life: Sid has detailed his poverty-stricken childhood, which included his dad 'robbing banks and beating up the kids' in further extracts from his memoir (pictured in 2017)

'They grabbed my dad, stuck him in handcuffs and dragged him out. We were screaming, terrified' he says.

He recalls that his dad - who was scratched out of family photos, was an angry alcoholic, and had tendency to lash out when he'd been drinking.

His mother, Joan, would not stand for her husband to abuse the children, and it was the last straw of his angry behaviour.

Tell-all: He wrote about his difficult upbringing, which included an absent father and a terminally ill mother; a young Sid is pictured

'She kept chucking him out because he was just too violent [...] Robbing banks was one thing, but violence against kids was another,' he wrote.

Sid added that he and his three brothers felt very protective of their mother, and would step in when they could, even when they were so young.

Sid, who's actual name is David, grew up on Mantell Street in Islington, and said that it was a real community, and everyone would help each other out.

Way back when: Sid tells of how the family were about to jet off on a family holiday to Mallorca, when their father got arrested on the plane tarmac; pictured as Ricky Butcher in EastEnders in 2000

Sid, who's actual name is David, grew up in Islington and recalled that his father could be violent when he had been drinking (pictured with Patsy Palmer who plays Bianca in the soap)

Father: Sid's dad David is pictured in 1991 with a snap of the star

As a result of their severe lack of money growing up, Sid and his brothers would roam about their community getting involved in burglaries.

Because Sid was young, he was four years old when he first started 'nicking stuff', he was able to fit in to tight spaces that his elder brothers were not, and they referred to him as Spiderman.

The actor confessed he and his siblings used to go out on Christmas Day to go 'on the rob' for presents, and they would sit around a stolen tree comparing their 'gifts.'

Having young children took its toll on his mother, who eventually turned to alcohol, and was drinking in replacement of any real diet.

Turning to crime: As a result of their severe lack of money growing up, Sid and his brothers would roam about their community getting involved in burglaries; a young Sid is pictured, left

She ended up contracting terminal cervical cancer, and even with chemo she ended up passing away in 1979.

The soap star went onto say didn't go to his mother's funeral, with his extended family deeming him too young to attend.

On the day of the funeral, he and two of his brothers - Scott and Darren - decided they would escape from the house.

'They found us later but it was a weird feeling, knowing your own mum was being buried and just running and running through this strange landscape.'

Sid recalls he thought he had come to terms with the pain of losing his mother, but he had just been numb to it, and it took him years to discover this.

Troubled: His mother, Joan, would not stand for her husband to abuse the children, and it was the last straw of his angry behaviour (Sid is pictured in his younger years)

Devastating: His mother ended up contracting terminal cervical cancer, and even with chemo she ended up passing away when she was 35 in 1979 (Sid is pictured in 2018)

It comes after Sid said he is 'proud to still be alive' after battling drug addiction and boozing during his EastEnders days.

In an interview with The Sun, Sid admitted he used to snort cocaine while learning his lines, spending up to £200-per-night.

Speaking about his cocaine troubles, Sid said: 'It's recreational then all of a sudden it's like, 'Hang on, I've got to get through pages of scripts, and then go to work'.

'You think you can do it and get away with it. I thought I could juggle the two, but I soon realised it was a silly idea... I'm proud I'm still alive.'

Candid: It comes after Sid said he is 'proud to still be alive' after battling drug addiction and boozing during his EastEnders days (pictured in 2019)

The actor continued that during the 90s he could spend as much as £200 a night on his habit and once drove to the TV studios 'coked up to my eyeballs'.

He managed to put drugs behind him after a rehab stint and also credited focusing on his fitness as a way to stay healthy, revealing he also doesn't drink much anymore.

Sid, who is releasing an autobiography called From Rags to Ricky, also reflected on his raunchy sex life and admitted that he 'lapped' up attention from women when he was single, adding that he doesn't have any regrets 'even sex in Tesco'.

Elsewhere in the interview, Sid discussed his childhood in North London where he was the youngest of four boys and would help his brothers commit burglaries and started smoking at the age of four.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's always been incredibly close to her family members.

And, on Tuesday, Michelle Keegan, 34, took to her Instagram Stories where she shared a series of adorable childhood snaps to celebrate her cousin Katie Fearnehough's birthday.

The Our Girl actress is barely recognisable as a young girl with a chunky fringe in the throwback photos contained within sweet collages.

Throwback! On Tuesday, Michelle Keegan, 34, (pictured right as a child) took to Instagram to share adorable childhood snaps to celebrate her cousin Katie Fearnehough's birthday

All grown up: The cousins have blossomed into beautiful brunette women

Proving their close bond, one photograph shows a baby Katie sitting on Michelle's lap during a day at the park.

In another shot, Michelle is dressed in a dark vintage-looking green dress as she wraps an arm around Katie.

The soap star also included some more recent photographs of herself and her cousin, with teen throwbacks and nights out as adults.

Sharing the snaps to her Instagram Stories, Michelle said: 'Happy 30th Birthday to my girl @katiefearnehoughx. Not only my cousin but my best friend.

Who's that girl? The Our Girl actress is barely recognisable as a young girl with a chunky fringe (pictured right) in the throwback photos contained within sweet collages

Close bond: Michelle branded her cousin her 'best friend' as she gushed over their close bond

'For three decades we have been side by side, growing up together & how lucky are we to have such special memories.'

Alongside a video of her cousin riding a Bucking Bronco ride, Michelle penned: 'Here's to the net 3 decades...let's ride them the way you are riding this bull.

'Holding on tight through the lows, laugh through the highs, all with an arm in the air and a smile on your face! Love you loads xxxx.'

Last September, Katie gave birth to a boy named Brody, making Michelle a doting auntie.

Lifelong friends: The soap star also included some more recent photographs of herself and her cousin, with teen throwbacks and nights out as adults

Twinning: Michelle and Katie have always been incredibly close

Last year, Michelle admitted that she felt 'frustrated' by constant questions about when she and husband Mark Wright will have a baby.

The actress, who has been married to the TOWIE star turned TV presenter, for six years, hit out at sexist double standards - admitting queries about when she is going to have a baby do 'bother' her now.

In an interview with Cosmopolitan magazine, she said: 'A few years ago it didn't bother me and I answered the question.

'But now I think, ''I don't need to answer that because nobody knows what goes on behind closed doors''.

Family matters: Michelle's cousin, Katie, gave birth to son Brody last September

'I remember when I finished Our Girl people were like, ''Is it because you're going off to have a baby?''

'I know for a fact if Mark finished a job, nobody would ask him if he was going to have a baby. It's not fair. It does make me feel frustrated.'

Michelle and husband Mark have been together since late 2012 when they met while they were both on holiday in Dubai.

The former TOWIE star popped the question nine months later and the pair married in a lavish ceremony at Hengrave Hall in Suffolk in May 2015.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She jetted off to the Greek island of Halkidiki with her family earlier this month.

And Billie Faiers looked sensational in a black bikini and tiger-print sarong as she posed with daughter Nelly, seven, in a sweet Instagram snap shared on Wednesday.

The former TOWIE star, 31, showed off her ample cleavage and incredible figure in the skimpy bikini top, while flashing her toned pins beneath the skirt's split.

Fabulous: Billie Faiers looked sensational in a black bikini and tiger-print sarong as she posed with daughter Nelly, seven, in a sweet Instagram snap from their Greece holiday shared on Wednesday

Accessorising her holiday look, Billie added a simple pair of white flip-flops and shielded her eyes from the sun with over-sized black sunglasses.

Meanwhile little Nelly looked adorable in a white patterned two-piece and pastel coloured Crocs.

The mother and daughter duo were in great spirits as they smiled for the camera, no doubt ready to hit the beach.

Family break: Billie jetted off to the Greek island of Halkidiki with her family earlier this month (pictured with husband Greg Shepherd and children Nelly, seven and Artur, three)

Billie also uploaded a sizzling snap of herself in a black outfit on Tuesday, showcasing her toned back in a cut-out top.

On Friday, Billie relaxed in a baby blue swimsuit as she took to Instagram to show off the first few days of her sun-soaked family holiday at the Sani Resort, Greece.

The TV personality and her husband Greg Shepherd are away with Nelly and son Arthur, three, as well as Billie's mum Suzanne Wells.

Hot stuff: Billie also uploaded a sizzling snap of herself in a black outfit on Tuesday, showcasing her toned back in a cut-out top

Billie shared smiley snaps of her daughter tucking into food and posing in a colourful baseball cap, and posted photos of her son riding a bike.

As well as sharing a selfie with her kids and her mother, the reality star also included a shot of herself and Billie lounging on a pizza-shaped float.

Billie captioned her upload: 'Happy On Our Holidays. We have been here quite a few days (I’m so useless on my phone when we are away)

'Time to have some fun in the sun my babies. And yes that is a giant slice of pizza me and Nelly are chilling on in the last pic.'

Holiday! On Friday, Billie relaxed in a baby blue swimsuit as she took to Instagram to show off the first few days of her sun-soaked family holiday at the Sani Resort, Greece

Cute: Billie shared smiley snaps of her daughter tucking into food and posing in a colourful baseball cap

The holiday comes a month after it was announced Billie's sister Sam, 30, has quit their joint reality show Mummy Diaries after seven years.

After the news was revealed, Billie posted on Instagram to confirm the show's new title The Family Diaries and thanked her fans for their support after Sam said she 'needed a break' from the show.

Billie wrote: 'As one journey ends another begins …. And What an incredible journey it has been ❤️ filming with my sister and family for the past 7 years has been the most wonderful experience and we truly have made the BEST memories all together Filming @mummydiariesoffical.'

Fun times: Billie posted photos of her son Arthur riding a bike

Pizza is life: As well as sharing a selfie with her kids and her mother, the reality star also included a shot of herself and Billie lounging on a pizza-shaped float
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Erika Girardi fled a group trip before a bombshell story broke about her embattled husband Tom Girardi and their lavish lifestyle on Wednesday's episode of RHOBH - where her costars questioned whether or not she would be going to jail.

The 50-year-old reality star broke down in tears during a get-away weekend in La Quinta after Garcelle Beauvais, 54, blurted out that ex Tom still called Erika daily.

Erika and her estranged husband Tom, 82, are both currently facing claims of allegedly embezzling settlement funds that were meant to help the families of plane crash victims.

The singer told Garcelle that she had crossed a line by bringing up something that she had shared in confidence.

Tough time: Erika Girardi fled a group trip before a bombshell story broke about her embattled husband Tom Girardi and their lavish lifestyle on Wednesday's episode of RHOBH

'This is very hard,' Erika said with tears running down her face. 'This is a hard time in my life.'

Lisa Rinna, 57, hugged Erika as she sobbed and said 'I'm sorry that happened. It's f***ed up.'

Erika's over the top emotional reaction during the episode titled 'Circle Of Distrust' had the women questioning whether there was more that they weren't being told about regarding her situation.

After Lisa's comment, Garcelle grabbed her phone and said 'I'm leaving.'

Tears flowing: The 50-year-old reality star broke down in tears during a get-away weekend in La Quinta

In a confessional, Garcelle said she was really mad because she didn't think that Lisa 'gave her the benefit of the doubt.' She said Lisa was supposed to be working on building their relationship.

Kathy Hilton, 62, convinced her to stay and Garcelle sat back down with the women. She apologized to Erika who told her it was okay.

'You don't need to leave, it is okay,' Erika told her before she started sobbing.

Hot seat: Garcelle Beauvais, 54, blurted out that Tom Girardi, 82, still called Erika daily prompting Erika to lose it

In a confessional, Kyle Richards, 52, said whatever was happening with Erika it had to be something major because she looks 'broken.'

Garcelle hugged Erika while apologizing again and Erika repeated that it was okay.

Sutton Stracke, 49, also said in a confessional that she found Erika's reaction 'a little much' and that it made her wonder whether Erika was being honest with them.

Broken down: In a confessional, Kyle Richards, 52, said whatever was happening with Erika it had to be something major because she looks 'broken'

Erika then decided to go home and told the women she needed to take care of some things.

When Erika walked out, Sutton told Garcelle that she didn't do anything wrong. Outside, Dorit Kemsley, 44, told Erika that she hated to see her upset like this and that she was sorry for what happened.

'Me, too,' Kyle said.

Taking off: Erika then decided to go home and told the women she needed to take care of some things

Lisa told Erika, as they waited with her for her ride, that they knew that she would open up in her own time.

'So why push it?,' Lisa said.

After Erika left the housewives returned to the living room of Kyle's La Quinta house where Lisa said she was so sad over the incident.

Sad situation: After Erika left the housewives returned to the living room of Kyle's La Quinta house where Lisa said she was so sad over the incident

Garcelle, clearly mad, didn't even look at her. Lisa asked her why she felt she had to ask Erika about Tom.

Crystal Kung Minkoff, 35, told Garcelle they should go back to their hotel and get ready for dinner.

Once outside while waiting for their ride, Garcelle said she didn't think that a lot of people were on her side. In a confessional, Garcelle said she had always felt that there was an inner circle to their group that did not include her.

Not happy: Garcelle, clearly mad, didn't even look at Lisa who sided against her

Inside the house, Lisa told Kyle, Dorit, and Sutton that she didn't think it was their place to ask Erika questions. Lisa then checked her phone for the latest news and saw that there was a report that Tom's creditors planned to file an involuntary bankruptcy petition.

Dorit said that if all of Tom's assets went into this bankruptcy filing that Erika was not going to get a 'dime.'

The women then changed for dinner.

Legal commentary: Dorit Kemsley said that if all of Tom's assets went into this bankruptcy filing that Erika was not going to get a 'dime'

Despite the fact that they were just having dinner at Kyle's house, the women dressed to the nines. Lisa wore a black Gucci jumpsuit and Dorit wore a Gucci partially see-through outfit. Sutton, wore a red plaid blazer, with a vintage Cartier diamond cuff.

Lisa asked her if it was real.

'What do you mean?' Sutton said. ' It's vintage Cartier.'

Dressed up: Despite the fact that they were just having dinner at Kyle's house, the women dressed to the nines

'You're so f***ing rich,' Lisa said. 'I forget.'

Garcelle and Crystal walked in and the women complimented each other on their outfits. Kathy asked if anyone had spoken to Erika and Kyle said she texted her. Garcelle said she also sent her a text but did not hear back.

Kyle told her that the next time she sees Erika that she won't be mean to her, but that she just won't trust her.

Good times: The women complimented each other on their outfits

'I get that,' said Garcelle. 'But I did not do it intentionally.'

Lisa asked Garcelle if there was anything she could 'own' about the situation. Lisa said in a confessional that Garcelle needs to 'check herself as to why she does what she does.' She said Garcelle is not someone who has 'your back.'

Dorit said to Garcelle that she didn't think that she wanted to hurt Erika, but that she was 'needling a little bit.' Garcelle denied it and said she wasn't going to hurt someone who was at their bottom.

On defense: Garcelle denied going after Erika and said she wasn't going to hurt someone who was at their bottom

'That's not who I am,' said Garcelle.

Lisa asked to make her understand what happened. Garcelle said she wished she had been told not to say anything because she wouldn't have, but she wasn't and she 'over stepped.'

Garcelle said in a confessional that she didn't do anything intentional or had anything to own, but just confessed to over-stepping to shut Lisa up.

Over stepped: In a confessional, Garcelle said that she didn't do anything intentional or had anything to own, but just confessed to over-stepping to shut Lisa up

The women sat down for dinner. Kathy brought up that she had heard that someone at the table said they didn't see color. She then told them a story where Michael Jackson told her that he didn't see color and that neither did she.

Sutton, in a confessional, said she was not going to touch that one.

Garcelle tried to explain to Kathy that she wanted her to see color.

Staying out: Sutton, in a confessional, said she was not going to touch that one as the talk turned to race

'If you don't see color then you don't see me,' said Garcelle.

Kyle tried to explain that Kathy meant that she thought everyone was equal, but Garcelle said that was not true at all because 'we are not treated equally as you are…we should be but we are not.'

Garcelle asked the women if they ever told their children to be careful when the cops pulled them over. Lisa and Kyle said no. Garcelle said she often worries about her son Oliver being pulled over.

No color: Kathy Hilton told them a story where Michael Jackson told her that he didn't see color and that neither did she

'In an instant, he is not my son and he's just a black man,' Garcelle said in a confessional. 'And this world does not see the value in black men.'

Crystal said she was also always taught growing up to protect herself. She said she would be picked on when she was younger. Dorit told the women that she has a lot of people who have worked for her that are multicultural and her children are used to it. Dorit said that some of the people her children loved most are 'dark-skinned.'

Garcelle asked if black and brown people were the only help at Dorit's house. Dorit said no and added that her mother's best friend was black. After dinner, Kyle then asked the women if they would make her life easier by all rinsing their plates and putting them in the dishwasher. Dorit suggested that next time they all go on vacation that they chip in to hire some help.

Good point: Garcelle asked the women if they ever told their children to be careful when the cops pulled them over

'Kyle what kind of vacation is this,' Dorit said in a confessional. 'We dress for dinner, not for dishes.'

In a confessional, Kyle didn't think it was such a big deal to ask the other housewives to just rinse their one dish. 'You would think I was asking them to detail my car or something,' she said.

Later after some of the housewives staying at Kyle's house had changed into their pajamas, Lisa shared with them that her husband Harry Hamlin gets acrylic nails because he plays guitar. They all laughed when they saw the picture of Harry's nails.

Then the next morning as the women were still drinking their coffee the alerts kept going off on their phones and it became apparent what made Erika so upset.

The Los Angeles Times had just published a story titled 'The legal titan and the 'Real Housewife': The rise and fall of Tom Girardi and Erika Jayne.'

News story: The Los Angeles Times had just published a story titled 'The legal titan and the 'Real Housewife': The rise and fall of Tom Girardi and Erika Jayne'

'It's not good' Kyle said to Lisa.

Kyle recounted later that she thought it couldn't get any worse for Erika. She said the article said that Tom stands 'accused of stealing millions of dollars from vulnerable clients, including Indonesian children orphaned by a plane crash and a burn victim.'

She read that the article also said that Tom 'has bristled at allegations that he diverted firm assets for lavish living' but his lawyers admitted in court that Tom had been unable to tell them what happened to the money.

The article: Kyle said the article said that Tom stands 'accused of stealing millions of dollars from vulnerable clients, including Indonesian children orphaned by a plane crash and a burn victim'

The article also reported that Tom allegedly had improperly funneled more than $20 million to Erika Jayne's entertainment company.

'That's a lot of money,' Lisa said.

Sutton came downstairs in her pajamas and joined Kyle and Lisa and told them that she had also read that the article used the words 'Ponzi scheme.' She said if Tom is found guilty that he is going to jail.

'Is someone going to jail?' Kyle asked as Sutton replied, 'If he's found guilty, yeah. He's going to jail.'

Ponzi claim: Sutton came downstairs in her pajamas and joined Kyle and Lisa and told them that she had also read that the article used the words 'Ponzi scheme'

They then discussed whether in Bernie Madoff's case whether his wife was implicated and went to jail. Sutton told them she wasn't. But, Sutton told them, that tricky part for Erika was if her business was in her name and she accepted these funds.

'That's not good,' Sutton said. 'If she did receive $20 million from him from the firm then that money should be going back to all the victims.'

Kyle wanted to know what happened to the money and Sutton said she thought it was gone.

Not good: 'That's not good,' Sutton said. 'If she did receive $20 million from him from the firm then that money should be going back to all the victims'

Sutton said in a confessional that these are not white collar crimes and that these crimes have victims. She said it looked like this was a lot bigger and had been going on a lot longer than they had been told. Kyle and Sutton agreed that Erika knew this article was coming out and was probably the reason behind her leaving.

Lisa said she didn't believe that Erika knew what Tom was doing. She said in a confessional that in her house when Harry puts contracts on the table that she has just signed them.

Sutton said the problem for Erika was that if her name was on the LLC that she would be held responsible for that LLC. Sutton said in a confessional that 'if the devil himself puts money in your LLC, you are responsible for it.'

Showing support: Lisa said she didn't believe that Erika knew what Tom was doing

Dorit said that the picture that was being painted by this article was that Erika and Tom had a very lavish lifestyle and all this money was just an effort to keep it up.

'The picture that was being painted is very, very different from reality,' said Kyle.

After reading the report, Dorit said it felt as if they did not know Erika at all and that Erika's freedom is at stake. Kyle wondered in a confessional what else Erika had been keeping from them.

Sutton also questioned whether they had all 'been slightly duped by the lies' and Dorit said it was a 'hard pill to swallow' as he's known Erika for years.

'It's almost as if we don't know her at all,' Dorit said.

Back at the La Quinta hotel, Garcelle also discussed the article with Crystal Kung Minkoff, 35. Garcelle said later in a confessional that the article explained why Erika flipped out on her. She said the paper must have called and given Erika a heads up.

The women then packed up and returned to their lives and homes in LA. Dorit was FaceTiming with her husband PK who was with Boy George and even the famous singer asked about Erika.

'Just thank God it's not your drama, that is all I have got to say,' Boy George said. 'That's the good news.'

Popular topic: Dorit was FaceTiming with her husband PK who was with Boy George and even the famous singer asked about Erika

Kyle called Dorit to discuss. Kyle said in a confessional that the thought that Erika knew something and was covering for Tom crept into her head. She told Dorit that Sutton wanted to set up a meeting without Erika. Dorit agreed to hold the meeting at her house.

Kyle said in a confessional that she was shocked when she opened up her phone in the morning and saw pictures of the alleged mistress and texts from Tom leaked by Erika on Instagram. Kyle said she thought Erika was posting pictures because people thought her divorce was a hoax.

Lisa said she had spoken to Erika that morning and she told her that her divorce lawyer told her to take the photos down. Sutton arrived and told the women that she thought they had all been placed in a bad position.

Alleged mistress: Kyle said in a confessional that she was shocked when she opened up her phone in the morning and saw pictures of the alleged mistress and texts from Tom leaked by Erika on Instagram

'I left yesterday very concerned,' Sutton said. 'My alarms and red flags started flying everywhere. What have we gotten ourselves into?'

Sutton told them she wasn't sure how much she wanted to be around Erika during this time.

The show ended with a 'To Be Continued' message.

The Real Housewives Of Beverly Hills will return next Wednesday on Bravo.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jennifer's Body alum Megan Fox joined her 'twin flame soulmate' Machine Gun Kelly on the Los Angeles set of his video shoot on Wednesday.

It was the day after the 31-year-old pop-punk rocker (born Colson Baker) falsely claimed to have 'shaved his head' in order to drum up publicity for his new papercuts music video.

In fact, there were at least eight special FX make-up artists hired to transform MGK for the shoot helmed by Cole Bennett.

Besotted: Jennifer's Body alum Megan Fox joined her 'twin flame soulmate' Machine Gun Kelly on the Los Angeles set of his video shoot on Wednesday

However, the self-described 'Blonde Don' did appear to have freshly bleached his locks after removing the Kurt Cobain-inspired hair extensions he wore at Lollapalooza on July 31.

The 35-year-old actress has never looked happier since she met MGK, and the couple are practically inseparable.

Megan was not wearing a face mask, but the Love Race singer had a KN95 mask on at least half his face as coronavirus numbers continue to rise in LA County.

Fox flaunted her tiny waist in a pink crop top, black sweatpants, and leopard-print slides.

Fake news! It was the day after the 31-year-old pop-punk rocker (born Colson Baker) falsely claimed to have 'shaved his head' in order to drum up publicity for his new papercuts music video

SFX team: In fact, there were at least eight special FX make-up artists hired to transform MGK for the shoot helmed by Cole Bennett

Makeover alert! However, the self-described 'Blonde Don' did appear to have freshly bleached his locks after removing the Kurt Cobain-inspired hair extensions he wore at Lollapalooza on July 31

Still going strong! The 35-year-old actress has never looked happier since she met MGK, and the couple are practically inseparable

The Tennessee-born brunette joked to Who What Wear last month that her style was 'Hot Topic meets middle America.'

Joining the pair on a balcony was shirtless Mod Sun, who rocked a teal-blue faux-hawk, black face mask, and black leather pants.

MGK and the 34-year-old boyfriend of Avril Lavigne have collaborated on several tracks together in the past.

Megan beamed as she sat at a table chatting with the Project Power actor.

Delta variant: Megan was not wearing a face mask, but the Love Race singer had a KN95 mask on at least half his face as coronavirus numbers continue to rise in LA County

Taut tummy: Fox flaunted her tiny waist in a pink crop top, black sweatpants, and leopard-print slides

Casually clad: The Tennessee-born brunette joked to Who What Wear last month that her style was 'Hot Topic meets middle America'

Collaborator: Joining the pair on a balcony was shirtless Mod Sun, who rocked a teal-blue faux-hawk, black face mask, and black leather pants

Dynamic duo: MGK and the 34-year-old boyfriend of Avril Lavigne have collaborated on several tracks together in the past

So in love: Megan beamed as she sat at a table chatting with the Project Power actor

Fox fell in love with MGK in March 2020 on the Puerto Rican set of producer Randall Emmett's directorial debut Midnight in the Switchgrass, which was released last month.

The Till Death star legally separated from the father of her three children - 90210 alum Brian Austin Green - in November 2019 and officially filed for divorce from him on November 25.

Meanwhile, the Texan musician has a 12-year-old daughter Casie Colson Baker from his prior relationship with Emma Cannon.

Castmates: Fox fell in love with MGK in March 2020 on the Puerto Rican set of producer Randall Emmett's (2-R) directorial debut Midnight in the Switchgrass, which was released last month

It's over: The Till Death star legally separated from the father of her three children - 90210 alum Brian Austin Green (L) - in November 2019 and officially filed for divorce from him on November 25

Future stepmother? Meanwhile, the Texan musician has a 12-year-old daughter Casie Colson Baker (M, pictured July 31) from his prior relationship with Emma Cannon

MGK currently has 39 scheduled tour dates through December, and he'll next headline ALT + LDN on August 30 at England's Clapham Common in London.

For his track My Ex's Best Friend with blackbear, the heavily-tattooed millennial will compete for the best alternative trophy at the fan-voted MTV Video Music Awards, which airs September 12.

MGK faces off against Bleachers, Glass Animals, Imagine Dragons, twenty one pilots, and Willow at Brooklyn's Barclays Center.

Busy boy: MGK currently has 39 scheduled tour dates through December, and he'll next headline ALT + LDN on August 30 at England's Clapham Common in London
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They've been spotted in recent days touring lavish abodes in Los Angeles.

But Jennifer Lopez and beau Ben Affleck took a break from house hunting to enjoy dinner at Craig's in West Hollywood on Wednesday evening.

The couple, who rekindled their romance in April, were joined by Lopez's 13-year-old daughter Emme at the celeb-friendly restaurant.

Date night: Jennifer Lopez and beau Ben Affleck took a break from house hunting to enjoy dinner at Craig's in West Hollywood on Wednesday evening

Wow! Jennifer, 52, showcased her toned arms in a beige tank top, which she tucked into a pair of sharp white trousers

Jennifer, 52, showcased her toned arms in a beige tank top which she tucked into a pair of sharp white trousers.

The multi hyphenate toted her belongings around in a white leather designer bag and accessorized with several pieces of glitzy gold jewelry.

Lopez wore her honey blonde tresses down and styled in loose waves that framed her seemingly ageless visage.

As for makeup, the On The Floor songstress rocked a bold smokey eye and her signature nude lip gloss.

Ageless: Lopez wore her honey blonde tresses down and styled in loose waves that framed her ageless visage

Family affair: The couple, who rekindled their romance in April, were joined by Lopez's 13-year-old daughter Emme at the celeb-friendly restaurant

Emme sported her go-to grunge style, consisting of a pair of cut-off shorts and an oversized flannel top.

Lopez shares Emme, as well as her twin brother Max, with ex husband Marc Anthony. They were married from 2004 until their split in 2014.

Ben looked preppy in a collard long-sleeve shirt layered over a white tee and trousers for his night out with Jennifer and Emme.

The 48-year-old Hollywood heavyweight retrieved the couple's vehicle from the valet post-dinner, sliding into the driver's seat.

Grunge gal: Emme rocked her go-to grunge style, consisting of a pair of cut-off shorts and an oversized flannel top

Preppy: Ben looked preppy in a collard long-sleeve shirt layered over a white tee and trousers for his night out with Jennifer and Emme

Accessorize: The multi hyphenate toted her belongings around in a white leather designer bag and accessorized with several pieces of glitzy gold jewelry

Jennifer walked to the front passenger's side in her sky-high nude heels, before opening the door and taking a seat.

Before zooming out of the Craig's parking lot, the coupe enjoyed some brief back-and-forth as they observed oncoming traffic.

The day prior to their evening out in Los Angeles, Jennifer and Ben were photographed near Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate, fueling rumors that the singer is looking to relocate to the West Coast from Miami, Florida for the actor.

They were reportedly touring the five-acre property once belonging to the famous British-American comedian at around 11:30AM, and spent an hour there.

Chauffeur: Ben had retrieved the couple's vehicle from the valet post-dinner, sliding into the driver's seat

Getting situated: Jennifer walked to the front passenger's side in her sky-high nude heels, before opening the door and taking a seat

Last words: Before zooming out of the Craig's parking lot, the coupe enjoyed some brief back-and-forth as they looked both ways

The lavish home is currently owned by billionaire Ron Burkle and comes with luxurious amenities such as a one hole golf course.

Ever the doting boyfriend, the Goodwill Hunting star drove his ladylove in his luxurious Mercedes Benz while she peered out the open window.

In addition to Hope's former residence, Ben and Jennifer were spotted touring an $85 million estate in Beverly Hills.

The stunning property comes with everything a celebrity could want and more with 12 bedrooms, a basketball court, and boxing ring, according to TMZ.

On the hunt? The day prior to their evening out in Los Angeles, Jennifer and Ben were photographed near Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate (pictured), fueling rumors that the singer is looking to relocate to the West Coast from Miami, Florida

Rekindled: The house tour is just another sign of how serious the couple have become, ever since rekindling their romance earlier this year; Ben and Jen pictured in July

The house tour is just another sign of how serious the couple have become, ever since rekindling their romance earlier this year.

This isn't the first time the couple have been spotted house hunting together, with the duo also spotted checking out potential homes last month.

Jennifer has also been spotted touring schools in the area for her children.

Ben has three children with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner: Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine, who are all based in the Los Angeles area.

Relocating? Jennifer has also been spotted touring schools in the area for her children; Jennifer pictured with daughter Emme

Parental duties: Ben has three children with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner: Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine, who are all based in the Los Angeles area; the family pictured in 2019

While planning for relocating her children, J.Lo has reportedly been looking forward to living with her boyfriend again.

'Ben and Jen are spending almost every night together when they’re not working,' an insider told Us Weekly last month. 'They plan on moving in together very soon.'

Jennifer and Ben have been seemingly attached at the hip ever since reconciling, 17 years after ending their engagement in 2004.

The couple recently celebrated Jennifer's 52nd birthday on board a massive yacht as they explored the likes of St. Tropez and Capri together.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brooke (Helene York) and Cary (Drew Tarver) find themselves contending with another famous family member, their mother Pat (Molly Shannon) in the new trailer for The Other Two Season 2.

The first season debuted on Comedy Central back in 2019, following these siblings as they deal with the overnight fame of their 13-year-old brother, ChaseDreams (Case Walker).

While Chase is officially retiring from entertainment at 14, the other siblings now have Pat to deal with, who has risen to fame with her daytime talk show.

Famous mom: Brooke (Helene York) and Cary (Drew Tarver) find themselves contending with another famous family member, their mother Pat (Molly Shannon) in the new trailer for The Other Two Season 2

Cary: The first season debuted on Comedy Central back in 2019, following these siblings as they deal with the overnight fame of their 13-year-old brother, ChaseDreams (Case Walker)

Brooke: While Chase is officially retiring from entertainment at 14, the other siblings now have Pat to deal with, who has risen to fame with her daytime talk show

The trailer begins with Pat's new show, where her catch-phrase is, 'Let's give ourselves a Pat on the back.'

Brooke is seen telling Pat, 'That was great mom' while Pat is seen happy as can be with her newfound fame.

Brooke is also seen talking with a younger guy on the street, who tells her, 'Tell your mom I said Hi. I love her show,' which doesn't make Brooke happy at all.

Catch phrase: The trailer begins with Pat's new show, where her catch-phrase is, 'Let's give ourselves a Pat on the back'

Great: Brooke is seen telling Pat, 'That was great mom' while Pat is seen happy as can be with her newfound fame

Not happy: Brooke is also seen talking with a younger guy on the street, who tells her, 'Tell your mom I said Hi. I love her show,' which doesn't make Brooke happy at all

Brooke is seen another day faking a smile as some of her mom's adoring older fans come rushing up.

Pat is seen telling her audience that she isn't the only 'host in the family who is killing it,' as we see footage of Cary hosting a variety of programs.

One clip shows Cary on the red carpet hosting a show called 'Age Net Worth Feet' on E! News Digital.

Fans: Brooke is seen another day faking a smile as some of her mom's adoring older fans come rushing up

Host: One clip shows Cary on the red carpet hosting a show called 'Age Net Worth Feet' on E! News Digital

Pat also says that Brooke is, 'out there scouring the nation looking for the next Chasse,' as Brooke is seen sending a message to a young boy that she'll 'represent' him if he moves to New York City.

Brooke is seen checking out a bunch of kids at an arcade, when a mom approaches her and asks, 'Which one is yours?'

'I haven't decided yet,' Brooke says, lowering her sunglasses.

Represent: Pat also says that Brooke is, 'out there scouring the nation looking for the next Chasse,' as Brooke is seen sending a message to a young boy that she'll 'represent' him if he moves to New York City

Haven't decided: 'I haven't decided yet,' Brooke says, lowering her sunglasses

Cary is at a clothing store where the clerk says he's the 'most successful actor I know,' though Cary insists it's not acting.

He's seen reading an E! News headline stating, 'In more gay news, Laura Dern was spotted kayaking.'

Brooke laments that, 'I didn't think managers do actual work' as she watches a group of girls do shots at a bar.

Gay news: He's seen reading an E! News headline stating, 'In more gay news, Laura Dern was spotted kayaking'

Shots: Brooke laments that, 'I didn't think managers do actual work' as she watches a group of girls do shots at a bar

She tells Shuli Kucerac (Wanda Sykes) that she's 'sick from working all the time' and asks how she's so healthy.

'I'm not. I've had pneumonia for 20 years. I just don't make it a thing,' Shuli says.

Cary is in bed with another man who wonders how his d**k is so much bigger in person but he freaks out when he says he has to call his sister.

Sick: 'I'm not. I've had pneumonia for 20 years. I just don't make it a thing,' Shuli says

In bed: Cary is in bed with another man who wonders how his d**k is so much bigger in person but he freaks out when he says he has to call his sister

Brooke says she should start dating again, adding her strategy is to book 'the hottest guys' on her mom's show.

She strikes a supposedly alluring pose just off camera, but when the hot guest says he's a nice guy, she drops the act.

Cary confides to a friend that he doesn't want to host, he wants to act, when he's told by a manager that they only represent multi-hyphenates, actors who can write.

Supposedly: She strikes a supposedly alluring pose just off camera, but when the hot guest says he's a nice guy, she drops the act

Act: Cary confides to a friend that he doesn't want to host, he wants to act, when he's told by a manager that they only represent multi-hyphenates, actors who can write

He's then seen at a book store buying Moleskins and telling the clerk, 'I'm a writer now, you can tell by my gloves.'

The trailer winds down with a number of random shots of the main characters, with the final shot of Brooke and Cary in first class, toasting to 'us' while four feet are hanging over their seats.

The Other Two Season 2 debuts with two new episodes on HBO Max starting August 26, with the 10-episode season continuing with two episodes each Thursday for the next four weeks.

Gloves: He's then seen at a book store buying Moleskins and telling the clerk, 'I'm a writer now, you can tell by my gloves.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She loves to flaunt her model looks on Instagram.

And on Wednesday, Hailey Bieber showcased her incredibly taut abs as she posed in a white bralette in snaps she shared on social media.

The 24-year-old, who is married to Justin Bieber, wore an oversized herringbone suit jacket with her skimpy top.

Glam: She loves to flaunt her model looks on Instagram. And on Wednesday, Hailey Bieber showcased her taut abs as she posed in a white bralette in snaps she shared on social media

Her hair was slicked back into a messy chignon and she accessorized with multiple diamond and gold necklaces and gold earrings.

She had a pale pink manicure and her finger tattoos were clearly visible in one of the snaps she posted.

She was in full glam makeup and in the accompanying caption, Hailey explained she was promoting bareMinerals beauty products.

Striking a pose: The 24-year-old, who is married to Justin Bieber, wore an oversized herringbone suit jacket with her skimpy top and was in full glam makeup by bareMinerals

Hours earlier, Hailey had shared a selfie with her famous husband as they got dressed up for a date night.

The daughter of Stephen Baldwin poured her curves into a skintight baby blue latex dress and posed holding a matching 'pouch leather clutch' by designer Bottega Veneta.

Justin, 26, posed with his head on his wife' shoulder as he stared directly into the camera.

The Canadian hitmaker wore a black pinstripe blazer over a silky black shirt and added a very colorful necklace.

Couple: Hours earlier, Hailey had shared a selfie with her famous husband as they got dressed up for a date night with the model pouring her curves into a skintight baby blue latex dress

Dapper: Justin, 26, wore a black pinstripe blazer over a silky black shirt and added a very colorful necklace

The celebrity couple tied the knot at a Manhattan courthouse in September 2019.

They exchanged vows for a second time a year later in a lavish ceremony in front of family and friends.

Meanwhile, the Sorry singer is preparing to perform at the Made in America festival's tenth anniversary in Philadelphia event scheduled for September 3rd to 5th.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amelia Gray Hamlin is 'very happy right now' in her relationship with Scott Disick, according to her mother Lisa Rinna.

The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills personality, 58, appeared on Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen on Wednesday, and was asked about her feelings on the romance between the 20-year-old model and Keeping Up With the Kardashians star, 38.

Rinna, who shares Amelia and Delilah Belle Hamlin, 23, with LA Law alum Harry Hamlin, 69, responded, 'How do you think I feel?

The latest: Amelia Gray Hamlin, 20, is 'very happy right now' in her relationship with Scott Disick, 38, according to her mother Lisa Rinna, 58. The couple was seen in an Instagram post last month

'Listen, I will say this: Amelia's very happy right now and you really want your kids to be happy, so Harry and I are very thrilled that she's happy,' said the Bravo beauty.

The pair in February revealed they had been dating, as they have been linked since last fall.

A source in March told People that the couple has been 'getting serious,' and that their 18 years in age difference isn't a factor in the romance, as 'she grew up in the industry and knows how all this works.

'It's a different type of maturity, and they really don't feel the age difference.'

Details: The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills personality appeared on Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen on Wednesday

Stunning: The model was snapped in Beverly Hills, California last June

Rinna chat about her daughter's relationship on the Andy Cohen talk show this past May, saying of Disick, 'He was very nice, we had a very nice time ... it is what it is.'

In a June episode of RHOBH, Rinna said she was nervous over the public celeb relationship with Disick.

'Amelia has had her struggles in the press, but it's now a new headline,' Rinna said. 'No one's talking about the eating disorder anymore and you know what, thank God. As a mother, I'm like, "Good." This gives her another label to deal with.'

Relaxing: The model took to Instagram on Wednesday evening with a selfie
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Taryn Manning brought the glamour on Wednesday evening as she attended a screening of the controversial thriller Karen in Atlanta, Georgia.

The 42-year-old actress struck a pose on the red carpet in a plunging blue leopard print wrap dress.

Karen, which is slated for an August 13 release, follows a racist neighbor (played by Manning) who causes problems for a new Black family in her neighborhood.

Leading lady: Taryn Manning brought the glamour on Wednesday evening as she attended a screening of the controversial thriller Karen in Atlanta, Georgia

Manning's red carpet getup was completed with a pair of fishnet stockings and some black patent leather boots.

The Orange Is The New Black star wore her lengthy blonde tresses in a sleek half up, half down hairdo.

She accessorized with yellow gemstone earrings and several rings.

Taryn was joined by her fiancee Anne Cline. The 30-year-old musician rocked a white bomber jacket with gold sequin detailing.

Controversial: Karen, which is slated for an August 13 release, follows a racist neighbor (played by Manning) who causes problems for a new Black family in her neighborhood

Taking the plunge: The 42-year-old actress struck a pose on the red carpet in a plunging blue leopard print wrap dress

The couple got engaged back in June.

The actress also cozied up to Karen director Coke Daniels, who has passionately defended the film after online critics called it a blatant rip-off of Jordan Peele's 2017 thriller Get Out.

Daniels donned an all-black ensemble for the screening, consisting of a suit jacket, trousers, a button-up shirt, and a stylish hat.

Singer/actress V. Bozeman beamed for shutterbugs while rocking a colorful patterned blouse and matching high-waisted pants.

Partner: Taryn was joined by her fiancee Anne Cline. The 30-year-old musician rocked a white bomber jacket with gold sequin detailing

United: The actress also cozied up to Karen director Coke Daniels, who has passionately defended the film after online critics called it a blatant rip-off of Jordan Peele's 2017 thriller Get Out

Actress Dawn Halfkenny displayed her toned physique in a figure-hugging dress covered in circular silver rivets.

Phaedra Parks leaned into recent trends by rocking a flashy Gucci belt and a semi-sheer Pucci top.

Brad James and Keshia Knight Pulliam looked thrilled to be at Wednesday night's event as they posed close for a red carpet snapshot.

The very first trailer for Karen premiered in late June, giving fans of Manning a peek at her transformation into the title character.

Beaming: Singer/actress V. Bozeman beamed for shutterbugs while rocking a colorful patterned blouse and matching high-waisted pants

Dazzling: Actress Dawn Halfkenny displayed her toned physique in a figure-hugging dress covered in circular silver rivets

The film also stars Corey Hardrict (American Sniper) and Jasmine Burke (Saints & Sinners) as Malik and Imani, who move across the street from Karen and are forced to endure her wrath.

It didn't take long for Karen to be trending on Twitter, with fans eagerly BASHING the film and its premise.

One Twitter user called the trailer, 'unbelievably cringe' adding there is no 'nuance or subtlety,' while another showed how the film was trying to copy Jordan Peele's films like Get Out and Us.

Director Coke Daniels recently admitted to the Daily Beast that he 'fully expected [the backlash] when I wrote that ominous word on the title page.'

On-trend: Phaedra Parks leaned into recent trends by rocking a flashy Gucci belt and a semi-sheer Pucci top

Thrilled: Brad James and Keshia Knight Pulliam looked thrilled to be at Wednesday night's event as they posed close for a red carpet snapshot

'What’s amazing about it is, the point of us making this film was to spark dialogue and continue conversations about social injustice and racism in this country, and with all the hype, hysteria, love, hate, everything, it just creates the perfect platform for us to really set the stage for that discussion. I knew this was coming,' he explained.

'It’s a delicate subject matter and these are very trying times, so I respect everyone’s opinion—even if I don’t necessarily agree with them—because I want to have dialogue.

'We need to talk about some ugly truths, and if it takes my movie to be the Trojan horse to get us into those conversations, then I’m all for it,' Daniels stated.

Karen: The very first trailer for Karen premiered in late June, giving fans of Manning a peek at her transformation into the title character
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rebecca Hall was all smiles in an elegant orange gown at the New York premiere of her film The Night House.

The film had its world premiere at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2020, where it was ultimately acquired by Searchlight Pictures.

The 39-year-old actress also posed with co-stars Vondie Curtis-Hall and Evan Jonigkeit, writer Ben Collins and composer Ben Lovett on the red carpet at the event, held at Cinepolis Chelsea in New York.

Elegant Rebecca: Rebecca Hall was all smiles in an elegant orange gown at the New York premiere of her film The Night House

Cast and crew: The 39-year-old actress also posed with co-stars Vondie Curtis-Hall and Evan Jonigkeit, writer Ben Collins and composer Ben Lovett on the red carpet at the event, held at Cinepolis Chelsea in New York

The London-born actress was wearing a chic spaghetti-strap orange dress with a plunging neckline.

The brunette actress' dark hair fell just above her shoulders with a pair of dangling pearl earrings for the premiere.

The Christine star completed her look with black heels with toe shields for the premiere.

Rebecca's look: The London-born actress was wearing a chic spaghetti-strap orange dress with a plunging neckline

The Night House follows Hall's character Beth, whose world was upended when her husband unexpectedly dies.

She finds herself alone at the lakeside home her husband had built for her, though she has become plagued by disturbing visions and dreams.

She starts digging through her dead husband's belongings, looking for any secrets he may have which leads her to try and solve a new mystery.

New movie: The Night House follows Hall's character Beth, whose world was upended when her husband unexpectedly dies

While Hall debuted this film at the 2020 Sundance Film Festival, she returned to the festival earlier this year for her directorial debut, Passing.

Hall directed the film and adapted the script from the novella by Nella Larsen, starring Tessa Thompson, Ruth Negga and Andre Holland.

The film follows, 'the unexpected reunion of two high school friends, whose renewed acquaintance ignites a mutual obsession that threatens both of their carefully constructed realities.'

Director: While Hall debuted this film at the 2020 Sundance Film Festival, she returned to the festival earlier this year for her directorial debut, Passing

Hall also played Ilene Andrews in the highly-anticipated Godzilla vs. Kong, which debuted in theaters and on HBO Max earlier this year.

She also stars in With/in: Volume 1, described as, 'An anthology film set during the COVID-19 pandemic.'

She stars in a segment called Mother with Morgan Spector and Maya Singer, though the film doesn't have a release date set yet.

Recent roles: Hall also played Ilene Andrews in the highly-anticipated Godzilla vs. Kong, which debuted in theaters and on HBO Max earlier this year
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dancing with the Stars couple Peta Murgatroyd and Maksim Chmerkovskiy packed on the PDA after reuniting in Manhattan on Wednesday.

The 35-year-old Kiwi-born Aussie and the Ukrainian 41-year-old could not keep their hands or their lips off each other as they window shopped on Madison Avenue.

Peta wore a hot pink bikini top beneath a white maxi-dress while Maksim wore an orange T-shirt with white-striped pants and $55 Vans 'Checkerboard' slip-ons.

Distance makes the heart grow fonder! Dancing with the Stars couple Peta Murgatroyd and Maksim Chmerkovskiy packed on the PDA after reuniting in Manhattan on Wednesday

'Back with my favourite human in our favourite city,' Chmerkovskiy - who boasts 2M social media followers - gushed.

'After a long time of non-separation, being apart for two weeks felt like a lifetime and [the] next few days feel like a well needed chicken soup for the soul.'

Murgatroyd showed off the necklace their son Shai Aleksander made for her in school, which prompted The Masked Dancer Sloth to ask: 'Where's my necklace?'

The married couple of four years nicknamed their adorable four-year-old 'Poosh' and he was back in Los Angeles, seemingly, with a nanny.

Matching tiny top buns! The 35-year-old Kiwi-born Aussie and the Ukrainian 41-year-old could not keep their hands or their lips off each other as they window shopped on Madison Avenue

Loved up: Peta wore a hot pink bikini top beneath a white maxi-dress while Maksim wore an orange T-shirt with white-striped pants and $55 Vans 'Checkerboard' slip-ons

Chmerkovskiy gushed: 'Back with my favourite human in our favourite city. After a long time of non-separation, being apart for two weeks felt like a lifetime and [the] next few days feel like a well needed chicken soup for the soul'

Murgatroyd showed off the necklace their son Shai Aleksander made for her in school, which prompted The Masked Dancer Sloth to ask: 'Where's my necklace?'

After lunch at Pret A Manger near Central Park, Peta and Maksim enjoyed an omakase dinner date at Sushi on Jones.

However, once Murgatroyd and Chmerkovskiy downed their delectable raw fish they got caught in a substantial downpour.

The professional Latin hoofers originally met while performing on Broadway in 2009, began dating in 2012, and split for 10 months in 2013-2014 before tying the knot in 2017.

The Mirrorball champ and his younger brother Val will next take their 18-date Maks & Val Stripped Down Tour to Massachusetts' Chevalier Theater in Medford this Saturday.

July 24 family portrait: The married couple of four years nicknamed their adorable four-year-old 'Poosh' and he was back in Los Angeles, seemingly, with a nanny

Al fresco: After lunch at Pret A Manger near Central Park, Peta and Maksim enjoyed an omakase dinner date at Sushi on Jones

Romantic: However, once Murgatroyd and Chmerkovskiy downed their delectable raw fish they got caught in a substantial downpour

Maksim announced on July 15 that he'll replace the late Grigory Chapkis as judge on the ninth season of Dancing with the Stars Ukraine, which airs on the 1+1 network.

Meanwhile, fans can catch more of the two-time Mirrorball Champ in the 30th season of Dancing with the Stars, which premieres September 20 on ABC.

Rumored celebrity contestants include LeAnn Rimes, Luann de Lesseps, Meghan McCain, Fran Drescher, Hilaria Baldwin, Brian Austin Green, Chris Harrison, and Tayshia Adams.

On the road: The Mirrorball champ and his younger brother Val will next take their 18-date Maks & Val Stripped Down Tour to Massachusetts' Chevalier Theater in Medford this Saturday
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kathy Griffin had filmed scenes for the fifth season of the HBO Max series Search Party prior to her recent lung surgery amid her cancer battle.

The 60-year-old comedian on the series will play the role of conspiracy theorist Liquorice Montague opposite the character Chantal (played by Clare McNulty) on the dark comedic series, Variety reported on Wednesday.

She shared a link to the story on Twitter Wednesday, writing, 'SURPRISE! This is what I’ve been secret posting about! So excited!!!'

The latest: Kathy Griffin, 60, had filmed scenes for the fifth season of the HBO Max series Search Party prior to her recent lung surgery amid her cancer battle. She was snapped in LA last year

Sarah-Violet Bliss and Charles Rogers, the showrunners of the series, said in a joint statement that 'working with Kathy was a huge life moment for us.

'She brought so much warmth, humanity, and professionalism to set and delivered a performance that will delight the world.'

The show, which stars Alia Shawkat, Meredith Hagner, John Reynolds and John Early, will also feature Jeff Goldblum in its fifth season.

A source told the NY Post of Griffin: 'She loved the experience working on the show and it was a great creative outlet before undergoing her lung cancer surgery. She is still in recovery but getting better every day.'

She shared a link to the story on Twitter Wednesday, writing, 'SURPRISE! This is what I’ve been secret posting about! So excited!!!'

The 60-year-old comedian on the series will play the role of conspiracy theorist Liquorice Montague on the dark comedic series

The Emmy-winning comic has kept fans in the loop on her stage one lung cancer via social media

The Emmy-winning comic has made headlines as of late amid her revelation earlier this month that she is battling stage one lung cancer, and had to undergo a surgery in which part of her lung was removed.

The Oak Park, Illinois native, who has never smoked cigarettes, took to Instagram Tuesday to update fans on her ongoing recovery.

Griffin, snapped in 2019, 'loved the experience working on the show and it was a great creative outlet before undergoing her lung cancer surgery' a source told the NY Post

'When you're a comedian - and I've been dealing with this for years - the doctors always want to be comedians too,' Griffin said in a clip on the social media site. 'So he goes like this, "You know, the thing about having a lobe removed from your lung is it's really not that big of a deal" - in the meantime, I feel like I could fall over any minute.'

She added, 'He goes, "You know, people don't realize we find the cancer and then we go in and, basically, we pop the lobe like a balloon and we take it out of a little incision on your side."'

Griffin noted she has 'like 17 incisions' as result of the critical operation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's pregnant with her second child.

And Ashley Graham showed off her changing body in a revealing bikini snap on Instagram on Wednesday.

The plus-size model, 33, posed in a very skimpy stripy two-piece that left little to the imagination.

Unvarnished: She's pregnant with her second child. And Ashley Graham, 33, showed off her changing body in a revealing bikini snap on Instagram on Wednesday

Graham was pictured putting food into her mouth with one hand while the rest of her head was obscured.

Her long hair was loose and she accessorized with a colorful beaded necklace and a thin silver chain around her belly.

The Sports Illustrated Swimsuit alum has been sharing her second pregnancy journey on social media just as she did with her first one.

Graham gave birth to son Isaac in January 2020 and announced last month she's expecting baby number two with husband Justin Ervin.

Glowing: The plus-size model regularly posts to social media as she shares her second pregnancy journey with her followers

Graham recently admitted her control has 'gone out the window' during her pregnancy.

Speaking with People, she said she has stopped trying to 'control' her body because she knows she will 'never feel the same' as she did before she was pregnant.

Graham explained: 'I think being in control when you're pregnant, it just gets thrown out the window.

'And I learned that the hard way when I tried to control everything when I was pregnant with Isaac and I told myself that I was going to bounce right back because I was breastfeeding and everybody told me, 'Oh, if you breastfeed you're going to lose all the weight.' And I had a few honest women tell me you will never feel the same. So they were just blunt with me and sure enough, I haven't felt the same.

'And then boom. I was like, 'Well, I just got pregnant again so maybe I'll never feel the same and I don't even know what I felt like before I was pregnant with Isaac anyways.''

Model mom: Graham gave birth to son Isaac in January 2020 and announced last month she's expecting baby number two with husband Justin Ervin
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nightbirde after leaving America's Got Talent due to her deteriorating cancer condition returned Wednesday to thank the judges and viewers for their support.

The 30-year-old singer, real name Jane Marczewski, appeared remotely on the quarterfinals results episode after dropping out following a devastating recurring cancer diagnosis.

Show host Terry Crews, 53, told Nightbirde that her performance on the show that moved AGT judge and executive producer Simon Cowell, 61, to push the golden buzzer had now been seen more than 200 million times.

Fan favorite: Nightbirde after leaving America's Got Talent due to her deteriorating cancer condition returned Wednesday to thank the judges and viewers for their support

Terry asked her when she wrote her song 'Ok' whether she had any idea that it would have that big an impact on the world.

'There is no way I would have ever imagined that,' Nightbirde said. 'It's a song I wrote for myself in the middle of the night, when I needed those words so bad. It's beautiful to see the world welcome that song into their own dark night. I'm overwhelmed by it.'

Howie Mandel, 65, then told her that the entire world is suffering adversity right now and that she is the 'poster human for courage in the face of adversity, for poise, for beauty, and for fight.'

Sofia Vergara, 49, thanked Nightbirde for touching her with her song.

Already won: 'Even though you haven't competed, you have already won,' Simon Cowell said. 'Your clip had such an impact on so many people'

Cancer battle: The 30-year-old singer, real name Jane Marczewski, appeared remotely on the quarterfinals results episode after dropping out following a devastating recurring cancer diagnosis

Touching song: Sofia Vergara, 49, thanked Nightbirde for touching her with her song

Simon got emotional when he talked to Nightbirde. He said they had spoken a few times and that he knew she had made the decision to leave because her health was the priority right now.

He relayed that the last time they spoke, Nightbirde said she felt she had let people down. Simon wanted her to know that she hadn't let anyone down by dropping out of the competition.

'Even though you haven't competed, you have already won,' Simon said. 'Your clip had such an impact on so many people.'

Popular song: 'There is no way I would have ever imagined that,' Nightbirde said of her audition song becoming popular. 'It's a song I wrote for myself in the middle of the night, when I needed those words so bad. It's beautiful to see the world welcome that song into their own dark night. I'm overwhelmed by it'

He said that the most important thing was her health and recovery.

'On behalf of all of us, we are sending you our love and our prayers and we can't wait to see you again soon,' he said.

Simon then appeared to stop himself from crying when he said, 'And thank you so much for auditioning on the show and for singing such a beautiful song.'

Getting emotional: Simon then appeared to stop himself from crying when he said, 'And thank you so much for auditioning on the show and for singing such a beautiful song'

Nightbirde said the entire experience had restored her faith in humanity to see people come together.

'We all hurt, we all suffer, and we all have the potential to overcome,' she said.

'This is the most beautiful thing that has happened to me in my whole entire life,' Nightbirde added.

All suffer: 'We all hurt, we all suffer, and we all have the potential to overcome,' Nightbirde said

Terry then explained to the audience and viewers that the top five acts of the night would go through to the semifinals, but that the acts that came in sixth, seventh and eight were all in danger of going home.

He said one of the acts could be saved tonight with an instant save.

Terry revealed the acts in danger were Beyond Belief dance company, stand up comedian Kabir 'Kabeezy' Singh, 37, and singer Madilyn Bailey, 28, before encouraging viewers to vote to save their favorite act.

Results episode: Terry Crews explained to the audience and viewers that the top five acts of the night would go through to the semifinals

He then announced that 1aChord, a trio of contemporary gospel singers, was the first act that was going on to the semifinals. They thanked America for voting them on. Simon told them they had amazing talent and encouraged them to do something original for the next round.

Next, AGT season 15 winner Brandon Leake did a performance with his poetry group Called To Move. The act was called 'Stockton' that ended with them all referring to themselves as 'dreamers.'

Brandon said his life changed dramatically since being on the show and revealed that he has a new album coming out, made a movie and has a child that will be born in two weeks.

First through: 1aChord, a trio of contemporary gospel singers, was the first act that was going on to the semifinals

Past champion: AGT season 15 winner Brandon Leake did a performance with his poetry group Called To Move

Terry announced that Brandon will also be starring in a new AGT stage show in Las Vegas along with this year's winner.

The next act voted on to the semifinals was comedian Gina Brillon, 41, from the South Bronx.

Terry then brought out singer Jimmy Herrod, 30, and Peter Rosalita, a 10-year-old from the Philippines, and announced that the next act going to the semifinals was 'Both of you!!'

Comedy act: The next act voted on to the semifinals was comedian Gina Brillon, 41, from the South Bronx

Jimmy said 'you guys are so good at getting us.' Sofia told them she was rooting for both of them.

Between magician Dustin Tavella, 35, and escape artist and illusionist Matt Johnson from British Columbia, the audience voted Dustin on to the semifinals.

Then, 2017 AGT winner, Darci Lynne and her puppet named Oscar came to the stage. Oscar entertained the audience by singing 'Let The Good Times Roll' all the while Darci's lips never appeared to move.

Surprise advancement: Jimmy Herrod, 30, and Peter Rosalita, a 10-year-old from the Philippines, both advanced to the semifinals simultaneously

Magic man: Magician Dustin Tavella, 35, also advanced to the semis

After the live votes were tabulated, stand up comedian Kabeezy was voted on to the semifinals. He was shocked and thanked America.

For the last spot it was a competition between the Beyond Belief dance company and singer Madilyn and the judges were literally split.

Heidi voted for the girls dance group. Sofia said she didn't think that Madilyn needed her help to be a recording artist and also picked the dancers.

Made it: After the live votes were tabulated, stand up comedian Kabeezy was voted on to the semifinals

Howie and Simon voted for Madilyn. Because it was a tie, the act that got the most votes at home would be declared the winner.

A crew member handed Terry a card, he said based on the number of votes that Madilyn was the one going on to the semifinals. Madilyn clasped her hands and smiled at the news.

America's Got Talent will return next Tuesday on NBC.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Maggie Q looked sensational on Wednesday night as she attended a special screening of The Protégé in Los Angeles.

The 42-year-old actress posed on the red carpet in an eye-catching mirrored pencil skirt with a dramatic slit that exposed her toned legs.

She paired the unique garment with a textured bustier bodysuit featuring long-sleeves and a halter strap.

Sensational: Maggie Q looked sensational on Wednesday night as she attended a special screening of The Protégé in Los Angeles

To further keep her skirt the focus, the Nikita star slipped her feet into a pair of plain black stiletto heels.

She wore her long, brunette tresses styled in an effortless half up, half down hairstyle.

As for makeup, Maggie drew attention to her sultry peepers with a generous dusting of brown eyeshadow while amplifying her pout with some mauve lip gloss.

After getting in some striking solo shots, Maggie was later joined by several of the industry figures behind The Protégé, including the film's director Martin Campbell.

Bringing the drama: The 42-year-old actress posed on the red carpet in an eye-catching mirrored pencil skirt with a dramatic slit that exposed her toned legs

Perfect pairing: She paired the unique garment with a textured bustier bodysuit featuring long-sleeves and a halter strap

Producer Jeffrey Greenstein was joined by Spanish model Salome Chandler, who dazzled in a satin jacket and matching maxi skirt.

Acclaimed producer Arthur M. Sarkissian donned a black blazer layered over a black dress shirt and a pair of dark wash denim jeans.

The 61-year-old, whose credits boast the likes of Rush Hour franchise, completed the ensemble with some beige suede boots.

Teamwork: After getting in some striking solo shots, Maggie was later joined by several of the industry figures behind The Protégé; (L-R) director Martin Campbell, Maggie and producer Arthur M. Sarkissian

Smile! Maggie showcased her incredible smile as she posed with director Martin Campbell and producers Arthur M. Sarkissian and Jeffrey Greenstein

Hot date: Greenstein was joined by Spanish model Salome Chandler, who dazzled in a satin jacket and matching maxi skirt

Sarkissian was joined by family members Nicholas and Jaclyn Sarkissian, who posed proudly beside him on the red carpet.

Other attendees included Priscilla Vitel, Ryan Johnson, Michael Putnam and Darroch Putnam.

The Protege, according to IMDB and Lionsgate, follows the world's most skilled contract killer Anna (played by Maggie Q) who was 'rescued as a child by the legendary assassin Moody (played by Samuel L. Jackson) and trained in the family business.

Icon: Acclaimed producer Arthur M. Sarkissian donned a black blazer layered over a black dress shirt and a pair of dark wash denim jeans

Family affair: Sarkissian was joined by family members Nicholas and Jaclyn Sarkissian, who posed proudly beside him on the red carpet

'But when Moody - the man who was like a father to her and taught her everything she needs to know about trust and survival - is brutally killed, Anna vows revenge,' the synopsis continued.

'As she becomes entangled with an enigmatic killer (played by Michael Keaton) whose attraction to her goes way beyond cat and mouse, their confrontation turns deadly and the loose ends of a life spent killing will weave themselves even tighter.'

The action-thriller will premiere theatrically on August 20.

Date night? Priscilla Vitel and Ryan Johnson cozied up to one another on the red carpet
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rami Malek continued his tennis tutelage as he was spotted with a sporty look after leaving a lesson.

The 40-year-old actor was seen leaving a private residence in Los Angeles following a lesson.

The outing comes just days after he was spotted at another lesson alongside his good friend and Twilight star Robert Pattinson.

Scroll down for video

Lesson: Rami Malek continued his tennis tutelage as he was spotted with a sporty look after leaving a lesson

Malek was wearing a backwards grey baseball cap with dark black sunglasses as he was leaving the lesson.

He was wearing a baggy black t-shirt and black shorts with a black leather bag slung from his shoulder.

The Oscar-winning actor completed his look with a pair of old black sneakers, while carrying a pair of pristine white sneakers as well.

Rami's look: Malek was wearing a backwards grey baseball cap with dark black sunglasses as he was leaving the lesson

The outing comes less than a week since the Bohemian Rhapsody star was seen taking tennis lessons with Robert Pattinson.

For that outing he opted for a plain white t-shirt, gold-rimmed sunglasses, blue shorts and black sneakers.

The actor was also spotted watching the women singles quarterfinal match of Elena Rybakina versus Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova at the 2021 French Open in June.

More tennis: The outing comes less than a week since the Bohemian Rhapsody star was seen taking tennis lessons with Robert Pattinson

Malek most recently starred alongside fellow Oscar winners Denzel Washington and Jared Leto in The Little Things, debuting in theaters and on HBO Max in January.

He also stars in the apocalyptic thriller podcast series Blackout, which returns for a second season later this year on Apple podcasts.

The actor returns to the big screen as Lyutsifer Safin in the highly-anticipated James Bond film No Time to Die, in theaters this October.

Tennis fan: The actor was also spotted watching the women singles quarterfinal match of Elena Rybakina versus Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova at the 2021 French Open in June

He also recently wrapped production on an untitled project from director David O. Russell.

No plot details have surfaced yet, though Malek is part of a star-studded cast that includes Christian Bale, Margot Robbie, Anya-Taylor Joy, Zoe Saldana, Robert De Niro, Timothy Olyphant, Michael Shannon and John David Washington.

The massive cast also includes Taylor Swift, Chris Rock, Mike Myers, Andrea Riseborough and more, though no release date was given.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She was snapped picking up some beverages to go in a sports bra and leggings early on Wednesday.

And later in the day, Lucy Hale was still keeping it casual as she ran some errands in LA.

The former Katy Keene star showcased her gym-honed figure in a beige tank top tucked into distressed white jeans.

Kept it casual: Lucy Hale showcased her gym-honed figure in a beige tank top tucked into distressed white jeans as she ran some errands in LA on Wednesday

The actress, 32, opted for comfort when it came to footwear, stepping out in a pair of white leather sandals.

Her blunt-cut bob was styled with a center parting and she sported her favorite round sunglasses.

Hale carried a designer purse and accessorized with a necklace and hoop earrings.

She also made sure to have a mask on hand as face coverings are currently required in indoor spaces in Los Angeles County.

Relaxed: The actress, 32, stepped out in a pair of white leather sandals. Her blunt-cut bob was styled with a center parting and she sported her favorite round sunglasses

Hale made her name in the Freeform series pretty Little Liars which ran from 2010 to 2017.

She went on to land the lead role in the Riverdale spin-off Katy Keene but the show lasted for just one season in 2020 on The CW.

Recently, she served as an executive producer as well as star of the independent thriller Borrego from writer and director Jesse Harris, and the movie is slated to be released some time next year.

Famous face: Hale made her name in the Freeform series pretty Little Liars which ran from 2010 to 2017. She went on to land the lead role in the Riverdale spin-off Katy Keene but the show lasted for just one season in 2020 on The CW

She will also be back on small screens in the upcoming drama series Ragdoll, which is based on the book of the same name and follows detectives attempting to solve the case of the Ragdoll Killer.

The actress recently wrapped filming on the series, and took to her Instagram account to share several behind-the-scenes photos.

'Feeling so grateful for a wrap on Ragdoll and for all the beautiful friends & memories I made. Cannot wait for you all to see this coming to your (TV emoji)'s soon ! Thank you to so many people but especially, Thalissa, the genius Freddy Syborn, everyone at Sid Gentle… too many to name but wow we did it. Congrats everyone!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They star together in the upcoming drama Flag Day.

And Sean Penn continued enjoying some quality time with his daughter Dylan Penn as the duo attended a special screening of their new movie at The Directors Guild of America in Los Angeles on Wednesday.

While the Hollywood vet, 60, was looking sharp with a satin blue bomber jacket and jeans, all eyes were on his daughter, 30, and her dazzling silver dress.

Family first! Sean Penn continued enjoying some quality time with his daughter Dylan Penn as the duo attended a special screening of their new movie at The Directors Guild of America in Los Angeles on Wednesday

Dylan was a sight to behold in a shimmering silver sequin dress with fringe falling along the sleeves and skirt.

The beauty mesmerized wearing peep-toe silver heels and a captivating pair of dangling Anita Ko earrings and multiple rings.

Putting her stunning complexion on full display, she slicked her blonde locks up into a trendy high ponytail.

Pink lipstick, a dewy touch of blush, and a winged slick of eye liner brought out her naturally beautiful complexion.

Father-daughter outing: Penn and his daughter star in the upcoming drama, which was also directed by the actor

Sparkle and shine! Dylan was a sight to behold in a shimmering silver sequin dress with fringe falling along the sleeves and skirt

All eyes on her! Even while posing beside her famous father, Dylan stole the show in her flashy yet beautiful look

Even while posing beside her famous father, Dylan, whose mother is actress Robin Wright, stole the show in her flashy yet beautiful look.

Once inside the theater, Dylan, Sean, and costar Katheryn Winnick addressed the audience.

They stood in front of the screen with microphones in hand, undoubtedly bestowing praise upon the project.

In addition to directing the film, Sean stars in Flag Day as John Vogel, a magnetizing figure who charms his daughter Jennifer (played as an adult by Dylan).

She's a star: In Flag Day the actress plays Jennifer, a woman whose father turns out to be one of the most notorious counterfeiters in US history

Beaming: The father-daughter duo smiled for shutterbugs

Lights, camera, action! Dylan and Sean were joined by their Flag Day co-star Katheryn Winnick

However, what starts as a family drama takes a turn into thriller territory after it's revealed that John is one of the most notorious counterfeiters in US history.

As an adult, Jennifer has to struggle to find her own path in life while moving past the crimes of her father.

The father–daughter due were on hand at the Cannes Film Festival last month, where Flag Day premiered in competition.

Despite heavy anticipation for their new film, it was poorly received by critics when it premiered at the Cannes Film Festival, though more will weigh in before its official release in the US on August 20.

Famous offspring: Dylan's mother happens to be actress Robin Wright, whom Penn split from in 2010

Taking to the stage: Once inside the theater, Dylan, Sean, and costar Katheryn Winnick addressed the audience

Passion: They stood in front of the screen with microphones in hand, undoubtedly bestowing praise upon the project

Seemingly missing from the advance screening on Wednesday was Penn's new wife Leila George, 29.

The Australian–American actress is only a few months younger than Dylan and just two years older than Sean's son Hopper Penn, 27.

The actor and director confirmed that he had married George last summer via a civil ceremony over zoom.

He showed off his gold wedding band during a visit to Late Night with Seth Meyers, where he divulged: 'We did a COVID wedding. By that, I mean it was a county commissioner on Zoom and we were at the house with my two children and her brother, and we did it that way.'

Not a fan favorite: Despite heavy anticipation for their new film, it was poorly received by critics when it premiered at the Cannes Film Festival

Heavily involved: In addition to directing the film, Sean stars in Flag Day as John Vogel, a magnetizing figure who charms his daughter Jennifer (played as an adult by Dylan)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They sparked a buzz after revealing they only bathed their children once they became physically dirty.

And Ashton Kutcher hilariously poked fun at himself and wife Mila Kunis as they bathed their children on Wednesday evening.

In a video posted to his Instagram account, an incredulous Ashton, 43, joked over how 'ridiculous' it was that they were cleaning their kids.

'Are you trying to melt them!?' Ashton Kutcher hilariously poked fun at himself and wife Mila Kunis as they bathed their children on Wednesday evening

The video begins with an incredulous Ashton asking his giggling wife as their children bathed, 'What's going on?'

'It's water,' Mila replied, amused by her husband's reaction.

Ashton could not believe his ears as he joked about his wife attempting to 'melt' their two children, Wyatt six, and Dimitri, four, with the water.

'You're putting water on the children!?' he exclaimed. 'Are you trying to melt them!? Are you trying to injure them with water!? This is ridiculous!' Ashton said. 'What's going on!?'

'It's water': Kunis was obviously amused by her husband's over-the-top reaction

'This is ridiculous!' The That 70's Show actor could not believe that his children were taking a bath

'We're bathing our children,' Mila replied, laughing.

'That's like the fourth time this week!' Ashton replied with an incredulous tone. 'Four times this week!' he shouted at the camera.

'Their body oils are going to be destroyed!' he continued.

The video was hilariously captioned, 'This bathing thing is out of hand #KutcherBathroomTalks.'

'We're bathing our children': Ashton's reaction to the spectacle left his wife in stitches

'That's like the fourth time this week!' The actor was certain to have fans laughing with his hilarious commentary

Ashton and Mila are among a growing list of celebrities revealing their lax washing routines.

The couple kicked off the public conversation about celebrity hygiene during a podcast appearance last month, with Ashton telling Armchair Expert host Dax Shephard: 'I wash my armpits and crotch daily and nothing else ever.'

Mila said she washes her 'slits and t**s' and also revealed that she did not bathe her children 'everyday' when they were infants.

Meanwhile Jake Gyllenhaal, 40, shocked fans last week when told Vanity Fair: 'More and more I find bathing to be less necessary.'

Keeping it clean for once: Cardi B admitted she's baffled by the trend of celebrities who say they don't shower often

Confused: The X-Rated rapper took to Twitter to join in on the debate about washing habits

Not impressed: Cardi appears to be a fan of showering regularly after taking to Twitter to share her concern for her peers that have been speaking out against daily washing

He noted: 'I do also think that there's a whole world of not bathing that is also really helpful for skin maintenance, and we naturally clean ourselves.'

Dax Shepard's wife Kristen Bell also said she doesn't shower often for environmental reasons, explaining: 'California has been in a drought forever. It's just like, responsibility for your environment.'

'We don't have a ton of water, so when I shower, I'll grab the girls and push them in there with me so we all use the same shower water.'

'Slits and t**s': Ashton Kutcher and Mila Kunis kicked off the public conversation about celebrity hygiene during a podcast appearance last month

Meanwhile: Dax and his wife Kristen Bell then went on The View where she revealed she would 'wait for the stink' before bathing their daughters Lincoln, eight, and Delta, six

'We naturally clean ourselves': Jake Gyllenhaal joined the choir in a recent Vanity Fair interview saying: 'More and more I find bathing to be less necessary, at times'

But not everyone is a fan of the hygiene trend, with Cardi B expressing her confusion over the movement of celebrities refusing to keep things clean.

The X-Rated rapper seemed as mystified as everyone on Tuesday, when she tweeted 'Wassup with people saying they don’t shower?' alongside a emoji with a raised eyebrow, adding: 'It's giving itchy.'

Joining Cardi in her thoughts about the situation was Game of Thrones star Jason Momoa.

The actor told Access Hollywood earlier this week that he is not part of the club, saying: 'I'm not starting any trends. I shower, trust me,.'

He added: 'I'm Aquaman. I'm in the f****** water. Don’t worry about it. I'm Hawaiian. We got saltwater on me. We good.'

Dwayne Johnson has also assured his fans he is not in the same category.

Details: When a Twitter user brought up the subject Dwayne, 49, wrote: 'Nope, I’m the opposite of a "not washing themselves" celeb'

When a Twitter user brought up the subject this week, Dwayne, 49, wrote: 'Nope, I’m the opposite of a "not washing themselves" celeb.'

In fact the fighter turned movie star, who goes by the nickname The Rock, revealed that he showers three times a day.

'Shower (cold) when I roll outta bed to get my day rollin’. Shower (warm) after my workout before work. Shower (hot) after I get home from work. Face wash, body wash, exfoliate and I sing (off key) in the shower,' he shared.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britney Spears and her boyfriend Sam Asghari were seen in a playful clip Wednesday on his Instagram account, as her conservatorship case continues to make headlines.

In the clip, the 27-year-old actor and fitness professional was seated in front of a chocolate shake while the 39-year-old Lucky singer encouraged him to ditch his strict dietary regimen for a sweet treat.

'You know, to be or not to be, that is the question I ask myself everyday - to eat or not to eat, that is the question,' he said, as Spears was heard laughing in the background.

The latest: Britney Spears, 39, and her boyfriend Sam Asghari, 27, were seen in a playful clip Wednesday on his Instagram account, as her conservatorship case continues to make headlines

'Should I do it, should I not?' Asghari said, mentioning he want to stay in great shape for any potential jobs - to which Spears said, 'Do it!'

Asghari donned a yellow T-shirt and had his hair combed to the side and a beard in the cozy exchange with the Grammy-winning pop star.

Asghari, who's been seen on the BET+ show Family Business, initially met Spears in 2016 when they worked together on her video for the track Slumber Party, and they began dating soon thereafter.

The lighthearted clip came after Los Angeles Superior Judge Brenda Penny denied a request from Spears' legal team to expedite a hearing in the conservatorship case ahead against her father Jamie Spears.

Back and forth: Asghari said he didn't want to drink the shake to stay in great shape for any potential jobs, to which Spears said, 'Do it!'

History: Asghari initially met Spears in 2016 when they worked together on her video for the track Slumber Party, and they began dating soon thereafter

Spears' lawyer Mathew Rosengart also requested that Jamie Spears' power in the conservatorship be suspended after the institution Bessemer Trust resigned from involvement in the case, NBC News reported.

Rosengart also requested a probe into how Jamie Spears is dispersing the funds in the conservatorship.

In legal filings, Spears' legal team said the Toxic singer 'continues to suffer ongoing harm each day that Mr. Spears remains in place as the Conservator of the Estate - emotionally, psychologically, and financially.'

Happy couple: The pair were seen kissing at the Once Upon A Time...In Hollywood premiere in LA in 2019

Hot topic: Fans congregated in Miami Beach, Florida last week to show their support for the singer in her legal battle

In his retort, Jamie Spears said in court docs that the singer is 'mentally sick' and that he sensed she 'was spiraling out of control.'

She spoke in a June 23 hearing about her hopes to end the arrangement, which was initially implemented amid a pileup of personal problems.

'I just want my life back,' she said. 'And it’s been 13 years. And it’s enough. It’s been a long time since I’ve owned my money. And it’s my wish and my dream for all of this to end without being tested.'

The issue is set to come before the court in a September 29 hearing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaley Cuoco and Pete Davidson goofed around Wednesday while filming their upcoming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York City.

The 35-year-old actress and her 27-year-old co-star were dressed casually while shooting outdoors on the street in the Brooklyn area.

Kaley got into character and looked roughed up while filming an action scene with the help of a stunt double.

Movie star: Kaley Cuoco was spotted Wednesday filming her upcoming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York City

The Big Bang Theory star had an abrasion on her cheek and unkempt hair as she filmed a scene wearing a purple T-shirt cinched at her waist along with a blue denim jacket and grey sweatpants.

Pete, meanwhile, wore a striped sweater and green pants.

Kaley and Pete later shared a laugh in-between scenes and she was seen cracking up amid photographers.

They were also spotted walking together with Kaley using a hand fan to keep herself cool.

On set: Pete Davidson filmed with Kaley in the Brooklyn area

Roughed up: The 35-year-old actress looked roughed up while filming

Leading lady: The Big Bang Theory star stars in the romantic comedy along with Pete

Funny guy: The Saturday Night Live star smiled between scenes

Pete smoked a cigarette and drank a Coca-Cola between scenes.

Meet Cute is a play on the film and television term for a scene in which two people who later will become a couple meet for the first time usually under a 'cute' circumstance.

The 'meet cute' scene has been a staple of romantic comedies in Hollywood for decades.

Casual style: Kaley wore a purple T-shirt cinched at her waist along with a blue denim jacket and grey sweatpants

Good times: Pete and Kaley enjoyed a laugh in between scenes

Staying cool: Kaley kept cool with a small hand fan

Shades on: The actress wore sunglasses while walking with Pete

According to Deadline, Meet Cute 'is a wildly inventive deconstruction of the romantic comedy built around the question: What would you do if you could travel to your loved ones’ past, heal their traumas, fix their problems, and change them into the perfect partner?'

Meet Cute is being directed by Alex Lehmann from a script by Noga Pnueli.

Alex previously directed the Netflix dramedy Paddleton that he co-wrote with Mark Duplass.

Rom com: According to Deadline, Meet Cute 'is a wildly inventive deconstruction of the romantic comedy built around the question: What would you do if you could travel to your loved ones’ past, heal their traumas, fix their problems, and change them into the perfect partner?'

Into it: Kaley got into character as she looked unkempt

Bruised up: The actress dances on the set with bruises

Touch up: A make-up artist touched up the actress

Kaley stars in the HBO Max series The Flight Attendant in the title role after her production company Yes, Norman Productions optioned the rights to the novel.

The Flight Attendant premiered in November 2020 and was renewed for a second season in December 2020.

Kaley has received nominations at the Primetime Emmy Awards, the Golden Globe Awards, the Screen Actors Guild Awards, and the Critics' Choice Award for her work on the HBO Max series.

Cute smile: Kaley flashed her cute smile for the cameras

Good times: The actress took a wide stance while laughing

Brooklyn set: The cast and crew filmed in Brooklyn and masked up amid the pandemic

Smoke break: Pete smoked a cigarette between scenes

Pete in April 2021 was cast as Joey Ramone in the upcoming Netflix biography I Slept With Joey Ramone.

The Saturday Night Live star recently played Blackguard in The Suicide Squad.

Pete also has the thriller Bodies, Bodies, Bodies currently in post-production.

Stunt double: Kaley and Pete looked on as a stunt double worked with them

Strong resemblance: The stunt double looked just like Kaley

Fooling around: Pete fooled around with photographers while on set
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Emmy nominee Christina Ricci Instastoried her first baby bump snap on Wednesday ahead of the birth of her second child.

The expecting 41-year-old and hairstylist Mark Hampton revealed their baby news on Tuesday by sharing pictures of their sonogram.

The images of the couple's unborn child were taken July 27 at BC Women's Hospital in Vancouver.

Bun in the oven! Emmy nominee Christina Ricci Instastoried her first baby bump snap on Wednesday ahead of the birth of her second child

Congrats! The expecting 41-year-old and the Julian Watson Agency-repped hairstylist Mark Hampton revealed their baby news on Tuesday by sharing pictures of their sonogram

Both Christina and her Welsh husband captioned their Instagram announcements: 'Life keeps getting better!'

The congratulatory comments came swiftly from Ricci's celeb pals Kate Beckinsale, Diane Kruger, Lana Del Rey, David Krumholtz, Christian Siriano, Kat Dennings, Helena Christensen, Ruby Rose, and Melanie Lynskey.

Last month, the former child star gushed that Mark was her 'favorite person;' a 'gorgeous human;' and 'bringer of all things happy, magical and good.'

Christina has known Mark as far back as 2017 when he coiffed her then platinum-blonde bob for her cover story in Net-a-Porter's The Edit.

Baby joy! The images of the couple's future child were taken July 27 at BC Women's Hospital in Vancouver

Lovely news: Both Christina and the Welshman captioned their Instagram announcements, 'Life keeps getting better!'

'Beautiful little face!' The congratulatory comments came swiftly from Ricci's celeb pals Kate Beckinsale, Diane Kruger, Lana Del Rey, David Krumholtz, Christian Siriano, Kat Dennings, Helena Christensen, Ruby Rose, and Melanie Lynskey

Mark has already had some practice doting on his nephew Charlie.

Meanwhile, Christina co-parents seven-year-old son Freddie from her six-year marriage to dolly grip James Heerdegen, which ended acrimoniously in June 2020.

The Cali-born, New Jersey-raised actress was granted a restraining order against her allegedly abusive ex in March and they settled their custody arrangements in April.

Throwback! Christina has known Hampton as far back as 2017 when he coiffed her then platinum-blonde bob for her cover story in Net-a-Porter's The Edit

On the career front, Christina will next play a mystery character in the fourth Matrix film hitting US/UK theaters and HBO Max on December 22.

It marks the solo feature directorial debut for Lana Wachowski, who previously directed Ricci in Speed Racer back in 2008

Returning cast includes Keanu Reeves, Carrie-Anne Moss, Jada Pinkett Smith, Lambert Wilson, and Daniel Bernhardt.

And other newcomers to the sci-fi franchise include Neil Patrick Harris, Priyanka Chopra Jonas, and Yahya Abdul-Mateen II.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Barbra Streisand is opening up about her first date with husband James Brolin, admitting that she made fun of his hair.

The 79-year-old actress, singer and filmmaker has been married to Brolin, 81, since 1998, but she opened up about their first date on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon.

She revealed that they were set up on a blind date, and her future husband was nothing like she expected.

Opening up: Barbra Streisand is opening up about her first date with husband James Brolin, admitting that she made fun of his hair

Husband and wife: The 79-year-old actress, singer and filmmaker has been married to Brolin, 81, since 1998, but she opened up about their first date on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon

'I was so shy that I came into the house and I went downstairs to be in with the children and play with them,' Streisand said.

'I expected a guy with a brown beard and brown, wavy hair, like a mountain man. And I saw a guy that had all his hair cut off, no beard. And I walked by him. I put my hand through his hair and said, "Who f***ed up your hair?"'

She said it took her, 'a few days' for her to fall in love with Brolin, though she added, 'he knew' right away.

Who: 'I expected a guy with a brown beard and brown, wavy hair, like a mountain man. And I saw a guy that had all his hair cut off, no beard. And I walked by him. I put my hand through his hair and said, "Who f***ed up your hair?"'

Right away: She said it took her, 'a few days' for her to fall in love with Brolin, though she added, 'he knew' right away

Streisand was promoting her new album Release Me 2, with Fallon showing a photo of her granddaughter holding the album.

'Her mom gave her the album to look at Gammaw, you know. The older one who's not even 3 calls me Gammaw,' she added.

She added that most women don't like being called a grandma because it makes them too old, but she, 'loves it.'

Granddaughter: Streisand was promoting her new album Release Me 2, with Fallon showing a photo of her granddaughter holding the album

Love it: She added that most women don't like being called a grandma because it makes them too old, but she, 'loves it'

'I think it's a great gift. I mean, I've lived, you know, a long life, I've done a lot of things, but I've never been a gammaw,' Streisand said.

She also spoke about her new album Release Me 2, which is comprised of unreleased songs throughout her legendary career, where she has been the only female artist to have a number one album in six consecutive decades.

Fallon also revealed all of the different packaging for the album, which you can get at different retailers.

Never a gammaw: 'I think it's a great gift. I mean, I've lived, you know, a long life, I've done a lot of things, but I've never been a gammaw,' Streisand said

Different: Fallon also revealed all of the different packaging for the album, which you can get at different retailers

'I love things that are off color, in more ways than one. So these are not primary colors. They're colors that I love,' she said.

The singer added that it took 'a long time' where she was, 'looking through a hundred Pantone swatches' to pick the right colors.

Release Me 2 was released on August 6.

Colors: 'I love things that are off color, in more ways than one. So these are not primary colors. They're colors that I love,' she said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's currently in the UK filming Aquaman And The Lost Kingdom.

And on Wednesday, Amber Heard shared a photo to Instagram in which she was seen in a sports bra and leggings striking a pose in front of a blue background.

'Another day at the office,' the actress, 35, wrote in the caption.

Filming: Amber Heard showed off her fit figure as she struck a pose in sports bra and leggings against a blue background in a photo from the set of Aquaman 2 she shared to Instagram

Heard is back as Mera for the sequel to the 2018 blockbuster Aquaman, reuniting with Jason Momoa for the next installment of the Warner Bros./DC Entertainment movie.

This despite calls from fans of her ex husband Johnny Depp that she be axed from the superhero franchise.

The former couple's relationship has been laid bare following their very acrimonious split in 2017.

But while Depp was dropped from the Fantastic Beasts franchise over allegations of domestic abuse towards Heard, Aquaman producer Peter Safran recently told Deadline they had never considered replacing her.

Team: Heard is back as Mera for the sequel to the 2018 blockbuster Aquaman, reuniting with Jason Momoa for the next installment of the Warner Bros./DC Entertainment movie

She's back: This despite calls from fans of her ex husband Johnny Depp that she be axed from the superhero franchise, something producer Peter Safran said was never considered

Protected the film'I don’t think we’re ever going to react to, honestly, pure fan pressure. You gotta do what’s best for the movie,' Safran recently told Deadline.com

'I don’t think we’re ever going to react to, honestly, pure fan pressure. You gotta do what’s best for the movie,' Safran said.

'We felt that if it’s James Wan, and Jason Momoa, it should be Amber Heard. That’s really what it was,' Safran continued.

He added that the producers were, 'not unaware of what is going on in the Twitter-verse, but that doesn’t mean you have to react to it or take it as gospel or accede to their wishes.'

'You have to do what’s right for the film, and that’s really where we landed on it,' Safran stated.

Stepped away: The ex couple's relationship was laid bare following their very acrimonious split and Depp was dropped from the Fantastic Beasts franchise over allegations of domestic abuse

Fans started calling for Heard's dismissal after her ex-husband Depp filed a libel lawsuit against the UK tabloid The Sun for branding him a 'wife beater.'

Depp ended up losing that lawsuit, with the court ruling in favor of The Sun, which lead to the actor stepping away from his role as Gellert Grindelwald in the Harry Potter spin-off Fantastic Beasts 3, with Mads Mikkelsen replacing him.

Heard herself addressed the campaigns to get her removed from the film in November, stating they had, 'no basis in reality.'

'Paid rumors and paid campaigns on social media don’t dictate [casting decisions] because they have no basis in reality. Only the fans actually made Aquaman and Aquaman 2 happen. I’m excited to get started next year,' she said.

Production started on Aquaman 2 started in late June in London, with Warner Bros. setting a December 16, 2022 release date.

New role: Heard is juggling her film commitments with being a new mom. She revealed via Instagram on July 1 that she welcomed a daughter Oonagh via a surrogate on April 8

Heard is juggling her film commitments with being a new mom.

She revealed via Instagram on July 1 that she welcomed a daughter Oonagh via a surrogate on April 8.

Announcing her baby news, Amber shared: 'A part of me wants to uphold that my private life is none of anyone’s business. I also get that the nature of my job compels me to take control of this.'

Amber stressed the importance of women being able to become parents regardless of marital status.

She wrote: 'I now appreciate how radical it is for us as women to think about one of the most fundamental parts of our destinies in this way

'I hope we arrive at a point in which it’s normalized to not want a ring in order to have a crib.'

She concluded the post by saying her baby girl is 'the beginning of the rest of my life.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is set to release her latest single, a collaboration with Lizzo, this week.

But in the process, Cardi B has also teased her next big project... becoming a mother for a second time.

The pregnant 28-year-old rapper - real name Belcalis Marlenis Almánzar - proudly put her baby belly on display in a metallic gold top and panties combination for a short teaser clip for the Rumors music video set to release Friday.

Joining forces: Cardi B proudly put her baby belly on display in a metallic gold top and panties combination for a short teaser clip for the Rumors music video with Lizzo set to release Friday

She was joined by the 33-year-old singer and rapper - real name Melissa Viviane Jefferson - as they channeled Greek goddesses for the clip.

Cardi teamed the revealing two-piece look with a pair of matching wrap around gold heels as long white pieces of cloth hung down from her shoulder onto the floor and around her wrist.

Perhaps the most interesting thing about her look was her gold headpiece which resembled the capital of an order, which is basically the distinctive top of an Ancient Greek column.

Just us: She was joined by the 33-year-old singer and rapper - real name Melissa Viviane Jefferson - as they channeled Greek goddesses for the clip

She knows her history! Perhaps the most interesting thing about her look was her gold headpiece which resembled the capital of an order, which is basically the distinctive top of an Ancient Greek column

Shining: Lizzo rocked a clinging jumpsuit featuring strategically placed Greek symbols

Lizzo rocked a clinging jumpsuit featuring strategically placed Greek symbols.

The two were shown standing in the clip as lightning struck when they touched their index fingers.

The teaser comes just a day after the dynamic duo unveiled unveil the ultra glamorous cover art for the forthcoming single.

'Fun fact: we took this picture right after cardi whispered "I want to eat yo p*ssy" in my ear,' joked Lizzo in her post's caption.

In the details: Cardi teamed the revealing two-piece look with a pair of matching wrap around gold heels as long white pieces of cloth hung down from her shoulder onto the floor and around her wrist

The two were shown standing in the clip as lightning struck when they touched their index fingers.

She continued: 'RUMORS THIS FRIDAY YOU READY?'

Shortly after, Cardi took to the comment section, writing: 'Lmmmmaaaoooo I wonder if the camera man caught that part'

The Rumors cover art shows Cardi and Lizzo posing in front of a black backdrop, while drenched in numerous pieces of chunky gold jewelry.

Some of the featured pieces included earrings shaped like ears, as well as thick gold bangles and choker chains.

Revealed! The teaser comes just a day after the dynamic duo unveiled unveil the ultra glamorous cover art for the forthcoming single

Coming soon! The dynamic duo sent fans into a frenzy earlier this week as they announced their forthcoming collaboration

Glam: The Rumors cover art shows Cardi and Lizzo posing in front of a black backdrop, while drenched in numerous pieces of chunky gold jewelry

The 28-year-old rapper posed with her manicured hand pressed to her ear, while the 33-year-old songstress leaned in close and gazed directly into the camera.

Their lengthy raven tresses were parted down the middle and straightened meticulously, while their baby hairs were neatly styled to frame their faces.

Though only a portion of their ensembles were shown, Lizzo and Cardi appeared to be wearing dueling strapless jeweled gowns.

Though she announced Rumors' release last week, it was not until Monday that Lizzo revealed Cardi would be featured on the highly-anticipated song.

Surprise! Though she announced Rumors' release last week, it was not until Monday that Lizzo revealed Cardi would be featured on the highly-anticipated song

Big reveal: The Truth Hurts singer did so by conducting a FaceTime with the WAP rapper, which she later shared to Instagram

The Truth Hurts singer did so by conducting a FaceTime call with the WAP rapper, which she later shared to Instagram.

'It’s Harry Styles,' Lizzo joked as a sleepy Cardi B answered while rocking a hot pink beanie.

'GRAND RISING MUTHAF**KASSSSS…. GUESS WHOS HOPPIN ON ‘RUMORS’ W/ ME?!?' captioned Lizzo, who boasts over 11million followers on the platform.

Recent: Cardi's collaboration with Lizzo comes just weeks after she appeared on Normani's long-awaited single Wild Side

Cardi's collaboration with Lizzo comes just weeks after she appeared on Normani's long-awaited single Wild Side.

Rumors is Lizzo's first single since after a two-year hiatus following the release of 2019's Cuz I Love You.

The album went on to earn eight Grammy nominations, winning three in the Best Pop Solo Performance, Best Traditional R&B Performance, and Best Urban Contemporary Album categories at the 2020 ceremony.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Heather Locklear is back on set after a four-year hiatus as she starts filming on her Lifetime original movie Don't Sweat The Small Stuff: The Kristine Carlson Story.

The 59-year-old actress was revealed to star in the movie at the end of July, with a report from Deadline, which also revealed Megan McCain will executive produce.

Locklear took to Instagram on Wednesday morning to share a snap from the set with co-star Jason MacDonald.

Scroll down for video

On set: Heather Locklear is back on set after a four-year hiatus as she starts filming on her Lifetime original movie Don't Sweat The Small Stuff: The Kristine Carlson Story

'I’m feeling super tall here!!' Locklear said in the caption of the snap, where she was standing on a box to get at MacDonald's eye level.

The actress was wearing a white top under a tan suit coat, tight black pants and white slippers.

Her co-star MacDonald also shared the same photo on his Instagram, while clarifying that she isn't that short, he's just much taller.

Video: Locklear ditched the suit coat and added some black boots in a brief video with MacDonald plus co-stars Natasha Bure and Ella Dorsch

'Heather isn’t short, I’m just really tall. Fun times taking thousands of photos for our ‘gallery shoot’ yesterday!' MacDonald added.

He continued, 'Have I mentioned that @heatherlocklear is the BEST?!' while adding the hashtags, '#dontsweatthesmallstuff #lifetimetv #galleryshoot #photos

Locklear ditched the suit coat and added some black boots in a brief video with MacDonald plus co-stars Natasha Bure and Ella Dorsch.

Sync: The whole group were off their marks for the shoot as they're seen all scooting over in sync with each other

The whole group were off their marks for the shoot as they're seen all scooting over in sync with each other.

The film follows Locklear's character Kristine Carlson, the author of the bestselling Don't Sweat the Small Stuff book series with her husband, Dr. Richard Carlson.

Her whole world comes crashing down when Richard passes away unexpectedly as she tries to rebuild her family after this devastating loss.

Crash: Her whole world comes crashing down when Richard passes away unexpectedly as she tries to rebuild her family after this devastating loss

No sweat: The film follows Locklear's character Kristine Carlson, the author of the bestselling Don't Sweat the Small Stuff book series with her husband, Dr. Richard Carlson

Bure plays their daughter Jazzy though it's unclear who Dorsch will play in the Lifetime original movie.

Ellen S. Pressman will direct from a script written by Shannon Bradley-Colleary, though it's unclear when it may debut on the Lifetime network.

Locklear hasn't starred in a film or movie since her role as First Lady Katelynn Christian in Tyler Perry's Too Close To Home in 2016-2017.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tom Girardi has informed a judge he will not testify at an upcoming contempt hearing connected to the Lion Air Flight 610 case.

Girardi, 82, has told a Chicago federal judge on Monday that he will invoke his right to remain silent if he is called to the stand in the upcoming hearing, according to Law360.

Last year a judge held Girardi and his law firm in contempt, finding he misappropriated at least $2 million in client funds intended for the families of those killed in the devastating 2018 Lion Air crash. The upcoming hearing is related to the contempt finding.

Tom Girardi has informed a judge he will not testify at an upcoming hearing connected to the Lion Air Flight 610 case

US District Judge Thomas Durkin called Thomas Girardi's conduct 'unconscionable' and said he was referring him to the U.S. attorney's office for criminal investigation when holding him in contempt last year.

Girardi's assets were also frozen by the judge, as were the assets of his Los Angeles-based law firm, Girardi Keese.

Durkin warned the former lawyer that the 'simple way to cure all of this' is to pay at least four Illinois-based clients he said are each owed a half-million dollars.

Girardi, 82, told a Chicago federal judge on Monday that he will invoke his right to remain silent if he is called to the stand, according to Law360 (pictured 2019)

'These are widows and orphans,' the judge told Girardi, according to the Chicago Sun Times. 'Half a million dollars for any one of these families is a significant amount of money. Life changing, given the tragedy they went through.'

Girardi's attorneys claimed he did not currently possess the $2 million owed to his clients.

Attorney Evan Jenness told the judge her client's firm, Girardi Keese, had about $15,000 in its operating accounts, the LA Times reported.

Girardi's assets were also frozen by the judge, as were the assets of his Los Angeles-based law firm, Girardi Keese

Girardi's legal woes stem from the crash of Lion Air Flight 610, a Boeing 737 Max, which plummeted into the Java Sea, off Indonesia, in October 2018, killing all 189 passengers on board. The 737 Max has since been grounded indefinitely by Boeing after an investigation uncovered catastrophic issues with its anti-stall software.

The missing funds are part of a settlement Girardi and his firm negotiated from Boeing for four Illinois-based families, with primary terms reached by early 2020.

While the terms of the settlement are confidential, remarks made in court indicate that each of Girardi's clients was to be paid $2 million, however only received around 75 percent of the money owed to them.

A fifth client also may not have been paid, the judge noted, adding that he planned to refer the matter to the US attorney's office.

Jayne's extravagant lifestyle is well documented on the reality show Real Housewives of Beverly Hills

Edelson's firm filed a separate lawsuit against Girardi, accusing him and his estranged wife Erika Jayne of embezzling the Lion Air settlement funds to keep up their 'public image of obscene wealth', despite being over the 'verge of financial collapse'.

It further claims that last year's announcement Jayne had filed for divorce against Girardi is an act to protect their money from debt collectors.

'At the heart of this deception is Defendant Girardi and his need to fund outrageous lifestyles for himself and his soon-to-be ex-wife, Erika Jayne,' the complaint, obtained by DailyMail.com, reads.

It continues: 'Tom and Erika have reached celebrity status in the glitz-and-glam world of Hollywood and Beverly Hills...To keep up their celebrity status, Tom and Erika must project a public image of obscene wealth at all times, and at whatever the cost.

The lawsuit cited examples of her excessive spending, mentioning how she boasted in 2018 that she spends $40,000 a month her glamorous make-up

'While Erika publicly filed for divorce this month, on information and belief, that 'divorce' is simply a sham attempt to fraudulently protect Tom's and Erika's money from those that seek to collect on debts owed by Tom and his law firm GK.'

In his suit, Edelson stated that Girardi and his firm are ''are on the verge of financial collapse and locked in a downward spiral of mounting debts and dwindling funds', and allegedly owe tens of millions of dollars to clients, co-counsel, and others.

The suit claims that it's because of his purported financial turmoil that Girardi allegedly resorted to embezzling money intended for his clients.

Jayne's extravagant lifestyle is well documented on the reality show Real Housewives of Beverly Hills.

The lawsuit cited examples of her excessive spending, mentioning how she boasted in 2018 that she spends $40,000 a month her glamorous make-up.

The suit also highlights a lyric from her 2017 hip-hop song 'Exxpen$ive' which features the phrase, 'it's expensive to be me.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tituss Burgess is set to join the cast of NBC's Annie Live!

The 42-year-old entertainer is the latest addition to an ensemble cast that features Taraji P. Henson as Hannigan, Harry Connick Jr. playing Daddy Warbucks and Nicole Scherzinger playing Grace.

The Athens, Georgia native will portray the role of Rooster, who is Hannigan's scoundrel brother.

The latest: Tituss Burgess, 42, is set to join the cast of NBC's Annie Live! as the latest addition to an ensemble cast that features Taraji P. Henson, Harry Connick Jr. and Nicole Scherzinger. He was snapped last week in LA

'I've always wanted to be a villain,' Burgess, a six-time Emmy nominee, said in a statement.

The casting of the character Annie has yet to be named, amid a nationwide search for a child star for the coveted role. Robert Greenblatt, Neil Meron, and Alex Rudzinsky are executive producers of the latest incarnation of Annie, which was first seen on Broadway in 1977.

Burgess, best known for playing Titus Andromedon on the Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, has amassed a number of screen and musical credits over the course of his career.

In recent years, he's worked on the animated musical show Central Park, and plays Reverend Dr. James Cleveland, the director of Aretha Franklin's church choir in the forthcoming Franklin biopic Respect.

Details: The Athens, Georgia native will portray the role of Rooster, who is Hannigan's scoundrel brother

Burgess, a six-time Emmy nominee, said in a statement, 'I've always wanted to be a villain'

Surging: The actor plays Reverend Dr. James Cleveland, the director of Aretha Franklin's church choir in the forthcoming Franklin biopic Respect, alongside Jennifer Hudson

Speaking last year with Washington, D.C.'s Metro Weekly, he called the film 'a beautifully written piece and ... directed so brilliantly by Liesl Tommy.'

Burgess said he 'was afforded the opportunity to play the role and it was kismet, if you will, because my first day of filming was Reverend Dr. James Cleveland’s birthday, December 5. It was almost like having his blessing.'

Burgess, who is openly gay, told the outlet about 'the similarities' between he and Cleveland 'have nothing to do with my sexuality.

'He’s a writer, I’m a writer,' Burgess said. 'He was a choir conductor, I conducted a choir when I was 12. He’s a man of faith, I am still very much a man of faith, and I have reconciled my own sexuality with my maker.

'And he mentored Aretha Franklin, I love Aretha Franklin ... so it was an easy fit in my book. And, once I was in hair and makeup, we look surprisingly similar.'

Annie Live! is set to air on NBC December 2.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He plays the pansexual character Max Wolfe on HBO Max's newly rebooted version of Gossip Girl.

But Thomas Doherty, 26, separated himself from his 17-year-old privileged high schooler character in a new interview with Variety.

The Scottish actor revealed he had only slept with women in his personal life, though he thought traditional sexuality labels only 'limit you.'

Getting personal: Thomas Doherty, 26, opened up about his sexuality in a new interview with Variety. He plays the pansexual character Max on the rebooted Gossip Girl; seen in June in NYC

Doherty admitted that portraying his character, who is a less-sinister analog to the original series Vincent Swan (Ed Westwick), had helped broaden his understanding of sexuality.

'I have always seen sexuality as a spectrum. But playing Max, a pansexual character, was incredibly liberating,' he explained.

'It was very educational, and it definitely made me challenge my own preconceived notions, my indoctrination, of "This is who you love, this is what you do, everything else is wrong."'

In the series, his cheekily named character Maximus Wolfe engages in relationships with both men and women, though he's open to other genders as well, as pansexual people can also be attracted to others who don't identify as men or women.

Freeing: 'I have always seen sexuality as a spectrum. But playing Max, a pansexual character, was incredibly liberating,' he explained; pictured with Evan Mock on Gossip Girl

The TV star also opened about about how he finds labels on sexuality to be 'limiting.'

'I think it is very limiting, and I think as I get older and experience life a little bit more, you constantly evolve and you’re constantly growing,' he said. 'I feel like labels limit you. They’re almost walls to your growth.'

Doherty, who has reportedly been dating the Dutch model Yasmin Wijnaldum, played it coy when he was asked about how he labeled his own sexuality.

'It’s just been girls. That’s a preference. But 26, living in New York…’ he said, with the author adding that he 'trails off as he gives a devilish smile.'

Leaving it open: Doherty, who has reportedly been dating Dutch model Yasmin Wijnaldum, said he had only slept with women so far. He added: 'But 26, living in New York…'; still from Gossip Girl

His fans won't find many clues about his personal life online, as he admitted he doesn't like to share too much on social media.

'I’m not a huge fan of social media,' he said. 'I don’t think it’s a very positive addition to the world, and I worry for younger people on it.'

He admitted to trying to pare back his Instagram feed after it became too much.

'I actually unfollowed everyone on my Instagram because I was like, this is just noise. It’s counterproductive.'

Too much: He admitted to trying to pare back his Instagram feed. 'I actually unfollowed everyone on my Instagram because I was like, this is just noise. It’s counterproductive'

Doherty's most high-profile romance was with his former Disney costar Dove Cameron.

He joined the fold for the Disney Channel original movie Descendants 2, which follows the children of famous Disney villains.

He played Captain Hook's son Harry Hook, while Dove starred as Mal, the daughter of Maleficent.

The two began dating after working together, but they broke up in December of last year after four years.

In June, Dove shared with Entertainment Tonight that the 'breakup f***ed [her] up.'

'It was really hard, and I needed something that was going to get me from where I was, in the mourning process, into the other side,' she said, referring to her single LazyBaby.

Doherty was seen moving on with Wijnaldum following the split.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She starred for 11 seasons on the ABC sitcom Modern Family.

But there was disappointing news for Sarah Hyland on Wednesday when the network confirmed it wasn't moving forward with her new show.

The actress, 30, had spent time in Ireland in May filming a pilot for Epic, a fantasy drama from the creators of ABC's Once Upon a Time.

The show promised to 'reinvent fairytale for a new audience' but TV execs confirmed to Variety that Epic is no longer moving forward.

Not picked up: There was disappointing news for Sarah Hyland on Wednesday when ABC confirmed it wasn't moving forward with her new fantasy drama Epic

The network commissioned a pilot in January from Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis and other cast picked for the show included Eleanor Fanyinka, Brittany O'Grady and Alexander Hodge.

In May, Hyland had posted photos to her Instagram as she filmed the one-hour fairytale drama in Tullamore in central Ireland.

The shooting took place in the woods and grounds of Charleville Castle on the Shannon River.

Posting a photo of herself with a horse at some stables, the actress had shared: 'So excited to be working on a project for the first time in over a year! I've already been overseas for a month with the most amazing cast, we started shooting yesterday, and let's just say that this is going to be... EPIC.'

She also shared a couple of snaps in which she's seen walking barefoot through trees and explained in the caption: 'Just a little witch barefoot in the woods of Ireland.'

New project: In May, Hyland had posted photos to her Instagram as she filmed a pilot for the fairytale drama from Once upon A Time creators Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis in Ireland

Filmed in Ireland: She also shared a couple of snaps in which she's seen walking barefoot through trees and explained in the caption: 'Just a little witch barefoot in the woods of Ireland'

Hyland's filming schedule meant that she was apart from fiance Wells Adams when he celebrated his 37th birthday in May.

The couple postponed their planned nuptials due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

The sitcom star told People last October the two 'definitely want to get married one day and have the wedding of our dreams and have everybody that we love there.

'But we postponed wedding planning because we want to be able to focus on what's important right now. There is a lot going on in the world right now and that's what we should be focused on,' she said.

The 30-year-old beauty and the Bachelor in Paradise star started dating in 2017 and got engaged two years later, before planning to marry on August 20 2020.

Set to wed: Hyland is engaged to Bachelor in Paradise alum star Wells Adams, 37, whom she started dating in 2017 (pictured in 201)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her busy schedule has helped her become one of the top models in the world.

But Bella Hadid slowed down on Wednesday to celebrate a 'rare' day off with some gorgeous throwback photos taken back in February.

The 24-year-old beauty showed off her outstanding figure at the beach while also sharing a sweet photo featuring her boyfriend Marc Kalman.

Bathing beauty: Bella Hadid, 24, showed off her stunning figure in a pink bikini during a tropical getaway from February

Bella's model physique was on full display in a playful photo of her on a mostly vacant beach as she sat on a towel-covered lounge chair and munched on a personal pizza.

She put on a colorful display with the pink-and-yellow patterned two-piece suit, which emphasized her flat tummy.

Her brunette locks were wet and flipped back, and she looked stylish in a set of rectangular sunglasses.

'Day off in paradise,' she captioned her post, adding that it was 'Rare but always appreciated.'

Secret romance: She also shared a cute photo of herself giving her boyfriend Marc Kalman a kiss on the cheek. The two reportedly dated since the summer of 2020, but they weren't Instagram official back in February

Stunner: She put on a colorful display with the pink-and-yellow patterned two-piece suit, which emphasized her flat tummy

Pretty in pink: She covered up her skimpy suit in another image with a pair of fuchsia-colored floral capris while taking a walk on the beach with a beverage

Later, she edited her caption to add that the pictures were taken in February of this year.

At the time, she posted photos to Instagram from her trip to paradise, though she declined to specify where she was vacationing.

But the trip featured her boyfriend Marc Kalman, whose face was almost completely bathed in the shadow of his phone as he snapped a selfie of himself with Bella.

He appeared to squint at the phone as the catwalk star leaned in to plant a cute kiss on his cheek while winking.

Other photos showed her standing among the fauna.

She covered up her skimpy suit in another image with a pair of fuchsia-colored floral capris while taking a walk on the beach with a beverage.

Relaxing: 'Day off in paradise,' she captioned her post, adding that it was 'Rare but always appreciated'

Hot days: She cooled down in the pool in another snap that showed her completely submerged

Looking up: The 5ft9in beauty looked minuscule in a fun photo taken from above that showed her in a dark bikini

Bella shared some more views of herself in her tropical bikini, including a photo taken from the side as she lounged in the sun.

She cooled down in the pool in another snap that showed her completely submerged.

The 5ft9in beauty looked minuscule in a fun photo taken from above that showed her in a dark bikini.

She puckered her lips up for a kiss at the camera and covered up with a tan shirt that was left totally unbuttoned.

The sister of Gigi Hadid may have had some time off, but she also appeared to be filming ads for Michael Kors, as some of her photos were repeated from a previous post.

She was seen emerging from a pull fully clothed while cameras were set up for the photo and video shoot.

Always working: The sister of Gigi Hadid may have had some time off, but she also appeared to be filming ads for Michael Kors, as some of her photos were repeated from a previous post

No fuss: In her downtime she wore more casual outfits, including one featuring a brown tank top and baggy olive-colored cargo pants

Family: Bella's model mother Yolanda Hadid was also vacationing with her during the photo shoot, and they were pictured together while walking along a paved path surrounded by palm tress

In her downtime she wore more casual outfits, including one featuring a brown tank top and baggy olive-colored cargo pants.

Bella's model mother Yolanda Hadid was also vacationing with her during the photo shoot, and they were pictured together while walking along a paved path surrounded by palm tress.

Bella wore an unbuttoned denim shirt over a black bikini top and baggy blue pants, while Yolanda wore a straw hat with a black shirt, shorts and New Balance trainers.

Bella's newest photos confirm that her romance with Marc has been going on for months.

The two were only romantically connected in July, when she shared a photo of them embracing in a since-deleted post, but a source shared with Page Six that the lovebirds had been together since the summer of 2020, though they 'hid it well.'

Their scheme to hide the relationship reportedly involved having Marc drive her car, but when they arrived at their destination he would let her out but would stay in the car and park it elsewhere, so as to be less conspicuous.

At the time that she went Instagram official with her Marc, who's an art director, her older sister Gigi Hadid left a smiley face emoji in the comments section.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She rose to fame as a Victoria's Secret Angel.

And although she hung up her wings years ago Alessandra Ambrosio demonstrated her supermodel credentials in Los Angeles this week.

The 40-year-old bombshell showed off her endless legs in a pair of tiny bike shorts as she stepped out for a workout.

Erstwhile Angel: Although she hung up her wings years ago Alessandra Ambrosio demonstrated her supermodel credentials in Los Angeles this week

Concealing her enviably svelte torso underneath a boyfriend fit t-shirt, she let her luxurious dark locks flutter freely in the breeze, although she kept a Discover Night scrunchie handy by wearing it around her wrist.

The sizzling sensation warded off the sweltering California rays with a baseball cap and rounded off the look with white sneakers.

Just one day prior she had been spotted enjoying a family outing in Malibu with her children Anja, 12, and Noah, nine, and her parents Lucilda and Luiz.

She has only recently returned to Los Angeles after a trip to her native Brazil where she shared a smooch on Instagram with her beau Richard Lee.

Looking fab: The 40-year-old bombshell showed off her endless legs in a pair of tiny bike shorts as she stepped out for a workout

Beat the heat: The sizzling sensation warded off the sweltering California rays with a baseball cap

Alessandra confirmed her smoldering romance with Richard when they were spotted on a romantic dinner date in February.

She was previously involved with Italian fashion designer Nicolo Oddi who founded the brand Alanui with his sister Carlotta.

Meanwhile Alessandra shares her two children Anja and Noah with her ex-fiance Jamie Mazur who co-founded RE/DONE.

Sporty: She rounded off the look with white sneakers

Alessandra herself started her own swimwear company GAL Floripa with her sister Aline and their friend Gisele Coria over two years ago.

Her brand is named partly after Florianopolis which is the city in southern Brazil where she gave birth to both of her children.

Last year Alessandra was spotted emerging from an immigration office in Los Angeles reportedly having just become a U.S. citizen.

Grunge rock: Alessandra was spotted Wednesday in Los Angeles wearing a Nirvana shirt while getting take-out food
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Zosia Mamet oozed elegance as she attended the star-studded premiere for The Night House in New York City on Wednesday night.

The 33-year-old Girls star posed on the red carpet with her husband Evan Jonigkeit, 37, who stars in the forthcoming horror film.

Mamet modeled a floor-length teal silk gown with a ruched mock neckline.

Elegance: Zosia Mamet oozed elegance as she attended the star-studded premiere for The Night House in New York City

Instead of rocking a pair of heels, the actress slipped her feet into some crisscross orange sandals.

Pulling the shades from her dress and shoes, Zosia dusted some teal shadow on her lids and a muted orange lipstick on her pout.

She wore her auburn tresses dow and styled in loose waves that flowed down her chest.

Evan looked handsome in a grey-blue suit jacket layered over a white dress shirt and a pair of matching trousers.

Supportive: The 33-year-old Girls star posed on the red carpet with her husband Evan Jonigkeit, 37, who stars in the forthcoming horror film

Striking: Mamet modeled a floor-length teal silk gown with a ruched mock neckline

The Pennsylvania native gave his red carpet ensemble a bit of added flair by rocking a necktie with a quirky print.

As they graced the red carpet, Zosia and Evan could hardly keep their hands off one another.

The posed closely, with Zosia placing her head on his shoulder for one sweet shot.

Handsome: Evan looked handsome in a grey-blue suit jacket layered over a white dress shirt and a pair of matching trousers

Happy in love: The couple married in 2016 during a rustic wedding in New York after three-and-a-half years of dating, as per Vogue

The couple married in 2016 during a rustic wedding in New York after three-and-a-half years of dating, as per Vogue.

The Night House's leading lady Rebecca Hall was also in attendance at Wednesday's screening in NYC.

The 39-year-old UK native looked ultra chic in an orange spaghetti strap gown with a plunging neckline, as well as a ruffled skirt.

Leading lady: The Night House's leading lady Rebecca Hall was also in attendance at Wednesday's screening in NYC

Sleek: The Vicky Cristina Barcelona star had her jaw-length brunette hair slicked back to expose her sparkling drop earrings

The Vicky Cristina Barcelona star had her jaw-length brunette hair slicked back to expose her sparkling drop earrings.

Rebecca's red carpet look was completed with a pair of unique black leather kitten heels.

While posing for shutterbugs, Hall schmoozed with her The Night House costars Evan Jonigkeit and Vondie Curtis-Hall. The trio beamed with pride over their soon-to-be released horror flick.

Chic chick: The 39-year-old UK native looked ultra chic in an orange spaghetti strap gown with a plunging neckline, as well as a ruffled skirt

Cast mates: While posing for shutterbugs, Hall schmoozed with The Night House costar Evan Jonigkeit (pictured right)

Pride: Vondie Curtis-Hall, Rebecca Hall and Evan Jonigkeit pose for shutterbugs on the red carpet

Fashion blogger Raquel Gerlani put on a fashionable display in a bright red suit jacket and flared high-waisted trousers.

She also donned a strapless corset top that coordinated with the chunky white boots on her feet.

Model-turned-actress Wakeema Hollis displayed her enviable physique in a grey fitted mock neck dress that stopped just above the knee.

Skate Kitchen star Dede Lovelace wore an eye-catching silk shirt dress boasting a multi-colored pattern.

Fashion forward: Fashion blogger Raquel Gerlani put on a fashionable display in a bright red suit jacket and flared high-waisted trousers

Stunning: Model-turned-actress Wakeema Hollis displayed her enviable physique in a grey fitted mock neck dress that stopped just above the knee

Ebony Obsidian dazzled in a retro striped blouse and a black pencil shirt for the film's big night in NYC.

The Night House, which was originally slated for a 2020 release, will hit theaters on August 20.

The horror-thriller follows widowed wife Beth (played by Rebecca Hall) who is left alone at the lakeside home her late-husband built for her, as per IMDB.

As she continues to reside in the home, she begins to uncover her recently deceased husband's disturbing secrets.

Eye-catching: Skate Kitchen star Dede Lovelace wore an eye-catching silk shirt dress boasting a multi-colored pattern
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@High School Musical star Joshua Bassett said coming out as queer was 'one of the easiest and most liberating things I've ever done.'

'I wasn't planning on talking about any of it and then there was a point where it kind of got bigger than me and I knew I had to acknowledge it,' the 20-year-old triple-threat told UK's best-selling gay magazine Attitude on Wednesday.

'And I wrote the statement in less than five minutes. It all came out at once and I was like, yep, let's post it. And I felt really great about it, and I never looked back.'

'It kind of got bigger than me': High School Musical star Joshua Bassett said coming out as queer was 'one of the easiest and most liberating things I've ever done'

Joshua first came out in May after admitting a crush on Harry Styles before officially telling GQ Magazine: 'I'm happy to be a part of the LGBTQ+ community because they embrace all.'

However, Bassett's first crush was actually Hilary Duff because he was such a big fan of Harald Zwart's 2003 spy comedy Agent Cody Banks.

'I wanted to be Agent Cody Banks,' the Feel Something singer gushed to Attitude.

'I met her by the way and she told somebody that she has a crush on me too. Because I told her that I had a crush on her my entire life. And she did tell the president of the Disney Channel that she had a crush on me too. So I'm never going to let that one go. I'm never going to live that one down.'

The 20-year-old triple-threat told UK's best-selling gay magazine Attitude on Wednesday: 'I wrote the statement in less than five minutes. It all came out at once and I was like, yep, let's post it. And I felt really great about it, and I never looked back'

Joshua first came out in May after admitting a crush on Harry Styles before officially telling GQ Magazine: 'I'm happy to be a part of the LGBTQ+ community because they embrace all'

'I wanted to be Agent Cody Banks': However, Bassett's first crush was actually Hilary Duff (L) because he was such a big fan of Harald Zwart's 2003 spy comedy Agent Cody Banks

The Feel Something singer gushed to Attitude: 'I met her by the way and she told somebody that she has a crush on me too. Because I told her that I had a crush on her my entire life'

Now that the world knows Joshua is queer, it definitely pours more water on the theory that his onscreen leading lady Olivia Rodrigo had penned her hit Driver's License about their so-called 'love triangle' with Sabrina Carpenter.

The 18-year-old pop star also denied the rumors to Variety on Wednesday, saying: 'I just remember [everyone being] so weird and speculative about stuff they had no idea about. I don't really subscribe to hating other women because of boys. I think that's so stupid, and I really resent that narrative that was being tossed around.'

Disney+ has not yet renewed High School Musical: The Musical: The Series for a third season, so it's unclear if Bassett or Rodrigo will be back as Ricky Bowen and Nini Salazar-Roberts.

Last year, the High School Musical spin-off won a GLAAD Media Award for outstanding kids & family programming.

Fake news: Now that the world knows Joshua is queer, it definitely pours more water on the theory that his onscreen leading lady Olivia Rodrigo (L) had penned her hit Driver's License about their so-called 'love triangle' with Sabrina Carpenter (R)

The 18-year-old pop star also denied the rumors to Variety on Wednesday, saying: 'I just remember [everyone being] so weird and speculative about stuff they had no idea about'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Production is under way on the highly-anticipated Captain Marvel sequel The Marvels, with star Brie Larson offering a brief update.

The 31-year-old actress appeared in a virtual interview on Siriux XM's The Jess Cagle Show recently, where she was asked about the sequel.

Marvel actors and actresses typically don't divulge too much about their projects before the movie comes out, Larson is clearly excited for the sequel.

Update: Production is under way on the highly-anticipated Captain Marvel sequel The Marvels, with star Brie Larson offering a brief update

Excited: Marvel actors and actresses typically don't divulge too much about their projects before the movie comes out, Larson is clearly excited for the sequel

'Gosh, so much going on, a lot of really juicy things happening that I cannot say a word about,' Larson began.

'But, boy oh boy, is it good. And you’re going to be very excited about it,' she added of the sequel.

Marvel had been criticized in the past for their lack of diversity and inclusion, though they have been making steps in the right direction.

Juicy: 'Gosh, so much going on, a lot of really juicy things happening that I cannot say a word about,' Larson began

Excited: 'But, boy oh boy, is it good. And you’re going to be very excited about it,' she added of the sequel

The studio hired Nia DaCosta (Candyman remake) to direct The Marvels, making her the first Black female director to take the helm of an MCU movie.

Larson had nothing but high praise for DaCosta, stating, 'She’s amazing. She’s so awesome and cool and clear.'

The thing that I loved about her too, she gave the best pitch,' Larson said of the director, though she wouldn't divulge story details.

Director: The studio hired Nia DaCosta (Candyman remake) to direct The Marvels, making her the first Black female director to take the helm of an MCU movie

Best pitch: The thing that I loved about her too, she gave the best pitch,' Larson said of the director, though she wouldn't divulge story details

'That’s the thing that I love about it, she just came in, was ready, had such an incredible take on this story and on this film. And I’m so happy that she’s guiding this. I’m thrilled,' Larson added.

The first Captain Marvel movie was released in March 2019, earning $426.8 million domestic and $1.128 billion worldwide.

A sequel was put into development just months after the original movie was released, with Larson returning as the title character and Teyonah Parris returning as Monica Rambeau and Samuel L. Jackson returning as Nick Fury.

Box office: The first Captain Marvel movie was released in March 2019, earning $426.8 million domestic and $1.128 billion worldwide

It was also confirmed that Iman Vellani will portray Kamala Khan, a.k.a. Ms. Marvel, who makes her MCU debut in the upcoming Ms. Marvel TV series on Disney Plus, slated to debut in late 2021.

Disney has set a November 11, 2022 release date for The Marvels, as part of Phase Four of the Marvel Cinematic Universe.

Larson is also attached to star in the new TV series Lessons in Chemistry, about a woman dreaming to be a scientist in the 1960s.

Release: Disney has set a November 11, 2022 release date for The Marvels, as part of Phase Four of the Marvel Cinematic Universe
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's in the middle of a messy divorce from Brandon Blackstock.

And on Wednesday, as the exes continue to battle it out over money, Kelly Clarkson officially asked a judge to legally restore her famous last name.

The singer and TV personality has filed legal documents requesting a default judgment that will make her officially divorced, according to The Blast, and wants to legally return to her maiden name.

Taking back her name: Kelly Clarkson has officially asked a judge to legally restore her famous last name amid her ongoing divorce battle with Brandon Blackstock over money, The Blast reported Wednesday

The Blast reports that Blackstock 'isn't putting up a fight in this department, and most of the time the judge signs off on these sorts of requests right away.'

Clarkson has previously asked the judge in the ongoing case to declare her legally single back in July.

She split from the music manager, with whom she shares daughter River Rose, seven, and son Remington Alexander, five, in 2020 after seven years of marriage.

Meanwhile, the former couple remain locked in a dispute over the division of assets and spousal and child support.

The latest: On Monday, it was reported that Clarkson will pay 70 percent of her children's school fees but won't cover the costs of music manager Blackstock's Montana Ranch (Pictured, 2018)

On Monday, it was reported that the American Idol alum, 39, has agreed to pay 70 percent of her children's private school fees.

However, she does not want to pay towards the running costs of Blackstock's ranch in Montana, a decision the judge has upheld and agreed to Kelly's terms, TMZ reported.

The judge has ordered that Blackstock carry the financial burden of his Montana ranch, that costs around $81,000 a month to run in expenses, per the report.

The decision was made as Blackstock is currently living at the ranch, and is using it as his primary residence. It was also revealed that Blackstock was earning around $10k a month, while Clarkson was bringing home around $1.5M a month.

Court documents obtained by TMZ confirm Kelly will continue to pay Brandon $150,000 per month whilst the divorce case continues in court as well as $45,000 in child support.

The Stronger singer - said to be worth $45M - has been required to pay her ex/former manager a whopping $150k a month in spousal support since April 1st 2021.

It's over: (L-R) Seth Blackstock, Savannah Blackstock, Remington Alexander Blackstock, Kelly Clarkson, River Blackstock and Brandon Blackstock in April last year

Legal documents obtained by The Blast last month revealed details into Clarkson's finances, showing that she personally earns $1,583,617 a month.

All-in-all, Kelly will end up cutting a $195,601 check for her ex every month.

The order additionally requires her to pay $1.25million to cover Brandon's attorney fees incurred from the divorce.

The documents also reveal that Blackstock has decided to change careers, leaving behind the entertainment business to pursue ranching.

The filings say Blackstock 'made a very deliberate choice to change his life and become a rancher full-time.'

According to the docs, he plans to earn income sponsoring rodeos and tending to his land and livestock.

Blackstock's side claims he is out of the music business, stating he 'spends minimal time regarding his representation of his remaining client, Blake Shelton.'

Earlier this month Clarkson asked for the courts to legally declare her single, over one year after she initially filed for divorce in June 2020.

To make matters worse, she had previously asked the court to terminate Blackstock's ability to seek spousal support, and for the couple's prenuptial agreement to be 'enforced' which could outline a custody arrangement.

The singer has sold a staggering 25 million albums and 45 million singles worldwide in her career, and currently has her own talk-show.

Paycheck: The documents also revealed details into Clarkson's finances, showing that she personally earns $1,583,617 a month

Clarkson first began dating Blackstock - a country music manager - back in 2011 and married him in 2013. Blackstock also shares his 13-year-old son Seth and 17-year-old daughter Savannah with his ex-wife Melissa Ashworth.

Meanwhile, the Piece By Piece hitmaker recently sparked speculation she and Blackstock could have been set to have a third child, as she confessed she had 'baby fever' after chatting to celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay.

During their chat, in which Gordon's 13-month-old son Oscar appeared, Clarkson said: 'Oh my gosh! Do not do this to me. I so want another child, and my husband is like, 'No! We have four!'

'You get baby fever when you see them and you're like, 'Oh, I miss the chubby little legs and the little face.'

Kids: Kelly is asking for joint legal and physical custody of her two children River, five, and Remington, four, in her divorce from Brandon after seven years of marriage.

The desire to have another baby came as a surprise to Clarkson's fans, as she has previously been vocal about her decision to stop having children.

She even had her tubes tied to prevent her from getting pregnant for a third time, whilst Blackstock has also undergone a medical procedure to ensure he is no longer capable of having kids.

In 2017, Kelly said: 'Oh God, those tubes are gone! That's blasphemy. We don't even speak of it. We're both fixed in our own ways, yet still we'll probably get pregnant again somehow.

'I always feel bad because I have friends who have a hard time getting pregnant and I'm just like guys, I have the worst pregnancies ever, it can't happen again!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The rise of a new Marvel legend is coming to the big screen next month with Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings.

Marvel Studios released a new 30-second TV spot for the superhero adventure (via Marvel YouTube) on Wednesday.

The new video showcases this iconic character's immense power, his family legacy while also revealing the proper way to say his name.

Legend: The rise of a new Marvel legend is coming to the big screen next month with Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings

Power: The new video showcases this iconic character's immense power, his family legacy while also revealing the proper way to say his name

The video begins with a shirtless Shang-Chi (Simu Liu) seen looking intense in various training scenarios, including one where a younger Shang-Chi is taking blows to the mid-section from several bo staffs.

'All my life, I tried to forget my past, my dad, and the ten rings,' Shang-Chi begins, as his father Wenwu (Hong Kong legend Tony Chiu-Wai Leung) has a different message.

'You were meant for greatness,' Wenwu begins, as we see shots of Shang-Chi and his family, as Wenwu continues, 'Don't hide who you really are.'

Shirtless Shang-Chi: The video begins with a shirtless Shang-Chi (Simu Liu) seen looking intense in various training scenarios, including one where a younger Shang-Chi is taking blows to the mid-section from several bo staffs

Rings: 'All my life, I tried to forget my past, my dad, and the ten rings,' Shang-Chi begins, as his father Wenwu (Hong Kong legend Tony Chiu-Wai Leung) has a different message

Father: 'You were meant for greatness,' Wenwu begins, as we see shots of Shang-Chi and his family, as Wenwu continues, 'Don't hide who you really are'

There are a number of action-packed shots of Shang-Chi in action, as the defiant son tells his father, 'I am nothing like you.'

Katy (Awkwafina) says, 'Hell yeah' as the mystical rings circle around Shang-Chi with another shot of the title character fighting a massive sword-arm-wielding villain that literally slices the bus in half.

The TV spot winds down with some flaming phoenix's flying off into the sky as Shang-Chi leads his red-clad army into battle with some enemy warriors.

Defiant: There are a number of action-packed shots of Shang-Chi in action, as the defiant son tells his father, 'I am nothing like you'

Katy: Katy (Awkwafina) says, 'Hell yeah' as the mystical rings circle around Shang-Chi with another shot of the title character fighting a massive sword-arm-wielding villain that literally slices the bus in half

The final shot finds Shang-Chi on an airplane sitting next to Katy, who someone can't pronounce his name right (Sh-ong Ch-ee, FYI).

The cast also includes Michelle Yeoh as Ying Nan plus returning Marvel Cinematic Universe characters Wong (Benedict Wong) and Abomination (Tim Roth).

Abomination was first featured in the second Marvel Cinematic Universe movie, 2008's The Incredible Hulk.

Pronounced: The final shot finds Shang-Chi on an airplane sitting next to Katy, who someone can't pronounce his name right (Sh-ong Ch-ee, FYI)

Wong was first featured in 2016's Doctor Strange, before returning in 2018's Avengers: Infinity War and 2019's Avengers: Endgame.

Destin Daniel Cretton (Short Term 12, Just Mercy) directs from a script he co-wrote with Dave Callaham (The Expendables) and Andrew Lanham (Just Mercy).

Disney also announced in May that their movies such as Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings and the upcoming Free Guy will have a 45-day theatrical window before arriving on the Disney Plus streaming service.

Return: The cast also includes Michelle Yeoh as Ying Nan plus returning Marvel Cinematic Universe characters Wong (Benedict Wong) and Abomination (Tim Roth)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bethenny Frankel looked every bit the beach babe on Wednesday afternoon as she soaked up the sun in The Hamptons.

The 50-year-old entrepreneur slipped her enviably fit figure into a patterned one-piece swimsuit while covering up with a zigzag beach blanket.

The Skinnygirl CEO trekked through the sand with two large totes in her hands, which were packed to the brim with seaside essentials.

Beach bound: Bethenny Frankel looked every bit the beach babe on Wednesday afternoon as she soaked up the sun in The Hamptons

Bethenny sported a glowing tan that was further highlighted by the bright white shade of her swimsuit.

Her legs looked exceptionally toned and the cut of her one piece showcased her ample cleavage.

Frankel's damp brunette hair flowed out from under a large woven sunhat.

The former Real Housewives star shielded her eyes with a pair of oversized black shades.

Wow: The 50-year-old entrepreneur slipped her enviably fit figure into a patterned one-piece swimsuit while covering up with a zigzag beach blanket

Got in handled: The Skinnygirl CEO trekked through the sand with two large totes in her hands, which were packed to the brim with seaside essentials

Bethenny's solo beach trip comes just one day after she took to Instagram to proudly share a fresh-faced underwear selfie in honor of 'National Shapewear Day.'

Posing before her bedroom mirror in a black sports bra and red briefs, she wrote: 'This is me at 50.'

The waistband of her underwear was branded Skinnygirl, which is Frankel‘s own company.

This is her: Bethenny Frankel went filter-free in a fresh-faced underwear selfie to mark 'National Shapewear Day on Tuesday

'If I were a "filterer" I would have gotten rid of my lines and my dark circles, but this is me at 50,' the former Real Housewife of New York captioned the snap, adding the hashtags #zeroglam and #zerofilter.

'Why do I mention this all the time? Because I think it’s important for young women to know that being flawed is truthful and real, and that filtering yourself into someone fictitious is actually damaging to girls’ and women’s self esteem,' she continued. 'It’s courageous and beautiful to be real at any age.

'I realize that fake and filtered sells, but I’m happy over here with my followers who appreciate the difference.❤️' BF concluded, adding '#NationalShapewearDay @skinnygirlbrand shapewear'

Someone who undoubtedly appreciates Bethenny's honest, unfiltered self is her fiance Paul Bernon, who recently rang in his 44th birthday.

Partner: Someone who undoubtedly appreciates Bethenny's honest, unfiltered self is her fiance Paul Bernon, who recently rang in his 44th birthday; the couple pictured in July

Tribute: To pay homage to her lover's special day, Frankel uploaded several loved-up shots of the pair spending time together at various locations to her Instagram

To pay homage to her lover's special day, Frankel uploaded several loved-up shots of the pair spending time together at various locations to her Instagram.

The couple have been romantically linked since 2018, following Bethenny's split from husband Jason Hoppy.

Frankel and Hoppy separated in 2012 after two years of marriage, and the reality television figure filed for a divorce the following year. Their divorce was finalized in January.

They shared 11-year-old daughter Bryn.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Legendary country crooner Dolly Parton 'cannot be more excited' to co-author her first novel Run, Rose, Run with James Patterson on March 7 as well as release an accompanying 12-track album.

'I also have a new CD to go along with the book, based on its characters and situations,' the 74-year-old national treasure - who boasts 17.1M social media followers - announced Wednesday.

'I hope you enjoy the book and the songs as much as we've enjoyed putting it together.'

Legendary country crooner Dolly Parton 'cannot be more excited' to co-author her first novel Run, Rose, Run with James Patterson (R) on March 7 as well as release an accompanying 12-track album

The 74-year-old national treasure announced Wednesday: 'I also have a new CD to go along with the book, based on its characters and situations. I hope you enjoy the book and the songs as much as we've enjoyed putting it together'

Dolly's $30, 448-page thriller centers on 'a young singer/songwriter on the rise and on the run, and determined to do whatever it takes to survive.'

Rose comes to Nashville 'to claim her destiny' and flee the hard life, brutal secret, and darkness that 'might find and destroy her.'

Parton first teased the project while celebrating #BookLoversDay on Monday, writing, 'I dream of writing my own novel one day' with a winking emoji.

Run, Rose, Run marks the nine-time Grammy winner's eighth book to be published and her 48th solo studio album to be released.

Dolly's $30, 448-page thriller centers on 'a young singer/songwriter on the rise and on the run, and determined to do whatever it takes to survive' and claim her destiny in Nashville

Hint hint: Parton first teased the project while celebrating #BookLoversDay on Monday, writing, 'I dream of writing my own novel one day' with a winking emoji

'It's been an honor - and a hell of a lot of fun - to work with the inimitable Dolly Parton, whom I've long admired for her music, her storytelling, and her enormous generosity,' Patterson, said in a statement to People.

'The mind-blowing thing about this project is that reading the novel is enhanced by listening to the album and vice versa. It's a really unique experience that I know readers (and listeners) will love.'

Dolly's news came after Forbes revealed she's worth an estimated $350M thanks to her incredible career and theme parks.

Parton previously confirmed she'll reunite with her 9 to 5 castmates Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin to guest star in the seventh (and final) season of Netflix's Grace & Frankie.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Geno Doak, the longtime beau of reality star Mama June Shannon, has been sentenced to 16 months in prison in connection with a drug conviction stemming from a 2019 incident in Alabama.

Doak entered custody July 29 and has a release date of November 28, 2022, according to documents viewed by The Sun. He previously told the outlet he was 'very concerned' with the prospects of a stint in prison.

Doak entered into a plea deal with prosecutors and is serving his sentence at Macon Community Corrections, TMZ reported on Wednesday. He is also sentenced to two years of probation and a substance abuse program as part of the plea.

Hard times: Geno Doak, 45, the longtime beau of reality star Mama June Shannon, has been sentenced to 16 months in prison in connection with a drug conviction stemming from a 2019 incident in Alabama

Doak, 45, and Shannon, 42, were arrested March 15, 2019 arrest outside of a gas station in Alabama in connection with crack cocaine possession, after police were called to the scene for a domestic dispute.

Doak was also charged with third-degree domestic violence and harassment, as well as drug paraphernalia possession, in the incident. Authorities said they recovered from their vehicle items including needles, a green pill and a glass pipe with white residue.

In the case, the Mama June: From Not to Hot star received a sentence of 100 hours of community service in connection with the incident.

The struggles for Shannon prompted numerous family problems, as her daughter Lauryn Shannon, 21, assumed custody of Alana, 15, in the wake of the 2019 arrest.

Doak said he was 'very concerned' with the prospects of a stint in prison

Details: Doak and Shannon, 42, pictured on her reality show, were arrested March 15, 2019 arrest outside of a gas station in Alabama in connection with crack cocaine possession

The McIntyre, Georgia native earlier this summer had a reunion with daughters Anna, 26, Jessica, 24, Lauryn and Alana during a baby shower for Lauryn; Anna told The Sun that Doak was not present at the gathering.

In an April edition of her new WE tv show Mama June: Road to Redemption, Mama June spoke with Alana about how she had 'missed out on a lot' amid the years of turbulence.

'I want to be here for y'all and I want to be the best mom I can be,' she said on the show, which documented ongoings as she and Doak both checked into a rehab facility.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She was spotted making out with Austin Butler in London over the weekend.

And Lily-Rose Depp was spotted out for the first time since her passionate PDA session on Wednesday.

The actress, 22, kept it casual as she arrived at JFK Airport in New York, rocking a comfortable grey sweatshirt and black leggings.

Love is in the air! Lily-Rose Depp was spotted arriving at JFK Airport in New York City on Wednesday, days after her passionate make-out session with Austin Butler

Lily-Rose put comfort first for her travels, keeping her feet cozy insie a pair of white sneakers.

She styled her blonde tresses into braided pigtails, tied together with colorful hair ties.

Slowing the spread of COVID-19, The King actress wore a purple face mask over her complexion.

She further kept a low-profile with a trendy pair of black and red shades.

Taking precautions: Slowing the spread of COVID-19, the daughter of Johnny Depp wore a purple face mask over her complexion

The outing comes just days after Lily-Rose was spotted locking lips with actor Austin Butler in London.

The actors put on a steamy display as they wrapped their arms around each other after enjoying a dinner date over the weekend.

Lily-Rose, who is the daughter of Johnny Depp and Vanessa Paradis, was seen going for an evening stroll with Switched at Birth star Austin, 29, following their meal.

Traveling lightly: The daughter of Johnny Depp rolled a single suitcase through the transport hub

Austin was previously in a long-term relationship with actress Vanessa Hudgens from 2011 to 2019, while Lily-Rose recently dated actor Timothée Chalamet.

Lily-Rose was thought to have rekindled her romance with Timothée earlier this year when they stepped out together in New York during the summer.

Lily-Rose and Timothée famously made headlines when they were photographed kissing on a yacht in September 2019.

In April 2020, the duo abruptly called off their relationship, though rumours circulated in recent months that they had reconciled.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dallas-based rapper Yella Beezy is behind bars in Texas after being arrested on drugs and weapons charges Wednesday.

The 29-year-old That's On Me hitmaker was taken into custody for felony possession of drugs and for unlawfully having a weapon, a misdemeanor, according to TMZ.

The official police report states the rapper - real name Markies Deandre Conway - had over 400 grams of a controlled substance as well as four handguns and a rifle, TMZ said.

Rapper Yella Beezy was behind bars Wednesday after being arrested in his home city of Dallas for felony drugs possession and unlawfully having a weapon, a misdemeanor, TMZ reported

On Tuesday night, Yella Beezy had posted video to his Instagram which appeared to show police officers searching his SUV which was parked on the side of a road.

It's the second time in six months that he has been arrested.

In February, Yella Beezy was pulled over by law enforcement in Dallas for allegedly blowing a stop sign in his armor-plated bulletproof truck.

Following a search of his vehicle, he was arrested for unlawful possession of a weapon.

Yella Beezy claimed the incident was a set up and alleged he was the victim of police harassment.

On Tuesday night, the 29-year-old had posted video to his Instagram which appeared to show police officers searching his SUV which was parked on the side of a road

It's the second time in six months that Yella Beezy has been arrested. In February, he was taken into custody in Dallas for unlawful possession of a weapon (mug shot from February)

The high-school dropout found fame in 2017 with his hit single That's On Me.

He followed it up with What I Did (featuring Kevin Gates), Up One (featuring Lil Baby) and a remixed version of That's On Me (featuring 2 Chainz, T.I., and Boosie Badazz), all from his 2018 mixtape Ain't No Goin Bacc.

He had two more hit singles in 2019, Bacc At It Again (featuring Quavo and Gucci Mane) and Restroom Occupied (featuring Chris Brown), both from his 2019 mixtape Baccend Beezy.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sophia Bush shared another troubling story about shamed One Tree Hill creator Mark Schwahn as she claimed that he had hung photos of the female cast members in their underwear in his office.

The 39-year-old actress appeared on Michael Rosenbaum's Inside Of You podcast on Tuesday as she shared a horrifying allegation regarding the 55-year-old former screenwriter, director, and producer.

Back in 2017, Schwahn was fired as showrunner from E! drama The Royals following allegations of sexual misconduct from multiple women.

Revealing: Sophia Bush (seen in January 2020) shared another troubling story about shamed One Tree Hill creator Mark Schwahn

The 39-year-old actress claimed that the 55-year-old former screenwriter, director, and producer had hung photos of the female cast members in their underwear in his office, as they are seen together in January 2011

At the time 43 women came out against Schwahn including Sophia's castmate and friend Hilarie Burton. She alleged he forcibly kissed her twice during her time working with him on One Tree Hill.

Eighteen women from that show, as well as 25 women from The Royals, starring Elizabeth Hurley, accused Schwahn of varying degrees of sexual misconduct.

Podcast host and Rosenbaum, 49, said that the showrunner 'was basically a monster' during the series' nine seasons which Bush agreed with.

Enlightening: The actress appeared on Michael Rosenbaum's Inside Of You podcast on Tuesday

'We found out from a writer that he kept a board of the fitting photos of each girl in underwear up in his office,' Bush (seen in March 2020) claimed

She explained: '18 women on our show signed a collective letter. That was 18 people willing to be public about their experiences of the cast and on the crew, and 25 women on the cast and crew of his subsequent show signed a letter in response about his behavior.'

The contents of the letter consisted of inappropriate behavior Schwahn was accused of on set of One Tree Hill before those working on The Royals made similar claims. To this day Schwahn has still not made a statement regarding those allegations.

Bush explained: 'He was very open. I think the worst of what he did was hidden. But, yeah, he was not embarrassed to be handsy, to make inappropriate commentary, to pull people into side rooms for conversations.'

Trouble: Back in 2017, Schwahn was fired as showrunner from E! drama The Royals following allegations of sexual misconduct from multiple women

Sad: At the time 43 women came out against Schwahn including Sophia's castmate and friend Hilarie Burton. She alleged he forcibly kissed her twice during her time working with him on One Tree Hill (pictured 2019)

Troubling: Eighteen women from that show, as well as 25 women from The Royals accused Schwahn of varying degrees of sexual misconduct (Bush and Burton are pictured with co-stars Bethany Joy Lenz, Chad, Sophia Bush, and James Lafferty)

She then gave her troubling account of claims a writer made regarding photos of the cast in their underwear allegedly put up on display in Schwahn's office.

Bush said: 'It's funny when you think about the things men write. We would have these scenes written for us, being with our intimate partners on the show, scenes written where we'd be in our underwear, whatever.

'We found out from a writer that he kept a board of the fitting photos of each girl in underwear up in his office. Pictures of us that were taken by the wardrobe supervisor, who was a woman, of us in different versions of underwear and/or lingerie that then had to be approved, picked and one would wind up in the show.

'He just would keep a board of all these photos. We were like, "Wow, that's super violating."'

Keeping mum: The contents of the letter consisted of inappropriate behavior Schwahn (seen in March 2015) was accused of on set of One Tree Hill before those working on The Royals made similar claims. To this day Schwahn has still not made a statement regarding those allegations

Rosenbaum asked if Bush would be able to keep her 'composure' if she was in the same room as the shamed creator.

The actress replied: 'I could do a conversation like this, but even as you ask me to imagine it, the sensation of white, hot rage in my chest is not small.

'Because not only was it the really overt just abuse and manipulation that he put so many women through, it was also the more insidious s***.'

One Tree Hill aired on The CW (previously The WB) throughout all nine seasons of the show from 2003 to 2012.

Back in the day: One Tree Hill aired on The CW (previously The WB) throughout all nine seasons of the show from 2003 to 2012

Bush along with Burton and fellow castmate Bethany Joy Lenz have recently joined forces for their own podcast, titled Drama Queens, as they take a deep dive on the show one episode at the time.

Of the podcast, Bush told Rosenbaum that she is happy to be 'healing old wounds' each week. She said: 'If it irks [Schwahn] that we have the power. I'm thrilled.'

Episodes of the Drama Queens podcast are uploaded each Monday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chloe Bennet has departed from the upcoming Powerpuff Girls pilot due to a scheduling conflict.

The actress, 29, who plays Blossom in the live-action adaptation of the animated series, made the decision to leave after her schedule clashed with a reshoot of the show, according to Variety.

Powerpuff was in contention to air during the fall, but is now set to be redeveloped and reshot after CW chairman and CEO Mark Pedowitz referred to the first pilot 'a miss,' adds the site.

Bye-bye Powerpuff Girls: Chloe Bennet has departed from the upcoming Powerpuff Girls pilot due to a scheduling conflict (pictured 2019)

While Warner Brothers wanted to extend Chloe's option as the show was being reworked, she still had to drop out due to her schedule.

Now the search for a new Blossom will take place this fall.

The other two Powerpuff Girls, Dove Cameron and Yana Perrault, are still attached to their roles of Bubbles and Buttercup.

The live-action series Powerpuff is set to follow the characters who have grown into women in their 20s and who are bitter about spending their childhoods fighting crime.

Let's do this: The live-action series Powerpuff will follow the characters who have grown into women in their 20s who are bitter about spending their childhoods fighting crime

It's a hit! The Powerpuff Girls originally aired on Cartoon Network from 1998 to 2005

The Powerpuff Girls originally aired on Cartoon Network from 1998 to 2005.

The animated series centered on three kindergarten-aged girls with genetically-engineered superpowers.

The franchise has expanded into several series and one film and includes a lucrative toy line.

There's no business like showbusiness! Chloe had a starring role as Sky/Daisy Johnson aka Quake on the Marvel Television series

Dove and Chloe previously worked together in 2018 during season five of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. on ABC.

Chloe had a starring role as Sky/Daisy Johnson aka Quake on the Marvel Television series, while Dove had a recurring role as Ruby Hale for six episodes.

Last year Chloe revealed she tested positive for COVID-19 after waking up on Christmas morning with a 'a high fever, and unable to breath.'

'I got tested, and I'm positive for COVID-19 … it's been a rough week to say the least. Multiple members of my family are also infected, we've all been battling it out together. We're still not in the clear, but as of now we're doing…okay,' she revealed on her Instagram Stories on New Year's Eve.

She continued: 'I'm sharing this because I want to iterate to anyone who still may not be taking covid seriously, please please please f**king do. Covid sucks. It just really sucks. I pride myself on staying healthy, I always wore a mask, social distanced, and took all the necessary precautions and I still got VERY sick.'

Despite enduring severe symptoms and exhaustion, she reminded her more than 2.6 million followers that she is 'one of the lucky ones.'

'I'm young, healthy, and diligent about my health and this virus still knocked me the f**ck down and continues to do so. Even trying to just write this out is proving to be exhausting,' she emphasized.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Camila Cabello took her and her boyfriend Shawn Mendes' dog, Tarzan, for a walk while staying in her beau's hometown.

The singer, 24, strolled the Toronto city streets in a navy hoodie, gray sweats and an orange handbag while she held a coffee.

The Stitches singer appeared to be alone as she went for the afternoon walk.

Enjoying a morning walk: Camila Cabello took her and her boyfriend Shawn Mendes' dog, Tarzan, for a stroll while staying in her beau's hometown.

The Havana singer seems to be taking some much needed time off.

She released the first single from her upcoming album Familia in July, and she has spent time recently promoting Cinderella, a modern take on the Charles Perrault fairy tale of the same name.

Her version of the famous story will focus on the title character working to become a businesswoman. The most memorable moment of the trailer, released earlier this month, showed her character turn down the prince's proposal.

The movie will also feature Frozen star Idina Menzel as Vivian, the evil stepmother, and Billy Porter as a genderless fairy godparent.

Can't stroll much longer: The singer's album will come out soon and a tour will almost certainly follow, though no dates have been announced yet

Though her boyfriend does not appear in the pictures, fans have no reason to fear a split between the two megastars.

The couple was seen earlier this week walking Tarzan after sitting down for lunch together, and Cabello posted a birthday tribute for Mendes as well.

In the caption of a shirtless photo of her 'amor', the actress wrote, 'Thankful for your existence every day'.

For his part, the Ruin singer has also stayed busy. He released an album last year and has a tour set to begin in 2022.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is awaiting the arrival of baby number two.

And Ashley Graham put her growing midsection on display as she worked a flirty bright orange mini dress on Wednesday.

The model, 33, couldn't have looked any happier striking an array of poses upon a beachfront balcony.

Working it! Ashley Graham put her growing midsection on display as she rocked a flirty bright orange mini dress on Wednesday

The mom-to-be was a vision of glamour with her brunette tresses styled into sleek, loose waves with a glamorous side part.

She worked an array of gold jewelry, including a chain necklace, and a pair of strappy neon yellow heels which injected another playful touch to the look.

In the images, Ashley tenderly cradled her bump while flashing a silly, shocked expression for the camera.

She appeared more contemplative in a second shot capturing her gazing towards the ocean blue with her hand gently resting at the top of her belly.

Hey mama! Graham, who shares son Isaac with husband Justin Ervin, gazed contemplatively towards the ocean blue as she rested one hand on her burgeoning bump

Ray of sunshine! And a third snap captured the model looking euphoric as she posed on the balcony with her hands on either side of the railing

And a third snap captured the model looking euphoric as she posed on the balcony with her hands on either side of the railing.

Ashley announced she was expecting her second child with husband Justin Ervin a little over a year after giving birth to their son Isaac last year.

The model recently admitted her control has 'gone out the window' during her pregnancy.

Speaking with People, Ashley said she has stopped trying to 'control' her body because she knows she will 'never feel the same' as she did before she was pregnant.

Bun in the oven! Graham announced she was expecting her second child with husband Justin Ervin a little over a year after giving birth to their son Isaac last year

She said: 'I think being in control when you're pregnant, it just gets thrown out the window.

'And I learned that the hard way when I tried to control everything when I was pregnant with Isaac and I told myself that I was going to bounce right back because I was breastfeeding and everybody told me, "Oh, if you breastfeed you're going to lose all the weight." And I had a few honest women tell me you will never feel the same. So they were just blunt with me and sure enough, I haven't felt the same.

'And then boom. I was like, "Well, I just got pregnant again so maybe I'll never feel the same and I don't even know what I felt like before I was pregnant with Isaac anyways."'

Forever and ever: Graham tied the knot with her husband Justin in 2010

Ashley also heaped praise on the 'mommy community' that she joined when she was pregnant with her first child, as she now has a place to go to for advice without being shamed.

'I think that the best thing I did was find a mommy community and when I'm pregnant, I find other pregnant people to just call and ask [questions] because this pregnancy is so different from the last and different symptoms, different feelings.

'And then when the kid gets here, then you have a whole other slew of questions because they don't come with a manual, so [I'm] all about the community. And I think that if I didn't have that, I would be so lost.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@August 11 marked the seventh anniversary of the shocking death of beloved comedian and respected actor Robin Williams, who was 63.

Leading the tributes and remembrances to the legendary star was his oldest son Zak Williams, who took to Twitter on Wednesday to pay tribute to his father.

He praised the Oscar winner for his efforts to 'bring laughter and to help others.'

Never forget: Zak Williams, 38, the oldest son of Robin Williams, paid tribute to his late father on Wednesday for the seventh anniversary of his death; seen together in 2012 in NYC

'Dad, seven years ago today you passed on. The joy and inspiration you brought to the world carries on in your legacy and in your family, friends, and fans you so loved,' he wrote.

'You lived to bring laughter and to help others. I will be celebrating your memory today. Love you forever.'

He shared a photo of Williams looking youthful and sporting a thick beard.

Zak, 38, most recently spoke about his father in July on what would have been his 70th birthday.

During an appearance on The Genius Life podcast with Max Lugavere, he spoke about his father's 'frustration' after he was misdiagnosed with Parkinson's disease.

It would only be revealed after his death by suicide that he had been suffering from Lewy body dementia, which is the second most common type of progressive dementia after Alzheimer's.

Touching: The joy and inspiration you brought to the world carries on in your legacy and in your family, friends, and fans you so loved,' he wrote. 'You lived to bring laughter and to help others. I will be celebrating your memory today. Love you forever'

Tough time: Last month, Zak shared that his father dealt with incredible 'frustration' after he was misdiagnosed with Parkinson's disease while suffering from Lewy body dementia; seen in character from Mork & Mindy in 1978

'What I saw was frustration,' Zak shared. 'What he was going through didn't match one to one [with what] many Parkinson's patients experience. So, I think that was hard for him.'

He continued: 'There was a focus issue that frustrated him, there were issues associated with how he felt and also from a neurological perspective he didn't feel great. He was very uncomfortable,' he added.

The mental health advocate also wondered if the drugs his father took to combat the wrong condition might have sped up his deterioration.

'Those drugs are no joke. They're also really hard on the mind and the body,' he explained.

'I couldn't help but feel beyond empathy. I couldn't help but feel frustrated for him,' Zak continued. 'It can be really isolating even when you're with family and loved ones.'

Growing family: Zak, who previously said he abused alcohol after his father's death, shared the joyous news that he'd welcomed a second child, a daughter named Zola, in June

Zak had previously opened up about how he struggled with alcohol abuse in the immediate aftermath of his father's death.

He got some happier news in June, though, when he and his wife Olivia June announced the birth of their daughter Zola.

The couple, who married in October of 2020, also share a two-year-old son named McLaurin 'Mickey' Clement.

Zak is Robin's only child with his first wife Valerie Velardi, but the entertainer also shared daughter Zelda, 32, and son Cody, 29, with his second wife Marsha Garces.

Difficult day: Zelda Williams, 32, Robin's daughter from his second marriage to Marsha Garces, had a tougher time on the anniversary after a fan brought up her father's suicide; Zelda and Robin seen in 2009

Not their business: She asked for others to 'let people who've lost loved ones mourn and verbalize their loss how they feel comfortable'

Moving on: Last month, she thank her followers for their tributes to her father for what would have been his 70th birthday. 'It's gotten a little less strange over the years'

Zelda had a harder time on the anniversary of her father's death after she quoted a tweet from a user calling out Zak for not mentioning that their father had died by suicide.

'How about we let people who’ve lost loved ones mourn and verbalize their loss how they feel comfortable?' she wrote. 'He’s my brother, and his son, and a father in his own right. We’re people too, not just advocates. Please don’t forget that on this often dehumanizing app. Have compassion.'

Minutes later she sent out another message in sympathy with those who were 'navigating loss.'

'Sending love out there today to all the folks navigating loss. New, old, the connective tissue of that deeply human pain can be hard to bear, but I find it easier sometimes knowing how many others have felt the same sting. We’re not alone,' she tweeted.

She also marked her father's birthday weeks earlier.

'Thanks to everyone who sent thoughtful things on Poppo’s bday,' she tweeted. 'Celebrated him in my own way yesterday, grateful for the space to do so. It’s gotten a little less strange over the years, and I’ve gotten a bit less scared of being me in the face of it. All things in time I guess…'

Inspired: Among the fans who celebrated Williams' life on the seventh anniversary of his death was Josh Gad, who shared an illustration of the many iconic characters he had played throughout this career; seen in 1998

Words of wisdom: The image include a quotation attributed to the actor: 'You're only given a little spark of madness. You mustn't lose it'

Among the fans who celebrated Williams' life on the seventh anniversary of his death was Josh Gad, who shared an illustration of the many iconic characters he had played throughout this career.

'still miss #RobinWilliams more than ever. Love this pic found on Twitter. Beautiful tribute. What a legacy.'

The image include a quotation attributed to the actor: 'You're only given a little spark of madness. You mustn't lose it.'

The actor Jon Donahue also paid tribute to the legendary comedian with a somber black-and-white photo.

'It's been seven years since we lost the great #RobinWilliams. It's still crazy to think we live in a world without his genius.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A Broadway revival of Funny Girl is aiming to open next year with Beanie Feldstein, 28, in the starring role.

Producers announced Wednesday that Feldstein, the Booksmart and Lady Bird actor, will star as Ziegfeld Follies comedian Fanny Brice in spring 2022 at a Broadway theater to be announced.

The role was made famous by Barbra Streisand, who originated the part on Broadway and then went on to star in the film version, which earned her an Academy Award.

An impressive gig: A Broadway revival of Funny Girl is aiming to open next year with Beanie Feldstein in the starring role originated by Barbra Streisand. Seen in 2020

She did it well: The role was made famous by Barbra Streisand, who originated the part on Broadway and then went on to star in the film version, which earned her an Academy Award

Funny Girl has a score by Jule Styne and Bob Merrill, with a book by Isobel Lennart.

This will be the first Broadway revival of the 1964 musical.

This will not be the first time Feldstein - whose brother is actor Jonah Hill - has tackled the part.

'The first time I played Fanny Brice was at my third birthday party, in a head-to-toe leopard print outfit my mom made for me,' she said.

The movie: The icon seen in the 1968 film Funny Girl which she won raves for

The plot: Fanny Brice ( Streisand) starts out as a bit player on the New York City vaudeville stage, but works her way up to stardom on Broadway

She has the goods: Not only can Babs sing she is also a good actress, a double threat

'So, it's safe to say that stepping into this iconic role, on Broadway and not in my family´s backyard, is truly my lifelong dream come true,' she said in a statement.

Rumors of a Funny Girl revival have swirled for years, with performers like Idina Menzel and Lady Gaga speculated to be connected to the show.

Songs include People and Don't Rain on My Parade. Feldstein made her Broadway debut in 2017 in the Bette Midler-led revival of Hello, Dolly!

The new production of Funny Girl will be directed by Tony Award winner Michael Mayer, who also helmed 'Hedwig and the Angry Inch' and 'Spring Awakening.' It will have a revised book by Tony Award-winner Harvey Fierstein.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaley Cuoco was spotted hard at work this Wednesday filming her upcoming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York.

The 35-year-old Big Bang Theory star was decked out in a stylish costume that featured a canary yellow gingham gown.

The Emmy favorite could be seen enjoying her downtime in between takes as well, sharing a laugh with some of the crew members.

Making it happen: Kaley Cuoco was spotted hard at work this Wednesday filming her upcoming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York

Kaley was modeling a pair of gold sunglasses that complemented not only her dress but also her signature blonde hair.

At one point she was glimpsed strolling down the sidewalk chatting on the phone and holding her sides in one hand.

During part of the shoot day a crew member could be spotted on hand holding a parasol over her head to protect her from the sweltering rays.

Meet Cute stars Kaley opposite Saturday Night Live cast member Pete Davidson who has been spotted with her on set recently.

Looking fab: The 35-year-old Big Bang Theory star was decked out in a stylish costume that included a canary yellow gingham gown

Chitchat: She could be seen enjoying her downtime in between takes as well, sharing a laugh with some of the crew members

The movie, which according to Deadline has a premise involving time travel, is being directed by Alex Lehmann from a script by Noga Pnueli.

Alex's previous directorial efforts include the Netflix dramedy Paddleton that he co-wrote with Mark Duplass who also stars in it opposite Ray Romano.

Kaley has lately scored nominations at the Screen Actors Guild Awards and Golden Globes for her new HBO Max series The Flight Attendant.

The show dropped on the streaming service last November and the following month was picked up for a second season.

The look: Kaley was modeling a pair of gold sunglasses that complemented not only her dress but also her signature blonde hair

She also voices the title character on the adult cartoon Harley Quinn amid a cast that includes Lake Bell, Ron Funches and Tony Hale.

The Harley Quinn show hit the headlines this summer when its co-creator told Variety that DC allegedly refused to let the show include a scene where Batman performs oral sex on Catwoman because 'Heroes don't do that.'

As far as her personal life is concerned Kaley is married to the dashing equestrian Karl Cook whom she tied the knot with on a horse ranch over the summer of 2018.



Off she goes: At one point she was glimpsed strolling down the sidewalk chatting on the phone and holding her sides in one hand
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lucy Hale was seen making a beverage run in a tight, sage-colored Jeanne the Label outfit in Los Angeles Wednesday.

The Pretty Little Liars actress paired the look with matching Adidas sneakers to run the errand. The 32-year-old wore gold-rimmed Ray Ban sunglasses and her short brunette hair was pulled back.

This comes after she flashed her bare legs while cuddling up to her 'kids' - her two dogs - while on her chaise lounge chair at home. 'Mother of two,' she said.

Scroll down for video

Drink up: Lucy Hale, 32, was seen in Los Angeles Wednesday making a beverage run in a tight, sage-colored Jeanne the Label 'fit

Lucy rocked two pairs of tiny hoops, two necklaces, and rings. A white face mask could be seen hanging on her forearm.

The 'mama to Elvis and Ethel,' as noted in her Instagram bio, shared a sweet boomerang image to the social media site today.

The star was in full glam as she stretched out bare legged on a black, leather lounge chair with her two white dogs.

Quick errand: She wore gold-rimmed sunglasses and her short brunette hair was pulled back

Looking relaxed and luxurious in what appeared to be her living room, the beauty wore a black bodysuit with sheer long sleeves. She also had on black stiletto heels.

'Mother of two,' she captioned the visual.

The Katy Keene star was actively using the Instagram stories feature today too.

In one stories photo she made quite the fashion statement as she posed in head-to-toe black lace. The pants were belted and she completed the look with pointed-toe black heels.

Oh mama! This comes after she flashed her bare legs while cuddling up to her 'kids' - her two dogs - while on her chaise lounge chair at home. 'Mother of two,' she said

A jacket was draped over her shoulders as she displayed some cleavage and stared through a netted headpiece.

Black lace seems to be the TV star's thing these days — she was also seen wearing lacy black underwear during a photoshoot in Malibu on Monday.

Overall, Lucy has remained busy with her acting career as of late.

Her survival thriller Borrego had its first screening during Cannes Film Festival last month.

Next for Hale: Her survival thriller Borrego had its first screening during Cannes Film Festival last month

She will also be back on small screens in the upcoming drama series Ragdoll, which is based on the book of the same name and follows detectives attempting to solve the case of the Ragdoll Killer.

The actress recently wrapped filming on the series, and took to her Instagram account to share several behind-the-scenes photos.

'Feeling so grateful for a wrap on Ragdoll and for all the beautiful friends & memories I made. Cannot wait for you all to see this coming to your (TV emoji)'s soon ! Thank you to so many people but especially, Thalissa, the genius Freddy Syborn, everyone at Sid Gentle… too many to name but wow we did it. Congrats everyone!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Madonna wished her son Rocco Ritche a happy 21st birthday on her Instagram account on Wednesday.

The Like A Prayer singer, 62, who rarely posts photos of her son, celebrated the milestone occasion with a slideshow capturing Rocco from adolescence to young adulthood.

'Happy Birthday Rocco!!' Madonna gushed in the caption, adding an array of emojis. 'We Have Been on many Trips together around the World (globe emojis). But the Greatest journey i have taken with you is the one inside my ♥️. Love you to the moon and back. Forever and Always.'

'Love you to the moon and back': Madonna wished her son Rocco a happy 21st birthday on her Instagram account on Wednesday

The first photo of the series captured the Beautiful Stranger songstress holding her young son in her arms.

In another snap, a pink-haired Madonna sat behind her son on an ATV as they explored a rugged terrain.

One photo captured Madonna playfully poking her head out from behind her son as he stood wearing a lavender jacket.

Solo shots of Rocco captured the young man sitting contemplatively by a tent and laying on the floor after a skating session.

Let's get this show on the road! In another snap, a pink-haired Madonna sat behind her son on an ATV as they explored a rugged terrain

Happy birthday! The hit-maker shared a snap of her son carrying an array of bags while standing before a cart full of boxes

Take a hike: Rocco lay on the ground as his mother hovered nearby

Rocco is Madonna's eldest son. She is also mum to Lourdes, 24, with Carlos Leon, and adoptive kids, David Banda, 15, Mercy, 15, and twins Estere and Stella, eight.

While most of her children frequently make appearances on her Instagram, Lourdes is seen less often, while Rocco is virtually never seen, as he spends most of his time in his father's native England.

Madonna shares Rocco with her ex-husband Guy Ritchie, whom she was married to from 2000 to 2008.

Contemplative: Rocco appeared deep in thought as he enjoyed a beverage by a tent

Having some fun: The songstress flashed a silly smile as she poked her head out from behind her son

'Forever and always': The Like A Prayer singer, 62, who rarely posts photos of her son, celebrated the milestone occasion with a slideshow capturing her son from adolescence to young adulthood

Back in 2016, Guy settled a bitter nine month custody battle he had been entrenched in with Madonna over where their son should live.

The Sherlock Holmes director reached a settlement with the pop star hours before they were due in court in New York.

Speaking outside the court Guy's lawyer, Peter Bronstein, said that the then-16-year-old-year-old would continue to live with his father in London.

Despite the well-publicised battle, things have clearly settled as he enjoyed time with both his mum and siblings.

Strike a pose: Ritchie looked like a natural model in this black-and-white snap

Looking sharp! Rocco was seen looking smart wearing a tie and black trousers

Wheel-y fun! Rocco lay on the ground as his skateboard sat nearby, overturned
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lynne Spears is defending herself after the Free Britney contingent went after her and daughter Jamie-Lynne on social media over Britney Spears' conservatorship.

Britney's mom shared an innocuous new social media post of a large spiderweb she saw outside her home on Wednesday and haters jumped in the comments with cruel jabs at Lynne and Jamie-Lynne.

'Stop,' Lynne snapped back at several of the commenters before defending herself further against accusations she doesn't do enough to advocate for the Princess of Pop.

Speaking out: Lynne Spears is defending herself after the Free Britney contingent went after her and daughter Jamie-Lynne on social media over Britney Spears' conservatorship (Jamie-Lynne and Lynne seen in 2006)

'Wow! Look at the size of this spider web!!' penned Lynne sharing an image of the wed.

In the comments, people started immediately trolling her on behalf of Britney: 'Awww cute! Jamie Lynn decorated her new place. Sorry, couldn't help it.' Lynne jumped in simply with: 'Stop.'

She repeated again, 'STOP,' when someone else commented #jailjamielynn.

Later, when Lynne was questioned over not advocating more for Britney as she fights for control over her conservatorship, the mother of three clapped back.

#FreeBritney: Britney's mom shared an innocuous new social media post of a large spiderweb she saw outside her home on Wednesday and haters jumped in the comments with cruel jabs at Lynne and Jamie-Lynne

'I do [speak up] by using my lawyer and the legal system since day one and NOT using social media or the press! Sorry you are so uninformed! Have a great day and try positivity!' she wrote.

The exchange came after Britney Spears' request to move her hearing up to a sooner date in an effort to remove father Jamie as conservator was denied.

DailyMail.com confirmed that Judge Penny also denied the 39-year-old singer's request to immediately suspend Jamie, 68, as her conservator.

The latest development in Spears' ongoing conservatorship battle means the Toxic singer will now have to wait at least a month to potentially be free of her father.

In the comments, people started immediately trolling her on behalf of Britney: 'Awww cute! Jamie Lynn decorated her new place. Sorry, couldn't help it.' Lynne jumped in simply with: 'Stop.'

The conservatorship will remain in place until the September 29th hearing, along with the eleven other conservatorship matters that are on the Court's calendar that date.

Meanwhile, Britney continues to reference the conservatorship battle on her Instagram page, and said Monday that she will be 'posting less' from now on after it had been suggested she should be more 'cautious' about what she shares.

Britney appeared to respond to comments made by Backstreet Boys' member Brian Littrell who said the singer should be more 'cautious' about what she posts.

'Let me clarify. you only know half of it !!!!' Britney wrote. 'And for a lot of you who say I should be cautious with what I post … I mean if you REALLY THINK ABOUT IT … with what I've been through I believe I been WAAAY TOO CAUTIOUS !!!! One day I will live on the edge !!!! One day.'

'I do [speak up] by using my lawyer and the legal system since day one and NOT using social media or the press! Sorry you are so uninformed! Have a great day and try positivity!' Lynne wrote (seen in 2000)

In a second post, Britney said 'in a system where I've felt completely hopeless for so long, at least I do have a platform to share.' But then added: 'I'm gonna post a little less from now on,' and said 'TA TA' to her fans.

On Friday, Jamie fought back against attempts to remove him from the conservatorship that controls her money and affairs, saying there are 'no grounds whatsoever' to do so and describing the singer as 'mentally sick'.

The father-of-three claimed in a court filing that Britney is struggling so much with her mental health that court-appointed professional Jodi Montgomery, who overseas the popstar's life decisions, recommended hospitalizing her on emergency psychiatric hold.

In court documents filed in Los Angeles on Friday, Jamie said Montgomery had called him, distraught, last month and sought his help with his daughter's mental health struggles.

Legal battle: The exchange came after Britney Spears' request to move her hearing up to a sooner date in an effort to remove father Jamie as conservator was denied

He claimed that Montgomery had explained that Britney was not taking her medications properly and refused to see some of her doctors and that she was 'spiraling out of control'.

But Montgomery and her lawyer said in response that Jamie 'misrepresented and manipulated' the call to use it to his own advantage'.

The court filings come as Britney's former bodyguard claimed she is living 'like an inmate in a golden prison' as the singer has her phone calls monitored and is not allowed out unsupervised.

Due to a medical scare, Britney's dad stepped aside from the part of the conservatorship that controls his daughter's life decisions in 2019, with Montgomery taking over, though her official status remains temporary.

The fighting between those involved in the conservatorship has grown increasingly heated, and increasingly public, since Britney's dramatic testimony at a hearing on June 23, when she told a judge ' I just want my life back.'

A hearing to address Britney's petition to remove Jamie as her conservator is scheduled for Sept. 29.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An extended teaser for Impeachment: American Crime Story, that depicts the Bill Clinton impeachment scandal and his sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky, has been released.

In it, actress Beanie Feldstein is seen as Lewinsky, as she walks along a corridor and faces off against Linda Tripp, who is played by Sarah Paulson.

Paulson, 46, plays the White House employee who recorded conversations with Lewinsky after she confided in Tripp about an affair with president Clinton.

'The President kissed me': Beanie Feldstein's Monica Lewinsky faces off with Sarah Paulson's Linda Tripp in Impeachment: American Crime Story teaser that dramatizes Bill Clinton scandal, released Wednesday

The dramatic clip features an exchange of dialogue between the pair, as Feldstein, 28, is first heard saying, 'The president kissed me,' as Paulson responds, 'Tell me everything.'

'I am in love with him,' Feldstein says next, with Paulson asking: 'When was the last time you two were together?'

Paulson, as Tripp, is also heard saying, 'The blue dress, it would be smart to keep that. Uncleaned. In your possession,' adding: 'He chose to start a relationship with an intern. He's gonna have to resign.'

Drama: Actress Beanie Feldstein is seen as Lewinsky, as she walks along a corridor and faces off against Linda Tripp, who is played by Sarah Paulson

Feldstein's Lewinsky ends the clip saying, 'My life is over.'

The infamous scandal saw the then US-President Bill Clinton accused of having a sexual relationship with a White House intern.

Lewinsky stated that she had nine sexual encounters in the Oval Office with Clinton between November 1995 and March 1997.

Grilling: Paulson is heard asking, 'When was the last time you two were together?'

Tense: The dramatic clip features an exchange of dialogue between the pair, as Feldstein, 28, is first heard saying, 'The president kissed me,' as Paulson responds, 'Tell me everything'

Details: Paulson, as Tripp, is also heard saying, 'The blue dress, it would be smart to keep that. Uncleaned. In your possession,' adding: 'He chose to start a relationship with an intern. He's gonna have to resign'

Foreboding: Paulson appears to pull no punches with playing Tripp as she is heard being assertive in the latest teaser

Re-telling: The infamous scandal saw the then US-President Bill Clinton accused of having a sexual relationship with a White House intern

These involved fellatio and other sexual acts, but not sexual intercourse, according to her testimony.

Tripp - who became a close confidante to Lewinsky - worked in the Pentagon during the Clinton administration.

The blue dress line in the dialogue refers to Tripp convincing Lewinsky to save the gifts that Clinton had given her during their relationship, and to not dry clean a blue dress that was said to be stained with Clinton's semen.

Secrets: Lewinsky stated that she had nine sexual encounters in the Oval Office with Clinton between November 1995 and March 1997

Infamous: The drama is based on Jeffrey Toobin's book A Vast Conspiracy: The Real Story of the Sex Scandal That Nearly Brought Down a President, that was released in 1999

The real deal: Lewinsky herself served as a hands-on producer for the series, and has since inked a production deal with 20th TV after impressing bosses with her work

Clinton famously denied under oath that he ever had 'a sexual affair', 'sexual relations', or 'a sexual relationship' with Lewinsky.

He stated, 'I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky' on a nationally televised White House news conference, after news of the affair broke in January 1998.

It is not yet clear who has directed the project, which started production in October last year, though it comes from creator Ryan Murphy.

Power walk: Tripp - who became a close confidante to Lewinsky - worked in the Pentagon during the Clinton administration

Shocking scenes: It is not yet clear who has directed the project, which started production in October last year, though it comes from creator Ryan Murphy

British actor Clive Owen stars as Bill Clinton, Edie Falco as Hillary Clinton, Billy Eichner as Matt Drudge, and Cobie Smulders as Ann Coulter, among other stars.

The drama is based on Jeffrey Toobin's book A Vast Conspiracy: The Real Story of the Sex Scandal That Nearly Brought Down a President, that was released in 1999.

Lewinsky herself served as a hands-on producer for the series, and has since inked a production deal with 20th TV after impressing bosses with her work.

Timeline of Bill Clinton/ Monica Lewinsky sex scandal November 1995 - President Bill Clinton, 49, engages in an affair with White House intern Monica Lewinsky, 22 March 1997 - The affair ends, according to Lewinsky. She said they had engaged in sexual encounters on nine occasions September 1997 - White House employee Linda Tripp begins recording her conversations with Lewinsky after she confided in Tripp about the affair January 7, 1998 - Lewinsky signs an affidavit stating that she never had a sexual relationship with Bill Clinton. This was at the request of attorneys representing Paula Jones, who had accused Clinton of sexual harassment in 1994 January 17, 1998 - News of the scandal first breaks on the Drudge Report January 21, 1998 - The Drudge Report publishes allegations that Lewinsky had kept a 'garment with Clinton's dried semen'. The story is picked up by major news outlets January 26, 1998 - President Clinton denies the affair while standing with his wife Hillary at a White House press conference. He says the famous line: 'I did not have sexual relations with that woman' January 27, 1998 - Hillary Clinton appears on the TODAY Show where she defends her husband and calls the claims 'a vast right-wing conspiracy that has been conspiring against my husband since the day he announced his run for president' February 6, 1998 - President Clinton says in a press conference that he will not resign from office August 3, 1998 - A blood sample is taken from President Clinton for DNA testing against stains from Lewinsky's blue dress August 6, 1998 - Lewinsky begins to testify before the grand jury August 17, 1998 - Clinton testifies to the grand jury where he admits to 'inappropriate intimate contact'. He speaks to the nation in a televised address, finally admitting that he had a relationship with Lewinsky October 2, 1998 - Transcripts of Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp’s taped phone conversations are released December 11, 1998 - The House Judiciary committee votes to impeach, approving two articles of impeachment, including lying to a grand jury and obstruction of justice December 12, 1998 - Clinton says he won't resign and denies lying under oath December 19, 1998 - The House of Representatives votes to impeach President Clinton. Clinton vows to remain in office until 'the last hour of the last day of my term' January 7, 1999 - The Senate begins its trial of President Clinton February 12, 1999 - The Senate acquits President Clinton on both charges of perjury and obstruction of justice Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He has one of the most impressive physiques in Hollywood.

And Michael B. Jordan was not too shy to show off his bulging muscles again in his latest project.

The 34-year-old actor certainly steamed up screens as he went shirtless in the trailer for A Journal For Jordan released on Wednesday.

Wow factor: Micahel B. Jordan certainly steamed up screens as he went shirtless in the trailer for A Journal For Jordan released on Wednesday

Dynamic duo: Michael looked in incredible shape as he has plenty of amorous scenes with co-star Chanté Adams in the minute-and-a-half long teaser for the film directed by Denzel Washington

Michael looked in incredible shape as he has plenty of amorous scenes with co-star Chanté Adams in the minute-and-a-half long teaser for the film directed by Denzel Washington.

The film is centered around the relationship between First Sergeant Charles Monroe King (Jordan) and journalist Dana Canedy (Adams), whose 2008 Pulitzer Prize winning memoir provides material for the movie.

King had kept journals of his deployment in the Iraq War - in which he perished in 2006 - with messages for his son Jordan, who was seven months old when his father died.

Bond: The film is centered around the relationship between First Sergeant Charles Monroe King (Jordan) and journalist Dana Canedy (Adams)

Stunning: Dana's 2008 Pulitzer Prize winning memoir provides material for the movie

Loving gesture: King had kept journals of his deployment in the Iraq War - in which he perished in 2006 - with messages for his son Jordan, who was seven months old when his father died

Sweet: The trailer featured several scenes of their life together including romantic dates to the museum

Milestone moment: They even showed when the couple welcomed their baby son

The trailer featured several scenes of their life together including romantic dates to the museum as well when they welcomed their baby son.

There were also a few scenes of First Sergeant King deployed in the Middle East as he wrote the letters.

The end of the clip ends with a voiceover from Denzel Washington as he said: 'See it exclusively in movie theaters this Christmas.'

Sweet: There were plenty of romantic scenes sprinkled throughout the clip

Tough: There were also a few scenes of First Sergeant King deployed in the Middle East

Tragic: He was shown writing the letters

While Denzel won't be seen in front of the camera for this project, the dramatic film marks Washington's fourth directorial effort, following the Oscar-winning Fences in 2016.

Both Jordan and Washington are producers on the movie, and Jordan said he was 'a sponge right now' working with the Hollywood icon.

There he is: The end of the clip ends with a voiceover from Denzel Washington as he said: 'See it exclusively in movie theaters this Christmas'

At the helm: While Denzel won't be seen in front of the camera for this project, the dramatic film marks Washington's fourth directorial effort, following the Oscar-winning Fences in 2016, he is seen on set of A Journal For Jordan in New York back in March

'Being directed by the GOAT - Denzel, himself - and being able to work with a very talented cast and actress in Chanté Adams, it's something that I've been looking forward to,' he told The Hollywood Reporter earlier this year.

Jordan added, 'We're having a blast and I’m getting a masterclass and a crazy education on character development, directing, and producing from Todd Black and Denzel Washington. It's a great thing.'

A Journal For Jordan will have a limited release in the US on December 10 before a wide release on December 22. The UK release will follow on 28 January 2022.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Behind-the-scenes shots of actress Michelle Williams, 40, continue to roll in as she is seen on set of the new Steven Spielberg movie.

In The Fabelmans - which is about the life of the Jaws and ET director - Williams portrays the legendary director's late mother, Leah.

The latest images feature the movie star with a blonde crop, a white-collared blue dress, and a matching blue shawl.

In character: Behind-the-scenes shots of actress Michelle Williams, 40, continue to roll in as she's seen on set of the new Steven Spielberg movie

Side by side: In The Fabelmans, Williams portrays the legendary director's late mother, Leah. On the right Leah is with her husband Arnold as well as a young Steven

The movie is being filmed in LA and is loosely based on the award-winning director's childhood as an avid movie fan in the 50s and 60s.

Also pictured in the new images is co-star Seth Rogen, 39.

Rogen plays the director's favorite uncle. In the photos he is seen wearing black-rimmed eyeglasses, slacks, and a sports coat.

Going back in time: The movie is being filmed in LA and is loosely based on the award-winning director's childhood as an avid movie fan in the 50s and 60s

Action: Also pictured in the new images is co-star Seth Rogen, 39

On Monday the 74-year-old Hollywood heavyweight shot a few scenes for the upcoming film on the beach in Malibu, California with cast members Gabriel LaBelle (who plays Steven), Sam Rechner (Ruby's Choice), and Chloe East (Genera+ion) among others.

Steven also has three sisters Nancy, Anne, and Sue but casting for those parts have yet to be revealed.

The Schindler's List director had a very colorful childhood. He was born in Cincinnati, Ohio but was raised between Haddon Township, New Jersey and Scottsdale, Arizona.

He spent three years attending Arcadia High School before moving to California with his dad after his parents divorced and he graduated from Saratoga High School.

The film is slated for a 2022 release.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Big Sean doesn't need to go very far to hit the club since he has one inside his own home.

The 33-year-old star is showing off his Beverly Hills mansion - that comes complete with a nightclub and stripper pole - in the premiere episode of MTV's Cribs revival airing Wednesday night.

Despite the many appeals of the estate, however, the rapper, recently sold the property for $11.1million, the Los Angeles Times reported.

In the club: Big Sean is showing off his Beverly Hills mansion - that comes complete with a nightclub and stripper pole - in the premiere episode of MTV's Cribs revival airing Wednesday night

Big Sean, whose real name is Sean Michael-Leonard Anderson, purchased the stunning Mediterranean mansion from Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash.

In a sneak peek of Wednesday's episode, the hip hop star took MTV cameras into his private nightclub for a rare look.

Typically, Big Sean doesn't allow phones, cameras or social media in the sacred party space (there is even a sign on the door prohibiting them).

'This is a place that I don't really show people, so you guys are pretty special right now,' he said during the tour.

Wow: Big Sean, whose real name is Sean Michael-Leonard Anderson, purchased the stunning Mediterranean mansion from Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash who installed a nightclub

'This is a place that I don't really show people, so you guys are pretty special right now,' he said during the tour.

Wow: The dark room featured black wall-to-wall carpet, black walls and furniture - even the ceiling is painted black - with accents of red and a stripper pole in the middle

The dark room featured black wall-to-wall carpet, black walls and furniture - even the ceiling is painted black - with accents of red and a stripper pole in the middle.

Sean explained that the club was already in the home when he bought it but the real estate agents said he was free to change the space however she saw fit.

'Are you f**king kidding me? This is Slash's club, I'm gonna keep it the same,' he laughed. 'I kept it the same vibe and aesthetic.'

Big Sean revealed that he actually kept the same silver skull sconces that were installed by Slash.

Original: Big Sean revealed that he actually kept the same silver skull sconces that were installed by Slash

Private: Typically, Big Sean doesn't allow phones, cameras or social media in the sacred party space (there is even a sign on the door prohibiting them)

'Are you f**king kidding me? This is Slash's club, I'm gonna keep it the same,' he laughed. 'I kept it the same vibe and aesthetic.'

The all-black decor enhanced the club-vibe when Big Sean turned off the main lights, bathing the room in a low blue and green glow. The floor of the stripper pole lit up as well, making it the focal point of the room.

In a second promo clip, the star showed off his personal recording studio which actually has a view of his first one bedroom apartment in the Valley from before he hit it big.

'I never take this for granted,' he said.

Big Sean purchased the home in 2017 for $8.7million and remodeled the space over the last few years, the LA Times reported.

All new: Big Sean will be the first star featured in the all-new reboot of Cribs

Party time: The all-black decor enhanced the club-vibe when Big Sean turned off the main lights, bathing the room in a low blue and green glow. The floor of the stripper pole lit up as well, making it the focal point of the room

Moving away: Despite the many appeals of the estate, however, the rapper, recently sold the property for $11.1million, the Los Angeles Times reported

The 11,000 square foot mansion has seven bedrooms, seven and a half bathrooms, a two-story foyer, gourmet, office, library and movie theater.

The estate sold just this week for $11.1 million.

MTV announced earlier this summer that it was rebooting Cribs, where viewers can get an up close look at the lifestyles of the rich and famous.

Stars like Martha Stewart, Jordyn Woods, JoJo Siwa, Scott Disick and Rick Ross are just some of the A-listers inviting MTV into their abodes for the reboot.

Wow: The 11,000 square foot mansion has seven bedrooms, seven and a half bathrooms, a two-story foyer, gourmet, office, library and movie theater

Incredible: In a second promo clip, the star showed off his personal recording studio which actually has a view of his first one bedroom apartment in the Valley from before he hit it big

'I never take this for granted,' he said.

Among the other celebs are Ashlee Simpson & Evan Ross, Christian Siriano, Johnny Weir, Kathy Griffin, Marsai Martin, Nick Young, Nico Tortorella, Nicole 'Snooki' Polizzi, Rick Ross, Ryan Lochte, Tia Mowry, Tinashe and TJ Lavin.

The seminal series debuted in 2000, pioneering the genre of celeb-fueled reality entertainment.

The show featured many wild moments, including a 2002 tour where Mariah Carey invited camera crews into her bathroom while she slipped into the tub and another where a barely famous Kim Kardashian shows off a stripper pole in her bedroom.

The US reboot of Cribs comes after the success of the international version of the show, which will returned for season two in July.

MTV Cribs premieres Wednesday night at 9:30pm.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is currently filming the half-hour horror comedy Shining Vale for Starz.

But Courteney Cox revealed Wednesday on Instagram that she's found plenty of ways to keep herself occupied in her lengthy downtime between takes.

The 57-year-old Friends star joked that she had picked up a side hustle as a crew member and a Warner Bros. backlot tour guide in a humorous new video.

Staying busy: Courteney Cox, 57, revealed Wednesday in an Instagram video that she learned to assuage her boredom on set by working as a Warner Bros. backlot tour guide

Courteney wore a lovely black polka dotted dress with a plunging neckline at the start of the video.

She was filming herself in front of a house set which was being used for her new series.

'Here I am on the backlot of Warner Bros. filming my show Shining Vale,' she shared. 'There’s definitely a lot of time in between setups, but I don’t get bored. I see opportunity all around.'

The video then cut to Courteney driving a small red fire department vehicle on the lot.

Back home: She was filming her new series Shining Vale on the Warner Bros. backlot, where Friends had been filmed years earlier

Taking a ride: 'There’s definitely a lot of time in between setups, but I don’t get bored. I see opportunity all around.' The video then cut to Courteney driving a small red fire department vehicle on the lot

Greg Kinnear, the actress' costar on Shining Vale, then popped up as he was getting a Covid-19 test, but then the camera pulled back to reveal that it was Courteney putting the swab up his nose.

Then she was behind a plastic tarp at the craft services table as she dished out food to hungry workers on set.

After one person order some short ribs, noodles and kimchi, Courteney revealed she didn't know what the fermented Korean dish was, though she managed to figure it out.

Next up, some unsuspecting tourists got a special celebrity sighting when the Friends star decided to drive a tour shuttle around the backlot.

Close encounter: Greg Kinnear, the actress' costar on Shining Vale, then popped up as he was getting a Covid-19 test, but then the camera pulled back to reveal that it was Courteney putting the swab up his nose

Pulling her weight: Then she was behind a plastic tarp at the craft services table as she dished out food to hungry workers on set

'We’re on stage five. This is where Friends started in 1994 and is now occupied by a show called Shining Vale — starring me!' she said to applause and cheers from the riders.

But Courteney appeared to have gotten herself in over her head after she had to make a sharp turn in the extra-long vehicle.

She passed an SUV on the left to make a right turn, while the people filming from behind her got increasingly anxious that she might sideswipe the vehicle.

'Go wide!' one of the women shouted just before her boss cleared the car. 'She’s got it.'

One of the guests on the tram shouted, 'You made it, nice turn!'

That seemed to come as a surprise to the TV star.

'Oh, I almost hit the car? Oh, I didn’t even think about that!’

History: 'We’re on stage five. This is where Friends started in 1994 and is now occupied by a show called Shining Vale — starring me!' she said while giving a backlot tour

Close call: She passed an SUV on the left to make a right turn, while the people filming from behind her got increasingly anxious that she might sideswipe the vehicle. 'Go wide!' one of the women shouted just before her boss cleared the car

Whoops: She seemed surprised after a tourist complimented her on not hitting the car. 'Oh, I almost hit the car? Oh, I didn’t even think about that!’

Courteney and Kinnear star as the parents of a dysfunctional family who move from a big city to a small-town house where horrible crimes were committed in the past in their series Shining Vale,

The Scream star plays Pat, a one-time novelist and former wild child who decides to move with her family to save her marriage after she has an affair with a young handyman.

But once they're in the new house, she starts to notice spooky occurrences that no one else in the family seems to notice, leading her to wonder if the place is haunted or if she's just depressed.

The eight-episode comedy is created by Trial & Error co-creator Jeff Astrof and Catastrophe co-creator, co-writer and star Sharon Horgan.

Mira Sorvino costars as Rosemary, who may be a split personality that only Pat knows about, or a demon who's trying to possess her.

Spooky: Courteney and Kinnear play the parents in a dysfunctional family who move to a house where horrible crimes were committed, but no one can see the haunting except for her; seen in 2019 in LA

In addition to the Starz series, Courteney recently was involved in the Friends reunion in late May.

She caught up with her costars Jennifer Aniston, Matthew Perry, Lisa Kudrow, David Schwimmer and Matt LeBlanc to share behind-the-scenes stories from the iconic NBC sitcom.

The reunion received mostly positive reviews, with critics complaining about the number of guest appearances with little connection to the series but applauding the more emotional discussions with the original cast.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Real Husbands of Hollywood is back and looks as absurd as ever.

Kevin Hart was recently spotted shooting a scene for the show in Los Angeles. The comedian, 42, hits a bear cub with his car in the scene then gets attacked by the bear while filming the incident on his cell phone.

BET announced on July 29 that the show, which was cancelled in 2016, would receive a limited series comprised of six episodes. The show will air on the channel's streaming service, BET+.

The reboot is on: Kevin Hart filmed a scene for the six-episode reboot of The Real Husbands of Hollywood, a satire of the Real Housewives franchise

The show's star wore a light blue t-shirt, blue socks, sandals and tan shorts for the scene.

The Real Husbands of Hollywood is a reality show satire that pokes fun at The Real Housewives franchise.

The show ran for five seasons during its initial release from 2013 to 2016. Nick Cannon, Robin Thicke, Nelly and J.B. Smoove played fictionalized versions of themselves in the series alongside the Ride Along actor.

Numerous guests stars also appeared in the series' original run including Shaquille O'Neal, Chris Rock, Mariah Carey, Mary J. Blige and many more.

Guest stars galore: The original series featured a number of guest stars, and the new season will almost certainly bring in more

Still close: For the comedian's birthday, friend and Real Husbands of Hollywood co-star Nick Cannon sent his buddy a llama

Hart's return to the show is a bit surprising given how in-demand he is. The Central Intelligence actor has three movies coming out next year, including a voice acting role in DC League of Super-Pets which is currently in production.

Additionally, the father of four finished shooting Borderlands, a science-fiction action comedy, in June.

The film will star Cate Blanchett as an infamous outlaw who returns to her home planet to find a client's daughter. Hart will star opposite Blanchett as Roland, a mercenary looking for redemption.

The movie star also took some time to provide commentary for some Olympic events alongside Soul Plane co-star Snoop Dogg. Pictures of the two went viral because the Secret Life of Pets actor's feet didn't touch the ground.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They are staples at the iconic celeb favorite Met Gala.

But Andy Cohen and Sarah Jessica Parker may be skipping the most glamorous event of the year.

The 53-year-old Bravolebrity revealed in an interview with Access Hollywood on Tuesday that he will be absent from the Met Gala 2021 next month.

Absent: Andy Cohen revealed in an interview with Access Hollywood on Tuesday that he will be absent from the Met Gala 2021 next month

Staples: Perhaps the most interesting thing is that he alluded to pal Sarah Jessica Parker also missing the event due to her filming the reboot as they have attended together in 2018 (pictured) , 2016, 2015, 2014 and 2011

Perhaps the most interesting thing is that he alluded to the 53-year-old Sex And The City star also missing the event due to her filming the reboot.

Cohen was asked by presenter Scott Evans if he will be attending the Monday, September 13 event to which the television personality quickly responded: 'No.'

The American radio and talk show host, producer, and writer then dropped a bombshell by saying: 'My date is filming this year. She’s filming And Just Like That…'

Cohen was asked by presenter Scott Evans if he will be attending the Monday, September 13 event to which the television personality quickly responded: 'No'

The American radio and talk show host, producer, and writer then dropped a bombshell by saying: 'My date is filming this year. She’s filming And Just Like That…'

They're back: Sarah Jessica Parker has been spotted filming the Sex And The City Reboot in recent weeks so no doubt that the schedule could conflict with the gala event, as she is seen filming with Kristen Davis in New York on Monday

Sarah Jessica Parker has been spotted filming the Sex And The City Reboot in recent weeks so no doubt that the schedule could conflict with the gala event.

Andy and Sarah have walked down the red carpet at the annual benefit for the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Costume Institute in New York City several times including: 2018, 2016, 2015, 2014 and 2011.

Last year's Met Gala was cancelled amid the COVID-19 pandemic but the pals managed to get together at a safe distance on Monday, May 4.

Having fun: Andy seemed in good spirits despite the admission

Andy posted a selfie from the side walk with Sarah up a set of stairs and stoop as they both wore protective face masks.

Andy humorously captioned the image to his 4million followers: 'We’re ready! #MetGala'

The New York fashion event, which takes place on September 13, is requiring all guests including the rich and famous to show proof of full vaccination and wear face masks inside while not eating and drinking.

Billie Eilish will make history at the charity fundraiser by being the gala's youngest ever co-chair.

'We're ready! #MetGala': Last year's Met Gala was cancelled amid the COVID-19 pandemic but the pals managed to get together at a safe distance on Monday, May 4

The theme for this year's New York social event is America: A Lexicon of Fashion, which is named after a new exhibition at the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

A spokesperson told The Daily Beast : 'Currently, all attendees at The Met Gala on September 13 must provide proof of full vaccination and will also be expected to wear masks indoors except when eating or drinking. We will update these guidelines as needed.'

The popstar will join other celebrities including Naomi Osaka, inauguration poet Amanda Gorman and Timothée Chalamet as co-chairs, while Tom Ford, Adam Mosseri and Anna Wintour will set as honorary chairs.

Precautions: The New York fashion event, which takes place on September 13, is also requiring all guests including the rich and famous to show proof of full vaccination and wear face masks inside while not eating and drinking, the event is seen in May 2019
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kim Kardashian credits her estranged husband Kanye West with teaching her how to be 'true to herself.'

The 40-year-old reality star was married to Kanye for seven years before filing for divorce earlier this year, and has said the Heartless rapper helped her understand the importance of 'living in the moment' and not caring what other people think.

'I got to a point - and maybe being in a relationship with Kanye for a decade and someone that absolutely didn't care about likability factor or what any of perception of him was - as long as he was true to himself, that taught me so much in the best way of just being me and living in the moment,' said the star.

He helped her: Kim Kardashian credits her estranged husband Kanye West with teaching her how to be 'true to herself'; seen in 2020

YOLO: The 40-year-old reality star was married to Kanye for seven years before filing for divorce earlier this year, and has said the Heartless rapper helped her understand the importance of 'living in the moment' and not caring what other people think

And Kim now knows she doesn't need to 'please everyone' as long as she's happy.

She added to Kristen Bell's We Are Supported By… podcast: 'You don't have to please everyone as long as I'm myself and as long as I'm doing it the way that I want to.

'Like, you have one life and you're living it for you. That taught me to just be more confident in myself and truly not care as much of what other people thought.'

Kim has keep things amicable between her and Kanye - who was reportedly dating model Irina Shayk - for the sake of their young children.

Together they have North, eight, Saint, five, Chicago, three, and Psalm, two.

He backed her up: She added to Kristen Bell's We Are Supported By… podcast : 'You don't have to please everyone as long as I'm myself and as long as I'm doing it the way that I want to. 'Like, you have one life and you're living it for you.' Seen in 2016 at the Met Gala in NYC

A source said recently: 'Kanye and her have been co-parenting successfully and both of them want what's best for the kids.'

Meanwhile, the 'Keeping Up with the Kardashians' star recently said she is trying to be 'stricter' with her and Kanye's children because she gives into them too easily.

She said: 'When my kids want something, typically candy, they give me this look directly in my eyes that cuts right through me. I usually give in and give them what they want. I'm naturally very calm, which I think translates into my parenting. I don't get super stressed or impatient, which I think is definitely a superpower when you have three kids age five and under running around.'

She has been there for him: Kim seen at his Donda party in Atlanta in July. She also said: 'That taught me to just be more confident in myself and truly not care as much of what other people thought'

Their little ones: Kim with Khloe and three of the four kids she has with the rapper

And the SKIMS businesswoman loves that her children share such a strong bond because it reminds her of growing up with her siblings Kourtney, 42, Khloe, 37, and Rob, 34.

She explained: 'They get along so well and have so much love for each other. It reminds me of growing up with Kourtney, Khloé and Rob. There's something so special about having a big family, and I'm happy my babies get that experience the way I did.

'It's so amazing to watch my kids grow and develop into their own people. I get the kids outside as much as possible, and I'm good at creating activities for them. They're always playing sports or working on projects.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cardi B does not appear to be a fan of celebrities who refuse to keep things clean - when it comes to their showering habits.

A growing list of celebrities including Jake Gyllenhaal, Ashton Kutcher and Mila Kunis have all spoken recently about why they are lax with their washing routine.

But the X-Rated rapper seemed as mystified as everyone on Tuesday, when she tweeted 'Wassup with people saying they don’t shower?' alongside a emoji with a raised eyebrow, adding: 'It's giving itchy.'

Keeping it clean for once: Cardi B admits she's baffled by the trend of celebrities who say they don't shower often

Confused: The X-Rated rapper took to Twitter to join in on the debate about washing habits

Ashton Kutcher and Mila Kunis kicked off the public conversation about celebrity hygiene during a podcast appearance last month, with Ashton telling Armchair Expert host Dax Shephard: 'I wash my armpits and crotch daily and nothing else ever.'

Mila said she washes her 'slits and t**s' and also revealed that she did not bathe her children Wyatt, six, and Dimitri, four, 'everyday' when they were infants.

Meanwhile Jake, 40, shocked fans last week when told Vanity Fair: 'More and more I find bathing to be less necessary.'

Not impressed: Cardi appears to be a fan of showering regularly after taking to Twitter to share her concern for her peers that have been speaking out against daily washing

He noted: 'I do also think that there's a whole world of not bathing that is also really helpful for skin maintenance, and we naturally clean ourselves.'

Dax's wife Kristen also said she doesn't shower often for environmental reasons, explaining: 'California has been in a drought forever. It's just like, responsibility for your environment.'

'We don't have a ton of water, so when I shower, I'll grab the girls and push them in there with me so we all use the same shower water.'

'Slits and t**s': Ashton Kutcher and Mila Kunis kicked off the public conversation about celebrity hygiene during a podcast appearance last month

Meanwhile: Dax and his wife Kristen Bell then went on The View where she revealed she would 'wait for the stink' before bathing their daughters Lincoln, eight, and Delta, six

'We naturally clean ourselves': Jake Gyllenhaal joined the choir in a recent Vanity Fair interview saying: 'More and more I find bathing to be less necessary, at times'

Joining Cardi in her thoughts about the situation was Game of Thrones star Jason Momoa.

The actor told Access Hollywood earlier this week that he is not part of the club, saying: 'I'm not starting any trends. I shower, trust me,.'

He added: 'I'm Aquaman. I'm in the f****** water. Don’t worry about it. I'm Hawaiian. We got saltwater on me. We good.'

Dwayne Johnson has also assured his fans he is not in the same category.

Details: When a Twitter user brought up the subject Dwayne, 49, wrote: 'Nope, I’m the opposite of a "not washing themselves" celeb'

When a Twitter user brought up the subject this week, Dwayne, 49, wrote: 'Nope, I’m the opposite of a "not washing themselves" celeb.'

In fact the fighter turned movie star, who goes by the nickname The Rock, revealed that he showers three times a day.

'Shower (cold) when I roll outta bed to get my day rollin’. Shower (warm) after my workout before work. Shower (hot) after I get home from work. Face wash, body wash, exfoliate and I sing (off key) in the shower,' he shared.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Todd Chrisley revealed that he has not spoken to his daughter Lindsie Chrisley since she announced her divorce from Will Campbell in late July.

And the TV star, 52, also said he will not be picking up the phone anytime soon either to chat with his child.

'I'm not reaching out and I'm not commenting on the divorce,' the Chrisley Knows Best standout told E! News.

Dad is staying mum: Todd Chrisley has declared that he will not be directly contacting his daughter Lindsie Chrisley about her divorce; seen on Chrisley Knows Best

After news broke of the split late last month Todd addressed the matter in public both on Instagram and his podcast Chrisley Confessions.

'I spoke about what I woke up to one morning. I talked about it on Chrisley Confessions and I made a commitment that I was not going to talk about that anymore,' Todd told E! of his previous remarks.

'It's not my business, I was not a party to it, I don't know what happened, so anything that I would say, I would be hypothetically speaking and based on all of the lies that have been told to the press when it comes to mine and Lindsie's relationship or the lack thereof, I just have made the decision to refrain from commenting on it.'

Todd's latest broadside comes a week after Lindsie responded to his emotional Instagram post about her divorce.

Glowing: Lindsie is pictured attending an event in Atlanta in 2019

A couple of weeks ago after news broke that Lindsie's marriage was ending her father uploaded a gushing message in which he told her: 'I love you so much!'

However Lindsie, 31, asserted on her Coffee Convos podcast last week that she is blocked from Todd's Instagram and therefore unable to even see his post.

She told her co-host Kail Lowry of Teen Mom fame, 'I truly was shocked when I saw something so personal shared as we do have each other’s numbers, and even though we are not in contact with each other we do have each other's personal phone numbers and our attorneys are in contact with each other.'

Public statement: After news broke that Lindsie's marriage was ending her father uploaded a gushing message in which he told her: 'I love you so much!'

Retort: Lindsie revealed she is blocked from her father's page and expressed her bafflement that he would air out 'something so personal' in public

Lindsie added: 'So I have reached out privately and I feel certain that our legal teams will be in communication with each other over the coming weeks.'

It emerged two weeks ago that Lindsie and her husband Will have decided to end their marriage after nine years.

And days later on his podcast Chrisley Confessions her father said it was 'a very sad day' when he heard his daughter and son-in-law were splitting up.

Reality star: Todd broke his silence on his podcast and Instagram about his estranged daughter's divorce; he is pictured on the series Chrisley Knows Best

Lindsie and Todd have been on the outs since a nasty public row nearly two years ago.

She accused him of trying to extort her with a sex tape and he alleged that she had cheated on Will with more than one man.

On his podcast this week Todd said: 'I do not wish a divorce on any family, certainly not after going through one and watching what it did to Lindsie and Kyle so I certainly was not hoping to see that pattern repeated.'

Todd, a real estate tycoon, shares his children Lindsie and Kyle with his first wife Teresa Terry who had been his high school sweetheart.

He stated 'Will Campbell has always been a good provider to my daughter and to my grandson,' nine-year-old Jackson.

The way they were: It emerged last month that Lindsie Chrisley and her husband Will Campbell have decided to end their marriage after nine years

Todd asserted that Will 'and his family have always been very supportive of Lindsie and Jackson to the best of my knowledge, which is very limited.'

While noting that he and Lindsie 'don't have a relationship' and have no contact with one another, Todd said of the split: 'I hate it for Jackson, but I know that Will has always been a good father like I said, to the limited amount of knowledge that I have, but the times that I've been around him with Jackson he was a great father.'

Todd added: 'To the times that I have witnessed - which have been a handful of times - his family with Jackson they have been wonderful grandparents and are really the only grandparents that Jackson knows and has a relationship with, so, and the only family really that he has a relationship with.'

He shared his hopes that Lindsie and Jackson will continue to enjoy a bond with Will's relatives because 'I want Jackson to have as little disruption as possible.'

Letting it out: Todd (right) gave a statement about Lindsie's divorce on his podcast Chrisley Confessions which he hosts with his current wife Julie (left)

On his Instagram that day he wrote a message from 'God and Todd' and did not name its target but said '#you know who you are.'

'I’m here. I love you. Whatever is going on in your life right now, I see it, and I’m working all things out for good, for you, my child. There is nothing you can do or have done that will make me ever love you less. I will protect you from anything, and anyone who tries’s to harm you or your reputation,' he wrote.

'I am stronger than depression and anxiety. I am braver than loneliness, and nothing will ever exhaust me. I promise you I will never leave you nor forsake you. I am breathing a new wind into and over your life right now.'

Todd gushed: 'Look for the favor and blessings I’m sending in this season your way because they are from me. I love you so much!'

Family photo: Lindsie and Will are pictured with their son Jackson who is now nine

Lindsie had a tense relationship with Todd, as well as her half-brother Chase, during her time on the reality series Chrisley Knows Best.

However matters came to a head over the summer of 2019 when she accused Chase and Todd in a police report of plotting to leak a 'sex tape involving her.'

Todd turned around and alleged that Lindsie had been unfaithful to Will with Josh Murray and Robby Hayes of The Bachelorette fame.

At the time Todd and his current wife Julie were enmeshed in a tax evasion case, and although they have since reached a settlement regarding the state charges in Georgia the federal case against them is ongoing, with them pleading not guilty.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liberty Poole revealed that 'something isn't sitting right' for her during Thursday's Love Island as her fears over boyfriend Jake Cornish intensified.

Liberty, in a heart-to-heart with Chloe, admitted that she felt as if she'd had a 'tough' week that was beginning to make her question things with Jake.

'My gut instinct doesn't sit right,' she said, also adding that he isn't 'the one' for her if he takes her for granted.

In a shock twist, Jake admitted to Liberty that he fancies both Millie and Mary, and he reveals he has been having doubts about their romance.

Gut feeling: Liberty Poole revealed that 'something isn't sitting right' during Thursday's Love Island as her fears over Jake Cornish intensified

Tensions began to rise between the pair during the early parts of the episode, which saw Tyler ask Kaz to be exclusive - Love Actually style.

Liberty, who prides herself on being Kaz's best friend, wanted to be one of the first people to congratulate her following the happy news.

However, Jake was keen for them to stand aside and let Kaz come to them, which left Liberty confused.

Best friend: Tensions began to rise between the pair during the early parts of the episode, which saw Tyler ask Kaz to be exclusive - Love Actually style - and Liberty wanted to be there to congratulate her best friend

Baffled: Liberty was left confused after Jake told her to stand aside and let Kaz come to her following the news that her and Tyler had become exclusive

Speaking to Millie, the marketing student raised her concerns over what Jake considers to be 'for the cameras.'

And in the preview for what's set to be another dramatic episode on Friday, Jake reveals to Liberty that he has also been experiencing doubts.

He refers to Millie and Mary - both blonde like his girlfriend - as 'his type' and that he can 'appreciate an attractive girl', despite him being officially with Liberty.

Uh oh: In the preview for what's set to be another dramatic episode on Friday, Jake reveals to Liberty that he has also been experiencing doubts

Dressed to impress: The producers also included a fan-favourite challenge, which saw the girls and boys battle it out to raise each other's heart rates

Elsewhere during Thursday's episode, the islanders could choose who to send to the hideaway - and they collectively picked newly-exclusive Tyler and Kaz, who were delighted.

The producers also included a fan-favourite challenge, which saw the girls and boys battle it out to raise each other's heart rates.

Teddy's name cropped up frequently when it was revealed who got the girls' hearts going, but it was Millie who grabbed the win for the girls, wearing a tight ensemble which set the boys' pulses soaring.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jesy Nelson is reportedly at risk of sparking tension between herself and her former Little Mix bandmates with her solo material which is said to sound very similar to the band's music.

The singer, 30, left Little Mix last December for the sake of her mental health and is now gearing up to release her debut single next month.

However, a source told The Sun that Jesy's similar sounding tracks won't go down well with Leigh-Anne Pinnock, Jade Thirlwall and Perrie Edwards, who it's claimed she primarily speaks to now through lawyers.

Solo: Jesy Nelson is reportedly at risk of sparking tension between herself and her former Little Mix bandmates with her solo material which is said to sound very similar to the band's music

The insider said: 'Things have got progressively more strained, but seeing her return with a song and an image that could have been taken straight from the Little Mix playbook is going to be very divisive.

'The girls always vowed to stay friends after all they had been through, but now most of their communication happens through intermediaries including lawyers and managers, which is a real shame.

'Jesy’s new video shoot could have been a Little Mix single, it’s packed with choreography and the style is very similar too.'

The source added Jesy's ex-bandmates may wonder why she quit the band when she has returned just eight months later with a similar look and sound.

Awkward: A source told The Sun that Jesy's similar sounding tracks won't go down well with Leigh-Anne Pinnock, Jade Thirlwall and Perrie Edwards, who it's claimed she primarily speaks to now through lawyers (pictured in May 2021)

MailOnline has contacted representatives for Jesy Nelson and Little Mix for comment.

Jesy broke her Instagram silence on Thursday night to give fans a glimpse of what is in store as she prepares to launch her solo career.

And in a teaser clip, the singer told her followers to prepare themselves for her 'new chapter' and said she has 'made the music I always wanted to make'.

The next chapter: Jesy broke her Instagram silence on Thursday night to give fans a glimpse of what is in store as she prepares to launch her solo career

A recorded audio clip of the singer plays over behind-the-scenes footage from the past months, including photoshoots, videos of her in the studio and dance rehearsals.

'For me, this is the music I've always wanted to make,' she said.

'I don't think anyone is going to expect it, this is a new chapter for me.

'If you genuinely believe something enough to happen, you can make it happen, you have to manifest it.'

Solo: The singer left Little Mix in December for the sake of her mental health and has been working hard on new music to establish herself as a single artist over the coming months

Exciting: And in a teaser clip, Jesy tells her followers to prepare themselves for her 'new chapter' and says she has 'made the music I always wanted to make'

One poignant clips shows a glamorous Jesy dressed in a white crop top and flares gaze down at the camera as she poses in an industrial building.

Other footage features the Wings hitmaker working in the studio or practicing routines with a group of male backing dancers.

After leaving the band, Jesy admitted the pressure she felt to look her best in their music videos took its toll on her.

Speaking to Cosmopolitan about the Sweet Melody video, she said: 'The last music video we did was the breaking point.

'Whenever we had a music video, I put an enormous amount of pressure on myself to try to lose weight. I have a fear of looking back on the camera.

'If I don’t like what I see, I find it so hard to be in front of the camera and feel amazing and perform.'

Glam: A recorded audio clip of the singer plays over behind-the-scenes footage from the past months, including photoshoots, videos of her in the studio and dance rehearsals

Interesting: 'For me, this is the music I've always wanted to make,' she said. 'I don't think anyone is going to expect it, this is a new chapter for me'

Move your body: Other clips feature the Wings hitmaker working in the studio or practicing routines with a group of male backing dancers

Last week Jesy wiped her Instagram account ahead of her hotly-anticipated debut solo single, which allegedly will be released in September.

The former Little Mix star removed all her posts on the social media app, unfollowed everyone and changed her profile picture to a red circle.

Fans soon took to Twitter to comment on the drastic measures, asking why Jesy's online social media presence had disappeared.

Aspirations: 'If you genuinely believe something enough to happen, you can make it happen, you have to manifest it,' she said

Coming soon: The video finished with a loading sign at 27%

Blank canvas: Last week Jesy wiped her Instagram account ahead of her hotly-anticipated debut solo single, which allegedly will be released in September

An insider told The Sun Jesy dedicated the beginning of the year to her new music and it has all come together quickly after spending months in the studio.

'Her new record label Polydor are keen to strike while the iron is hot, so they are throwing everything at her project and want the first single out in a matter of weeks.

'It is more upbeat than some might be expecting and there will be plenty of choreography in the video.'

Meanwhile, it's said the Romford-born star is finding it 'so refreshing' working as a solo star.

Image: After leaving the band, Jesy admitted the pressure she felt to look her best in their music videos took its toll on her (pictured in the Sweet Melody music video)

The source added: 'The difference this time is that she is not comparing herself to her bandmates. It's been so refreshing for her. Jesy has been working hard and is feeling really positive about this new chapter of her career.'

Before the wiping of her Instagram page, Jesy excited her fans by teasing that her 'new era is pending'.

Jesy won The X Factor alongside Perrie, Leigh-Anne and Jade in 2011.

Together Little Mix sold over 60 million records, making them one of the biggest girl bands of all time.

Jesy confirmed her permanent departure from the band just weeks after revealing she was taking a temporary hiatus from all work commitments.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chris Hughes has denied that Love Island's Mary Bedford is his ex, saying they only went on one date.

The pair dated briefly following Chris' split from former Little Mix star Jesy Nelson, with Mary, 22, thought to have referenced him on the show when she said she didn't want to date a footballer again.

Speaking to The Sun, Chris, 28, who previously played for local team Bourton Rovers FC, insisted the relationship was not serious and he doesn't know much about Mary.

Never together: Chris Hughes has denied that Love Island's Mary Bedford is his ex, saying they only went on one date

He said: 'No, but Mary's not my ex! I went on a date with her and I was pictured with her but that was as far as it went. She's a nice girl and I wish her all the best, but she's not my ex.

'It was ages ago, about a year ago. I don't really want to chat about Mary because I don't really know a lot about her to be honest.'

Mary was snapped passionately kissing Chris, who rose to fame on Love Island in 2017, after enjoying a date at London's STK Restaurant last summer.

Chris is said to still sometimes 'like' her social media posts.

Fling: The pair dated briefly following Chris' split from former Little Mix star Jesy Nelson, with Mary thought to have referenced him on the show when she said she didn't want to date a footballer again

Chris said: 'I went on a date with her and I was pictured with her but that was as far as it went. She's a nice girl and I wish her all the best, but she's not my ex'

The blonde has her own YouTube channel and boasts 185,000 Instagram followers, including former Coronation Street star Helen Flanagan and ex-Love Islanders Molly-Mae Hague and Kaz Crossley.

According to the publication, Chris is thought to not be the only footballer Mary has gone out with and there are rumours she previously dated a Premier League player.

During her time in the villa, Mary was first drawn to Toby Aromolaran, who is also a footballer.

She is currently coupled up with Aaron Simpson, who previously played football for Sutton United.

Romance: Mary is currently coupled up with Aaron Simpson, who previously played football for Sutton United

It comes after Chris and his pro golfer girlfriend Annabel Dimmock recently went Instagram official with their romance.

Beneath a photo shared on 24-year-old Annabel's Instagram, former Love Island star Chris, 28, sweetly wrote: 'Yours,' as she planted a kiss on his cheek and wrapped her arm around him.

Anna - who has played six seasons on the professional golfing circuit - captioned the sweet snap: 'Handsomes,' and made sure to tag her new beau in the post.

The pair appeared to have been enjoying a date at Thorpe Park when the photo was taken, with Anna tagging the theme park as her location.

Love is in the air: It comes after Chris and his pro golfer girlfriend Annabel Dimmock, 24, recently went Instagram official with their romance
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is no stranger to putting together a stylish look.

And Chloe Ross, 28, looked a vision in a baby blue playsuit for an evening at the Sky Garden on Thursday as she was joined by friend Chris Kowalski.

Chloe simply stunned in the chic outfit, which is from her pal Chloe Lewis' Style Cheat range.

Chic: TOWIE's Chloe Ross looked a vision in a baby blue playsuit for an evening at the Sky Garden on Thursday

The former TOWIE star teamed the gorgeous number with white slip-on shoes and a shoulder bag.

Slicking her brown tresses back, Chloe opted for a full-face of effortless makeup that contributed to her overall glow.

Chris, who co-owns a beauty clinic, also cut a stylish figure for their day in London, and Chloe joked with her 108,000 followers that they had gone 'matchy matchy.'

Stunning: Chloe simply stunned in the chic outfit, which is from her pal Chloe Lewis' Style Cheat range

Day out: Slicking her brown tresses back, Chloe opted for a full-face of effortless makeup that contributed to her overall glow

Twinning: Chris, who co-owns a beauty clinic, also cut a stylish figure for their day in London, and Chloe joked with her 108,000 followers that they had gone 'matchy matchy'

The beauty flaunted her beautiful makeup in a car selfie and captioned it: 'off outtt'.

She also showed her utmost support for Chloe Lewis' Style Cheat range, by encouraging her followers to 'swipe up' if they wanted to steal the look for themselves.

Further outfit detailing was showcased, including a belt and buttons.

Gorgeous: The beauty flaunted her beautiful makeup in a car selfie and captioned it: 'off outtt'

Good friend: She also showed her utmost support for Chloe Lewis' Style Cheat range, by encouraging her followers to 'swipe up' if they wanted to steal the look for themselves

Good times: Chloe and Chris looked as if they were having a whale of a time at London's highest public garden, as she shared snaps of their food and views

Chloe and Chris looked as if they were having a whale of a time at London's highest public garden, as she shared snaps of their food and views.

She even teased Chris that 'only he' would bring out hand cream during their meal.

The skyscraper is renowned for its incredible views of the city, and Chloe was keen to show her fans in a scenic video.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jack Grealish and his Manchester City teammates Kyle Walker and Riyad Mahrez enjoyed a night out in their home city on Thursday.

The players appeared at ease as they left the city's Ivy restaurant, despite being quickly swamped by fans as they made their way home.

Jack, 25, looked typically trendy in a luxury white sweatshirt teamed with distressed jeans, with Riyad, 30, rocking a near-identical look in ripped jeans and a white T-shirt. Kyle, 31, donned black jeans and a black varsity jacket.

Night out: Jack Grealish, 25, and his Manchester City teammates Kyle Walker, 31, and Riyad Mahrez, 30, enjoyed a night out in their home city on Thursday

At ease: The players appeared at ease as they left the city's Ivy restaurant, despite being quickly swamped by fans as they made their way home

The trio were escorted out of the up-market restaurant by security.

Riyad kindly took time out of his evening to sign autographs for fans.

The athletes were swiftly escorted to a waiting car and whisked away.

The outing comes two days after Jack revealed a conversation with John Terry helped convince him to leave Aston Villa and join Manchester City.

Trendy: Jack looked typically trendy in a luxury white sweatshirt teamed with distressed jeans and trainers

The attacking midfielder became the most expensive English player of all time when he moved from hometown club Villa to the Premier League champions for a whopping £100million transfer fee on August 5.

And as reported by The Sun, Jack took heed of John's words when the Chelsea and England legend emphasised the prestige of playing European football to him.

He said: 'I remember speaking to John Terry at Villa and he said when you stand there and hear that Champions League anthem there is nothing better.

Keeping warm: Stepping out towards the end of the week, Kyle donned black jeans and a black varsity jacket

Matching: Wearing a similar outfit to teammate Jack, Riyad rocked ripped jeans and a white T-shirt

'It has been difficult watching (Champions League) games. I remember watching City v PSG last year and the first half was amazing. To be involved would be a dream come true.

'When you see a club paying that much for a player it means they trust and value you highly and see so much potential. Now I just hope I can repay this football club by winning as many titles as possible — and winning that trophy we all want.

'The club were so close to winning it last year, they were one goal away. That is exactly why I have come here. I look around the changing room and there is so much talent and depth and I fully believe we can win it this year.'

Jack, who made his City debut as a substitute in Saturday's 1-0 Community Shield final loss against Leicester, and City will kick off their domestic campaign against Tottenham on Sunday August 15 looking to defend their title.

Security: The trio were escorted out of the up-market restaurant by security and were swiftly whisked away by a waiting car
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They've been inseparable since meeting on the 2020 Winter edition of Love Island.

And Molly Smith and her boyfriend Callum Jones appeared just as loved-up as ever as they attended a Klarna Launch party in Manchester on Thursday night.

The Love Island star, 27, and her co-star beau, 25, walked arm-in-arm through the streets of the city as they entered the glitzy showbiz bash.

Glam: Molly Smith and her boyfriend Callum Jones appeared just as loved-up as ever as they attended a Klarna Launch party in Manchester on Thursday night

Molly looked typically stylish as she flaunted her incredible abs in a black crop top, teamed with a pair of chic leather trousers.

The reality personality styled the ensemble with an olive green blazer, while she carried her essentials in a black padded bag with a gold chain strap.

The blonde bombshell wore her long locks in a loose straight style and opted for a glamorous coat of make-up in bronze tones.

Stepping out: The Love Island star, 27, and her co-star beau, 25, walked arm-in-arm through the streets of the city as they entered the glitzy showbiz bash

Molly accessorised with hoop earrings and a selection of rings, while she boosted her petite frame with a pair of perspex heels.

Callum also looked on trend in a plain white T-shirt which he wore under a dark jacket and teamed with a pair of black trousers.

He completed his outfit with a pair of black and white trainers.

The couple, who are both from Manchester, have been inseparable since meeting on the reality show and moved in to a new home together last year.

Molly entered the show as a Casa Amor bombshell and turned Callum's head from his former flame Shaughna Phillips.

Callum was an original Islander and had been coupled up with Shaughna from the beggining, before switching his affections to Molly.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@EastEnders has drawn in its lowest ever rating since it first aired 1985, according to reports.

On July 31 the BBC soap attracted just 1.7 million viewers, minuscule in comparison to the show's heyday, which saw 30 million tune in on Christmas Day 1986 when Den Watts told Angie he wanted a divorce.

According to The Sun, these figures are a 'cause for concern', with 'rival soaps Coronation Street and Emmerdale pulling in much bigger audiences'.

Low ratings: EastEnders has drawn in its lowest ever rating since it first aired 1985, according to reports (pictured: Mick Carter and Phil Mitchell 2020)

The paper suggested that recent storylines are to blame, saying: 'Recent storylines have focused on trendy issues — cosmetic surgery addiction, cannabis oil treatments and online trolling, among others.

'The sheer volume of these bland storylines amounts to overkill.'

It also pointed to the fact that EastEnders is short of 'icons' such as Peggy Mitchell and Dot Branning, while 'Corrie has kept many of its veteran stars, like Bill Roache (Ken Barlow) and Barbara Knox (Rita Tanner).'

A BBC spokesperson told MailOnline: 'Throughout the Euros and the Olympics, EastEnders have been dropping the entire weeks episodes on iPlayer every Monday giving the audience the choice to watch when and where they choose so it's no surprise that the overnight audience has been impacted.'

Heyday: On July 31 the BBC soap attracted just 1.7 million viewers, minuscule in comparison to the show's heyday, which saw 30 million tune in on Christmas Day 1986

The statement continued: 'EastEnders has been streamed 57 million times since this began, making it one of iPlayer's most popular shows.'

It was also reported in March that both EastEnders and Coronation Street had seen a significant drop in their viewing figures.

According to data published by The Mirror, Corrie's audience has fallen by 19 per cent in the past four years while EastEnders has fallen by around 37 per cent.

The numbers also showed the amount of people tuning into watch TV was down nine per cent in the first eight weeks of 2021 compared to the same time period in 2017.

As well as EastEnders and Coronation Street's viewing figures being down, ITV soap Emmerdale also saw their numbers drop by 22 per cent in the period compared.

Writing in Broadcast ­magazine ratings expert Stephen Price said: 'The soaps' dominance of traditional TV appears to be on the wane, no longer impervious to challenge from the linear opposition and losing fans to the streamers.

'With volume falling faster than overall TV viewing and the challenge of other genres more keenly felt, soaps' all-conquering prowess is ­disappearing.'

The study also reportedly found that younger viewers had turned away from soaps in general, claiming that EastEnders lost 53 per cent of viewers aged 16-34.

Slump: EastEnders and Coronation Street saw a significant drop in their viewing figures in March it was claimed (Linda and Mick Carter in EastEnders)

ITV told The Mirror: 'ITV soaps are consistently amongst the most-watched programmes in primetime and they are in the top three most streamed on ITV Hub.'

While a BBC spokesperson told MailOnline: 'A growing proportion of EastEnders' viewing and the majority for under 35s is via BBC iPlayer where the audience value the ability to watch it on demand.

'Since the show returned to air in September 2020, it has generated 262 million iPlayer streaming requests, making it one of the service's very best performing programmes.'

There has been a shift in what people watch over the years, with EastEnders, Corrie and Emmerdale averaging around 8.7m viewers between them in 2007.

However ten years later in 2017 the three soaps had 6.9m people tuning in to watch.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Christine McGuinness turned up the heat on Thursday when she took to Instagram to show off her new lingerie.

The blonde bombshell, 33, posed in two different pieces, first working her best angles in a pink bra and matching briefs and then slipping into a chic black one-piece.

Putting on a busty display, Christine's peachy bottom was visible in the mirror behind her and the Instagram snaps appear to have been taken in the home she shares with husband Paddy McGuiness and their three children.

Wow: Christine McGuinness, 33, turned up the heat on Thursday when she took to Instagram to show off her new lingerie

Wearing her glossy blonde hair loose, Christine beamed from ear to ear in the sexy images.

The doting mother accessorised with a delicate necklace and on her left wrist donned a luxury watch.

Both pieces of lingerie featured delicate lace detailing and made sure all eyes were on Christine's enviable physique

It comes after Christine shared the incredible news that her BRCA (breast cancer gene) test has returned negative.

Peachy: Putting on a busty display, Christine's peachy bottom was visible in the mirror behind her

In a new interview, the star discussed her brave decision to find out whether she has faulty genes after her mother Joanne - who is now in remission - was diagnosed with cancer in September.

'I'm just really relieved,' said an elated Christine, adding: 'Thank God it came back negative.'

Speaking to OK!, the mother-of-three shared: 'It doesn't mean I can't get cancer, but it means my chances are the same as anybody else's.'

Christine has a family history of breast cancer and decided to take the BRCA test after her mother's diagnosis last year.

Christine admitted she was initially hesitant to use testing company Myogenes as she feared the process would be invasive, but told the outlet it was straightforward and simple.

'It's sent in the post – it's just a saliva test and really quick,' she said, adding that results are sent directly to your GP.

Christine also revealed to the publication that if she had tested positive for the gene she would have considered 'a full mastectomy and breast reconstruction to make sure she's around for as long as possible for the children'.

She added that upon hearing the news of her negative test, husband Paddy gave her 'a huge hug' and said he was 'really, really pleased'.

Good news: It comes after Christine shared the incredible news that her BRCA (breast cancer gene) test has returned negative
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He has spent the past few months in New York with his wife and their baby son.

And Kit Harington was spotted on the streets of the Big Apple on Thursday, following a designer splurge during a shopping spree at Saint Laurent.

The actor, 34, cut a casual figure and could be seen leaving the store carrying a black and white branded carrier bag in his hand.

Spending spree: Kit Harington was spotted on the streets of the Big Apple on Thursday, following a designer splurge during a shopping spree at Saint Laurent

The Game Of Thrones star showed off his toned torso in a white T-shirt, which highlighted his muscular biceps as he strolled through the city.

Kit styled his look with a pair of lemon yellow shorts and a pair of white trainers.

The A-lister accessorised his casual look with a pair of stylish sunglasses which he tucked into his T-shirt and a classic-looking watch.

Out and about: The actor, 34, cut a casual figure and could be seen leaving the store carrying a black and white branded carrier bag in his hand

The outing comes after Kit spoke about surviving alcoholism and depression in a candid interview with The Sunday Times last week.

The actor said he 'went through some pretty horrible stuff' in the years since the fantasy drama series ended in 2019.

Kit, who has been sober for two-and-a-half years following a stint in rehab, revealed that while he is now 'very happy' and 'content', he once battled suicidal thoughts.

'I went through some pretty horrible stuff,' Christopher, who goes by the moniker Kit, told The Sunday Times, when describing his life after the end of Game of Thrones.

'Things that have happened to me since Thrones ended, and that were happening during Thrones, were of a pretty traumatic nature and they did include alcohol,' he revealed.

First-time parents: Kit and his actress wife Rose confirmed the arrival of their baby boy in February but have not revealed his name (pictured in April 2019)

'I went through horrible stuff': Kit revealed how he contemplated suicide amid a 'traumatic' battle with alcoholism and depression (pictured in April 2019)

Kit went on to describe his experience of hitting rock bottom, that resulted in a stint in rehab at the Privé-Swiss retreat in Connecticut, costing £95,000 a month.

When asked by the publication whether he ever contemplated suicide, Kit reportedly hesitated before saying: 'The answer is yes. Yes of course. I went through periods of real depression where I wanted to do all sorts of things.'

Kit said he hopes his comments will help others suffering, and admitted to being very 'secretive' about his addictions.

'I will say about my addictions that I kept them very, very quiet and I was incredibly secretive and incredibly locked up with them,' he confessed.

Kit and his actress wife Rose confirmed the arrival of their baby boy in February but have not revealed his name.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

She's been very vocal about her recent weight loss, after overhauling her lifestyle.

And Gemma Collins exuded confidence as she slipped her curves into a colourful beach dress while trying her hand at bodyboarding during her holiday to Cornwall on Tuesday.

The former TOWIE star, 40, looked thrilled as she happily hit the waves with other holidaymakers for her fun-filled staycation.

Adventure Queen: Gemma Collins exuded confidence as she slipped her curves into a colourful beach dress while trying her hand at bodyboarding during her holiday to Cornwall on Tuesday

Gemma appeared in her element as she got stuck into the water sport as she confidently waded into the water with her loved ones.

The star donned a black swimsuit beneath her loose-fitting dress and swept her blonde locks off her face with an orange hairband.

Despite being seemingly new to the sport, Gemma sported a huge smile on her face as she threw herself into her latest activity.

Fun times: Gemma appeared in her element as she got stuck into the water sport as she happily waded into the water with her loved ones

You go girl! Despite being seemingly new to the sport, Gemma sported a huge smile on her face as she threw herself into her latest activity

Beach style: The star donned a black swimsuit beneath her loose-fitting dress and swept her blonde locks off her face with an orange hairband

Getting wavy: Gemma joined a throng of other surfers as she hit the waves on her bodyboard

Staycation fun: Gemma certainly didn't care about getting soaked as she splashed around in the sea amid the beach day

All together now: The blonde beauty shared a laugh with her loved ones as she tried out the new sport

At one point Gemma checked her outfit to see if it hadn't slipped down while in the water before recommencing the fun.

It comes after Gemma took to Instagram on Thursday to share a photograph of herself in a wetsuit as she revealed that she'd tried out surfing at Watergate Beach her Cornish getaway.

The TV personality sported wet hair after riding the waves and pulled down her neoprene one-piece to reveal a strapless swimsuit beneath.

Loving life: She couldn't keep the smile off her face as she larked around in the water on her bodyboard

Shore thing: Gemma looked determined to master the skill of bodyboarding amid her fun beach outing

Fun in the sun: Gemma was sure to soak up the sun during the beach day amid her summer staycation

Whoops! At one point Gemma checked her outfit to see if it hadn't slipped down while in the water before recommencing the fun

In check: Gemma checked herself out as she took a little pause from her fun in the water

Liberating: Gemma looked over the moon as she embraced her wild side

Holding up a large yellow surfboard while standing on the beach, Gemma flashed a wide smile and pulled the shaka sign - associated with surfers - with her hand.

She wrote alongside her snap: 'COWABUNGA! Absolutely loving the surf. Dude life. it's so much fun I can't tell you.

'Never did a staycation before but fallen in love with Cornwall. Might need to get myself a place next to Ramsey.'

Life's a beach: The Diva Forever star lifted up her dress as she walked along in the sea alongside her nephew Hayden

And breathe! Gemma took a moment to push her hair back and adjust her clothes amid her bodyboarding session

Living her best life: Gemma was certainly enjoying herself, sporting a big smile while splashing around in the sea

Woah there! Gemma caught the eyes as she floated along on her board

The best time: The star proudly displayed her curves in her eye-catching beach dress

Her surfing adventure comes after Gemma share a video of herself to Instagram demonstrating her weight-lifting routine with her 2.2 million followers.

The sprawling garden at her £1.35 million Essex mansion featured as her backdrop, complete with an outdoor sofa, a table and chairs, gas patio heater and recliners.

Donning a black sports bra and black-and-white printed leggings, the former TOWIE star showed off her 3.5 stone weight loss in the two-piece.

Water babe: The TV personality let her hair loose while frolicking in the sea

Surf's up! Gemma can certainly add another string to her bow following her successful surf

Hey there: Gemma was having the best time on her board as she joined other surfers in the water

Family time: The beauty spent some quality time with her nephew during the fun-filled outing

Addressing the camera, she said: 'Girls, guys, all you honeys following me? People are scared to use weights because they think it's going to bulk them.

'Actually, it gives you definition. And you don't need to rush your exercises, you know. You can take time to do something really simple.

'My bit that drives me mad is all the extra candy under the arms and the back, the back fat, can't bear it,' the Dancing on Ice star said as she learnt forward to pick up a kettlebell weight.

Fun! It comes after Gemma took to Instagram on Thursday to share a photograph of herself in a wetsuit as she revealed that she'd tried out surfing at Watergate Beach her Cornish getaway

'Let's get moving, honeys': Her surfing adventure comes after Gemma share a video of herself to Instagram demonstrating her weight-lifting routine with her 2.2 million followers

Luxurious: The sprawling garden at her £1.35 million Essex mansion featured as her backdrop, complete with an outdoor sofa, a table and chairs, gas patio heater and recliners

'Upright rows gives you... you can use a weight of your choice. I'm on 12 now but I didn't start on a 12.

'You just take your time, take a stop midway through, get yourself a water. The point I'm trying to make is you don't have to kill yourself.

'Let's get there, let's get active. Apparently it's raining at the weekend. Let's get moving honeys,' she finished with.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alan Carr's husband Paul Drayton has insisted that he sustained a black eye after he punched himself in the face during a drunken binge because 'I hate myself.'

Paul, 46, who has been married to comedian Alan since 2018, posted a picture of himself with a black eye on Instagram telling a fan: 'We had a bad row.'

Within an hour, it was removed with Paul posting: 'I'm feeling very fragile at the minute and would like to say that Alan would not and has never hit me.

Shocking: Alan Carr's husband Paul Drayton has insisted that he sustained a black eye after he punched himself in the face during a drunken binge because 'I hate myself'

'And I'm devastated that he has to deal with this today.'

Paul, who has a history of alcoholism told MailOnline: 'I punched myself in the face because I hate myself. There was no fight.

'The Instagram post was just a joke, that's all.'

Paul admitted that he had 'fallen off the wagon' but that he was getting help.

Never: Paul, 46 - who has been married to comedian Alan since 2018 - removed the photo from Instagram within an hour on Wednesday after telling a fan 'We had a bad row' and took to Instagram the next day to insist the comedian, 45, 'has never hit me'

He added: 'I bet a lot of people are wondering what it's all about but I'm getting the help I need.'

As he was speaking at his house in West London, he was joined by an elderly woman who refused to identify herself.

She said: 'We are getting help for Paul from the people that matter.'

Alan confirmed in a statement shortly after his husband posted the black eye image the injury was a result of him 'being back on the wagon' and he had not been involved in the incident.

Statement: Paul, who has a history of alcoholism told MailOnline: 'I punched myself in the face because I hate myself. There was no fight (pictured with Alan in 2020)

He told The Sun: 'While I was away filming on location the past few weeks, Paul fell off the wagon and started drinking again.

'When I arrived back home from Wales, Paul was covered in scratches and bruises from a drinking binge.'

The Chatty Man host added: 'We are now working together to get the help he needs to get better which is our number one priority right now.'

After a concerned fan commented on Paul's photo asking: 'What the hell happened? Sending my love,' he replied: 'We had a bad row', and added a crying face emoji.

Married: Alan confirmed in a statement shortly after his husband posted the black eye image the injury was a result of him 'being back on the wagon' and he had not been involved in the incident - pictured on their wedding day back in 2020

Vegas nuptials: The pair are seen on their wedding night in Las Vegas

According to The Sun, Paul's famous friends were quick to share their concerns, with Carol Vorderman commenting: 'We love you Paul,' and Tamzin Outhwaite asking: 'When was this? Are you OK?'

The paper added that Paul's post comes three days after he shared a photo of himself wearing a vomit-stained T-shirt alongside the caption: 'This is what alcoholism does to you. My gorgeous husband took this pic.'

MailOnline has reached out to Alan's representatives for comment.

Last August, Alan revealed lockdown had tempted his teetotal husband to start drinking again.

The pair spent the pandemic isolating together on their farm outside London.

Paul went into rehab in 2018 for alcohol problems the same year he married Alan at Adele's home in LA.

Alan said: 'While I was away filming on location the past few weeks, Paul fell off the wagon and started drinking again' (pictured 2019)

Alan told the Kelly Hoppen podcast last year: 'It's been tough for Paul during lockdown. He's been saying, ''Oh, shall we get a bottle?'' and I say, ''No, we're not getting any rosé wine in''.

'He's been so good and I'm so proud of him.'

The Chatty Man host went alcohol free to support his husband but has since started drinking again.

He said: 'I like eating and drinking, but it was ridiculous before - we were cracking open a bottle of rosé because it was a Monday.

'We were out of control. It was a laugh, but looking at Paul, sometimes the party has to stop.'

He added: 'I enjoy a drink and I have it on special occasions now, it's a real treat for me.'

'With lockdown and the rise of podcasts it's reawakened my chatting.

'It's made me want to chat more to people, and I'm quite good at it and I like chatting to people.'

The couple wed in an idyllic ceremony in Los Angeles in front of just four guests in January 2018, before enjoying a relaxing honeymoon in Mexico - but have kept their relationship low profile.

His best pal Adele officiated the wedding ceremony, and he later revealed during an appearance on This Morning in April 2018 that she also paid for the entire wedding.

The couple became engaged in 2016 when they were on holiday in Indonesia.

When Paul popped the question, Alan thought he had had a dental accident while chowing down on his dessert - only to reveal his beau had hidden an engagement ring in the pudding.

Rehab: Paul went into rehab in 2018 for alcohol problems the same year he married Alan at Adele's home in LA (pictured together with Adele)

Alan has been open about Paul's battle with alcoholism and spoke about it in his book ALANATOMY.

He said: 'I want to be there for him because he's the best thing that's happened to me and I've got to support him and everything.'

Talking about his demons, Alan admitted: 'To be honest, it was a tough year for my Paul. He had a few issues with alcohol, and a lot of the time that was because I was away so much.

'I was out there, working hard, earning the money, and I neglected my personal life, really, so I feel a little bit to blame for that.'

However, Alan is adamant he has no interest in becoming a dad, and neither does Paul.

Setting the record straight on whether he planned a family back in 2015, the funnyman quipped: 'I am so not broody. I don't have a fatherly bone in my body. I struggle with two dogs, I forget to feed them sometimes, let alone a baby.

'Plus, everyone who has kids looks terrible. I see people and say, 'Are you on crack?' and they're like, 'No, I've got two kids'. Paul luckily isn't into kids either.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Faye Winter was ordered to apologise to Teddy Soares by producers who threatened to kick her off Love Island for her expletive rant.

TV execs told Faye, 27, if she refused to back down her place on the show could be in jeopardy after it took her days to take responsibility for her behaviour.

The lettings manager branded partner Teddy, 26, a 'two-faced p****' and warned the rest of the male cast 'I'll f***ing fall out with all you p***** if I need to' during last Friday's episode, which has since sparked a record 25,000 Ofcom complaints.

'Grovel for forgiveness': Faye Winter was ordered to apologise to Teddy Soares by producers who threatened to kick her off Love Island for her expletive rant

A TV insider told MailOnline: 'Faye was ordered by producers to apologise to Teddy, and not only that but to grovel for forgiveness.

'They warned if she refused to back down her place on the show could be in doubt and as the latest arrivals have shown, there's always a new contestant waiting in the wings.'

Faye's reaction saw her swear a reported 57 times at Teddy, and she also picked a fight with dumped Islanders Matthew MacNabb, 26, and Dale Mehmet, 24, who attempted to defuse the situation.

She fumed after being shown a clip of Teddy admitting he felt sexually attracted to Casa Amor bombshell Clarisse Juliette, 24, shouting: 'That screen up there is exactly the f***ing reason why I don't want to be someone's f***ing girlfriend.'

The outburst has seen 25,000 complaints to regulator Ofcom, who are deciding whether to launch an investigation.

'Do I look like I give a f***? No': TV execs told Faye if she refused to back down her place on the show could be in jeopardy after it took her days to take responsibility for her behaviour

'Back down': The lettings manager branded partner Teddy a 'two-faced p****' and warned the rest of the male cast 'I'll f***ing fall out with all you p***** if I need to'

During the row, Faye shouted at Teddy: 'Do you know how childish you are hun? Do I look like I give a f***? No. Do I want you to sit on my middle finger? Yes.

'I do not want to speak to you because right now you look like a two-faced p**** and I want nothing to do with you.

'Everything that was shown of me on that f***ing screen, you knew. Everything that was shown of you on that f***ing screen, I knew jack s*** about. Everything on that screen I didn't f***ing know.'

She also projected her angry towards the rest of the male cast, who had each been exposed for their behaviour in Casa Amor, saying: 'There's no point being awkward, they're all f***ing look at them, they're all shady as f***. They've all scurried off like f***ing ants, f*** off.'

'They're all shady as f***': During the row, Faye shouted at Teddy: 'Do you know how childish you are hun? Do I look like I give a f***? No. Do I want you to sit on my middle finger? Yes'

On Tuesday's episode, days after Faye's eruption was aired, she was finally filmed apologising to Teddy for her wrongdoings.

Speaking to camera in the Beach Hut, Faye said: 'I need to apologise for the way I spoke to him the night that I lost my head. It's kind of make or break isn't it, for me and Teddy now. I need to have a normal, adult should I say, quiet, shall I also say, conversation with him.'

She told Teddy: 'First and foremost, no beating around the bush, I am really sorry for the way I spoke to you, like really sorry. There's no excuse for the way I spoke to you or how I raised my voice, and no one should have someone speak to them like that.

'Seeing what I saw on screen, I was hurt and for me to react like that I obviously do care about you a lot, like a lot. I would love to show you that isn't how I feel, and I'm not done and hopefully be able to start with you and continue with you on this journey. I wouldn't say sorry to just anyone, sorry rarely leaves my lips.'

The couple have since put the fallout behind them, even hinted at cementing their romance by going all the way and having sex.

'I am really sorry': On Tuesday's episode, days after Faye's eruption was aired, she was finally filmed apologising to Teddy and the couple has since put the fallout behind them

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tyson Fury's baby daughter was dead for three minutes before being resuscitated by 'miracle workers' at Liverpool children's hospital.

The newborn is currently in intensive care, and while Athena is said to be 'stable', Tyson's father John revealed that things had been touch and go earlier tin the week.

'It's been a bit of a white knuckle ride, we've had a lot to deal with,' John told BT Sport.

Shocking: Tyson Fury's baby daughter was dead for three minutes before being resuscitated by 'miracle workers' at Liverpool children's hospital

'But we've come out on the other side due to professionalism of Alder Hey Hospital in Liverpool, they're the best children's hospital in the country if not the world.

'They've been really magnificent, they've really saved her life because she was dead for three minutes and they brought her back, it's onwards and upwards from today.'

Earlier in the day, Tyson shared an update on his newborn daughter Athena's condition, saying she has had a 'stable day' without using a breathing ventilator.

The boxer, 33, - who shares the little one with wife Paris, 31, - took to Instagram on Thursday to say that she was 'doing well' but is still in intensive care 'for now'.

Devoted parents: The boxer, 33, - who shares the little one with wife Paris, 31, - took to Instagram on Thursday to say that she was 'doing well' but is still in intensive care 'for now' (pictured together in May)

Alongside a picture of her in hospital he wrote: 'Update for everyone. Baby Athena is doing well & has had a stable day off ventilator, thanks to everyone for the prayers, still in ICU for now.

'Thanks to all the DRs & nurses. God bless you all.'

Meanwhile, Tyson later shared a snap of his sweet birthday card 'signed' by his newborn daughter as he marked his 33rd birthday.

The special card featured tiny footprints belonging to his baby in pink and yellow, alongside the heartwarming message which read: 'To daddy, happy birthday, I love you with all my heart Athena xxx.'

Beside on set of footprints were the words: 'Athena four days old.'

The couple revealed that Athena was born on Sunday and taken straight to the ICU afterwards but didn't give any further details.

In February Paris revealed she was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition.

Precious: Meanwhile, Tyson later shared a snap of his sweet birthday card 'signed' by his newborn daughter as he marked his 33rd birthday

It come a day after Paris shared a sweet video of her baby in hospital, after the tot was re-admitted to intensive care.

The mother-of-six took to her Instagram stories on Wednesday morning to film her little girl, where she revealed that she has a 'big day today'.

It came as Tyson raised over £30,000 for children's charity Alder Hey Family House Trust who run the Ronald McDonald House in Liverpool.

Sad: It come a day after Paris shared a sweet video of her baby in hospital, after the tot was re-admitted to intensive care

The sweet clip sees little Athena lying in her cot with what appears to be a breathing aid attached while her mother films her.

Captioning her video, Paris penned: 'My beautiful baby girl this morning. More awake now and sucking her dummy.'

She added: 'She has a big day today, please God it goes well', alluding to a possible medical procedure for the tot.

Newest addition: The mother-of-six, 31, took to her Instagram stories on Wednesday morning to film her little girl, where she revealed that she has a 'big day today'

It follows Tyson successfully raising over £30,000 for the children's charity Alder Hey Family House Trust, whom he credits for supporting him and his family during this difficult time.

Taking to Twitter on Tuesday, Tyson thanked his followers for their fundraising efforts and told how they had raised £27,000 in just 5 hours.

He wrote: 'When the power of social media is utilised for good it's beautiful to witness. We've raised over £27k in 5 hours @RMHCUK

'Thank you all. Please continue to support this cause, raise awareness for an independent charity that depends on donations.'

However, at the time of writing, the amount had actually soared, with the total currently standing at £32,154.

Getting there: Captioning her video, Paris penned: 'My beautiful baby girl this morning. More awake now and sucking her dummy'

It comes after Tyson revealed that his newborn daughter was back in intensive care, just hours after she came off the ventilator following her first ICU admission.

The boxer, whose daughter was born on Sunday, took to Instagram on Tuesday to share a snap of his baby girl where he announced the news.

Alongside the photo of a sleeping Athena in which she's hooked up to various wires, the father-of-six, penned: 'Baby Athena is back on icu, please keep her in your prayers'

Amazing! It comes as her boxer husband Tyson raised over £30,000 for children's charity Alder Hey Family House Trust who run the Ronald McDonald House in Liverpool

In February Paris revealed that her daughter was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition.

Speaking on Loose Women after announcing her pregnancy, she said: 'I usually have a condition that makes the babies come a bit earlier so it will probably be the beginning of August, which is better for me, the last few weeks are terrible!'

Tyson's wife Paris previously shared the first snap of their baby daughter on Monday following the tot's first admission to intensive care which saw have a ventilator to help with her breathing.

Poor baby: It comes after Tyson, 32, revealed that his newborn daughter was back in intensive care, just hours after she came off the ventilator following her first ICU admission

Taking to her Instagram stories, the mother-of-six, 31, uploaded the adorable snap of her baby girl wrapped up in a blanket shortly after she came off the ventilator.

Captioning the image, Paris gave an update on Athena's health, writing: 'Thank God she's doing well and thank you for all your messages, thoughts and prayers.

The sweet image saw little Athena asleep in a white baby grow, while wrapped up warm in a blanket featuring a bubby swinging on a swing adorned with pink flowers.

Condition: In February Paris revealed that her daughter was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition

Candid: Speaking on Loose Women after announcing her pregnancy, she said: 'I usually have a condition that makes the babies come a bit earlier so it will probably be the beginning of August, which is better for me, the last few weeks are terrible!'

It follows Tyson previously revealing that his newborn baby daughter is 'off the ventilator'.

The boxer's wife Paris gave birth to Athena on Sunday, and on Monday morning, Tyson took to Instagram to update his fans on the health of their sixth child, writing: 'The baby is in a stable position and doing well - hopefully she comes out of ICU today.'

Hours later, the world-famous athlete shared a clip of himself cradling his newborn, telling his Instagram followers: 'Hi guys, the baby's doing fantastic, a lot, lot better.

Little one: Tyson's wife Paris previously shared the first snap of their baby daughter on Monday following the tot's first admission to intensive care which saw have a ventilator to help with her breathing

Update: Captioning the image, Paris gave an update on Athena's health, writing: 'Thank God she's doing well and thank you for all your messages, thoughts and prayers'

'She's off the ventilator, she's doing really good, look, she's lovely.'

Tyson revealed earlier in the day that he is raising money for the Ronald McDonald House charity, which provides 'home from home' accommodation for families with children in Liverpool's Alder Hey Children's Hospital.

Standing next to his father in an Instagram video, he explained he wants to raise money for the charity due to 'the fantastic job they do on a daily basis'.

Incredible news: Tyson previously revealed his newborn baby daughter Athena is 'off the ventilator' in a new Instagram clip shared on Monday

Intensive care: Tyson's update comes hours after the world-famous boxer revealed his newborn baby daughter Athena (pictured) was in intensive care

Tyson has remained at Alder Hey hospital since the arrival of his sixth child and explained in a clip shared on Monday that he will be auctioning two signed WBC belts and offering a meet and greet to a randomly selected GoFundMe donor.

Standing next to his father John in the hospital's carpark, Tyson told his followers in a short clip: 'Hi this is Tyson Fury aka the Gypsy King. I'm just here with my dad at the children's hospital.

'They do a fantastic job on a daily basis. We've got two WBC belts here that I'm going to sign personally and we're going to put them up for charity to raise some money for the hospital.'

Fundraising: Tyson revealed he's raising money for the Ronald McDonald House charity which provides accommodation for families with children in hospital on Monday

He concluded: 'Whoever wins - I'll pick a winner at random - I will do a personal meet and greet to whoever wins these belts and I'll personally sign them to you.'

It comes hours after Tyson revealed his newborn baby daughter is in intensive care.

The day before, Tyson wrote: 'Please can everyone pray for my baby girl who was born this morning. Athena Fury born 8/8/21.'

Tyson said: 'Hi this is Tyson Fury aka the Gypsy King. I'm just here with my dad at the children's hospital'

He added: 'They do a fantastic job on a daily basis. We've got two WBC belts here that I'm going to sign personally and we're going to put them up for charity to raise some money'

Health update: Tyson revealed his newborn baby Athena is in intensive care but 'stable' as he continued to ask people to keep her in their prayers on Instagram on Monday

The birth of their baby girl comes after Paris endured a lengthy two-day labour.

The new mother-of-six took to Instagram to re-share a video on Saturday that her husband took of them both eating what appeared to be spicy food - in an attempt to speed on the birth of Athena.

Her caption read: 'He is dangerous with a camera think he's bored now we nearly at the end of day 2 in here and still no little girly'.

New baby: Paris, 31, gave birth to their sixth child together on Sunday - a girl named Athena (Pictured days before giving birth)

Congratulations: Tyson announced the news on Instagram, where he asked his followers to pray for their little girl

Lengthy labour: The arrival of their baby girl comes after Paris endured a lengthy two-day labour

Tyson could be heard in the background saying: 'Just thought I'd take this opportunity to share with you our little date in the labour ward'.

Paris also posted a photo of herself on her Stories from Friday when she arrived in hospital.

The expectant mother posed in a black Calvin Klein T-Shirt alongside an array of what looked like a Louis Vuitton duffle bag and small suitcase, as well as a Harrods shopper behind her.

Designer mother-to-be: The expectant mother posed in a black Calvin Klein T-Shirt alongside what looked like a Louis Vuitton duffle bag and small suitcase, as well as a Harrods shopper

She captioned the pre-birth pic: 'Landed here yesterday morning'.

Paris then posted a video of her husband in the labour ward watching a game of boxing whilst they waited for the arrival of their little one.

The couple are already parents to Venezuela, 10, Prince John James, eight, Prince Tyson II, four, Valencia, three, and Prince Adonis Amaziah, 16 months.

The couple announced they were expecting their sixth child together in February.

Tyson shared the happy news on boxing correspondent Gareth A Davies' YouTube series.

Tyson revealed the news while gushing about his family values, telling Davies: 'Paris is pregnant again and the Lord has blessed us definitely with another child and I'm very thankful.

'Got a beautiful wife, beautiful kids, they're all healthy. That's the most important thing, you know, your health and your family.

Big family: They are already parents to Venezuela, 11, Prince John James, eight, Prince Tyson II, four, Valencia, three, and Prince Adonis Amaziah, 12 months

'Nothing else really matters. Your job, your money, your wealth, your career, none of that really matters because you can get another job, you can start snooker or you can go make more money.

'It doesn't really matter but the one thing you can't get back is your family. You can't get back time lost and that's the crazy thing about it all.'

The proud dad, who is the highest-paid fighter of 2020 with £46million in earnings, also spoke about how he and Paris are raising their children to understand the value of money.

'For me it's very important to stay close to my grassroots as I've got a lot of kids coming up, I've got five kids, very important for them to know the value of money,' he explained.

Parents: Tyson first announced the pregnancy boxing correspondent Gareth A Davies' YouTube series (pictured with Paris in March 2020)

'It's very important for them to know how to earn money. So, if they see me splashing out all the time and living a move stars' lifestyle they grow up thinking that's the only way they can live.

'To earn from a normal job, £200-300-a-week, however much they're going to get, they might think that's no good if they've been spoiled rotten by multimillionaire parents.

'So I don't do that. My kids don't go to private school, I don't have any private education, they just go to normal school, everyone does normal stuff.'

Paris, who shares a sprawling family home with Tyson and their children in Morecambe, has been forging ahead with her own career over the past year, landing a role as a panellist on Loose Women last year.

It's a girl! In March, the blogger revealed the gender of her baby after having a celebration with her family at their abode

Romance: The couple met at a wedding when Paris was 15 and Tyson was 17, but didn't start dating until after being re-introduced a year later after Paris' 16th birthday

Family: The proud dad, who is the highest-paid fighter of 2020 with £46million in earnings, also spoke about how he and Paris are raising their children to understand the value of money

In March the couple revealed they were having a girl after having a celebration at their abode.

Paris took to Instagram to share the news as she uploaded an image of the sportsman and their children covered in pink confetti.

Captioning the heart-warming image, Paris wrote: 'It's a girl... We are due another little princess, god willing come summer we will have 3 girls and 3 boys. So blessed.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Boris Becker looked like he had caught the sun on Thursday as his stunning swimsuit-clad girlfriend Lilian De Carvalho generously applied sun cream to his rather rouge-looking face in Formentera.

The couple, who have been dating since last summer, appeared in the throes of love as they chartered a boat for a day out to sea - and packed in plenty of fun-filled water activities.

Boris, 53, couldn't keep his eyes of Lilian, believed to be in her 40s, who looked incredible in a daring red high-rise swimsuit, as she tenderly coated his face in SPF.

Sunburnt? Boris Becker looked like he had caught the sun as his stunning swimsuit-clad girlfriend Lilian De Carvalho generously applied sun cream to his rather rouge-looking face in Formentera on Thursday

Political risk analyst Lilian showed off her cleavage in the one-piece which plunged to the navel and featured a criss cross halterneck design.

The high-rise design accentuated her long legs and peachy derriere as she made the most of the sunny climes on the boat's deck.

She wore her long raven tresses in braids and complemented her natural beauty with a minimal make-up look.

Sizzling display: Political risk analyst Lilian showed off her cleavage in the one-piece which plunged to the navel and featured a criss cross halterneck design

Smitten: The couple, who have been dating since last summer, appeared in the throes of love as they chartered a boat for a day out to sea, and packed in plenty of fun-filled water activities

Boris, meanwhile, donned a pair of blue board shorts and couldn't wait to get out to sea.

The Wimbledon champ showed off his athletic side as he jumped into the water before wrapping his arms around Lilian as they splashed around on a paddle board.

The lovebirds were later seen walking along the coast. Lilian covered up in a green kaftan while Boris donned a polo neck and black shorts.

The couple were joined by a host of friends for the action-packed day out and were seen laughing with them as they took out a small boat to the yacht.

Racy: The high-rise design accentuated her long legs and peachy derriere as she made the most of the sunny climes on the boat's deck

There he goes! Boris, meanwhile, donned a pair of blue board shorts and couldn't wait to get out to sea

Making a splash: The Wimbledon champ showed off his athletic side as he jumped into the water before wrapping his arms around Lilian as they splashed around on a paddle board

Sealed with a kiss: Although now being in Spain, the loved-up couple, who have been linked since June 2020, have also spent time together in London as well as being seen in Dubai back in January during the third UK lockdown

Although now being in Spain, the loved-up couple, who have been linked since June 2020, have also spent time together in London as well as being seen in Dubai back in January during the third UK lockdown.

London-based Lilian is a political risk analyst and has three degrees, including a masters in African studies from the School of Oriental and African Studies, and speaks five languages.

The holiday comes after Boris' ex-wife Lilly, 45, spoke out about their 2018 split after nine years of marriage. The couple share their son Amadeus, 11.

Jump: Boris couldn't wait to get into the sea and made an almighty leap

Clever: London-based Lilian is a political risk analyst and has three degrees, including a masters in African studies from the School of Oriental and African Studies, and speaks five languages

Stunning: Lilian wore her long raven tresses in braids and complemented her natural beauty with a minimal make-up look

Group: The couple were joined by a host of friends for the action-packed day out and were seen laughing with them as they took out a small boat to the yacht

In a new interview with Hello!, Lilly revealed how she and Boris 'truly tried' to make their relationship work, and how, three years after their split, she is ready to find love again.

Reflecting on her marriage breakdown, the Dutch model said: 'Sadly, Boris and I cannot make it work – that is the reality, we have truly tried.

'I am not full of regrets as he gave me so many wonderful memories and also our incredible son. For that alone I will be truly grateful – you learn and move on. Take the chapter and use it.'

Stroll: The lovebirds were later seen walking along the coast. Lilian covered up in a green kaftan

Covering up: Boris donned a polo neck and black shorts which gave his sunburnt chest some relief

Getaway: Boris was later spotted in a white Puma polo

Sunny smiles: The sportsman also put on a black cap, the pair looking in high spirits as they continued to enjoy their holiday

Shades: Lilian rocked a pair of chic black sunglasses, with Boris also donning some shades

Lilly added that she would like to find love again. 'I am emotionally ready, so it's just trying to find the right one. Don't we all long for that fairytale ending?', she revealed.

The model also spoke proudly about their son Amadeus as she revealed he 'definitely has his father's genes' and is 'very interested in running and tennis'.

The former Wimbledon champion split from model Lilly in 2018 after a 13-year relationship and nine years of marriage, and it is understood that they are still in the 'final stages' of divorcing.

In May 2019, the pair reached an agreement after becoming embroiled in a family court dispute over their son.

PDA: Lilian put an arm around her beau as they were surrounded by luxe boats

Lilly reflected on 2018 after parting ways from her husband of nine years during an interview with Günther Jauch on Germany's RTL.

She admitted the couple will never rekindle their relationship, insisting: 'It's really over between us. 2018 was the worst time of my 42 years. He so grossly disappointed me.'

Speaking on the negative effects of being in the limelight, she went on: 'What makes it so bad is that everything is happening in public now. But I married a public man, maybe it's part of it.'

'Unfortunately, [a reunion would] not work anymore. Too much has happened. I do not want to, he does not, and that's fine. It's really over between us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kate Ferdinand has shared a candid make-up free photo in which her facial pigmentation can be seen.

Taking to Instagram on Thursday, the blonde beauty told her followers: 'Me without make-up,' as she posted the image, and admitted: 'I always feel so insecure about it & it really does get me down, I try to cover it at all costs.'

Beneath the bare-faced photograph, Kate, 30, spoke truthfully about 'trying my best to love myself as I am' and shared: 'As soon as the sun comes out my face looks like a patchwork.'

Powerful: Kate Ferdinand, 30, shared a candid makeup-free Instagram photo on Thursday in which her facial pigmentation could be seen

The wife off star footballer Rio Ferdinand wrote in full: 'PIGMENTATION. ''Kate what's the dark thing above your lip?''

'Me without makeup. For the last few years even with SPF 50 & a hat, as soon as the sun comes out my face looks like a patchwork.

'I always feel so insecure about it & it really does get me down, I try to cover it at all costs.'

The doting mother added: 'For much of my life I've felt like I have to try my best to be perfect, I'm fed up of having crazy unrealistic expectations all of the time.'

Candid: In her post, Kate spoke truthfully about 'trying my best to love myself as I am' (pictured in July)

She concluded: 'Although I make it hard for myself sometimes I'm trying my best to love myself as I am.'

Earlier this year, Kate revealed in an interview with The Sun that she suffers from melasma, a patchy skin pigmentation.

Speaking to the paper in March, Kate was asked what her 'beauty splurges' were, to which she replied: 'All my skincare products are expensive, but I have suffered from melasma [patchy pigmentation] so I really do take care of my skin.'

The British Skin Foundation explains melasma as 'a common skin condition of adults in which brown or greyish patches of pigmentation (colour) develop, usually on the face.'

Kate wrote: 'Me without makeup. For the last few years even with SPF 50 & a hat, as soon as the sun comes out my face looks like a patchwork'

The description continues: 'It is more common in women, particularly during pregnancy (when up to 50% of women may be affected). Sometimes men may also be affected. Melasma is more common in people of colour and those who tan very quickly but can occur to anyone.'

The charity's information page concludes: 'Melasma usually becomes more noticeable in the summer and improves during the winter months.

'It is not an infection; therefore, it is not contagious, and it is not due to an allergy. It is not cancerous and will not develop into skin cancer.'

Kate's honest post comes after she slipped into a very busty black bikini while enjoying time on a boat on a sun soaked family getaway on Sunday.

Kate looked every inch the beach beauty by donning a straw fedora and oversized black sunglasses, before cuddling up to her husband Rio, 42, on the boat.

Kate and Rio share eight-month-old son Cree and she is also close to his three other children; Lorenz, 14, Tate, 12, and Tia, 10.

Holiday: Kate looked every inch the beach beauty by donning a straw fedora and oversized black sunglasses, before cuddling up to her husband Rio, 42, on the boat
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@EastEnders actress Rose Ayling-Ellis will make history as the first deaf contestant to take part in Strictly Come Dancing.

The soap has scored two of their stars to join the upcoming series, with Rose being announced on Thursday night- hours after her former co-star Nina Wadia was revealed as the 11th celebrity to be taking part in the dance competition.

The actress, 30, who plays Frankie Lewis, said she hopes by taking part in Strictly she will 'break down barriers' for the deaf community.

Bring it on: EastEnders actress Rose Ayling-Ellis will make history as the first deaf contestant to take part in Strictly Come Dancing

'To be the first deaf contestant on Strictly Come Dancing is sooooo exciting.. and a little bit scary,' Rose said.

'It is the hardest secret I have ever had to keep so it feels amazing to finally have this out in the open.

'I hope I will do the deaf community proud and break down more barriers. But I am also very excited to learn an incredible new skill and even better I get to learn whilst wearing beautiful dresses made especially for me.'

Double trouble: It comes after EastEnders' Nina Wadia was announced as the 11th star to join the show

Twinkle toes: The star, who plays Frankie Lewis on the soap, was announced as the 12th celebrity to join the line-up for the new series on Thursday night

The news was first announced on EastEnders' Twitter page. The post said: 'We're unbelievably excited to announce that our very own @RoseAylingEllis will be joining the cast of @bbcstrictly 2021!

Take a look at our exclusive interview with @EmmaBarton and Rose. Good luck from all of us at #EastEnders, Rose!'

Rose is the first ever deaf actor to play a deaf character on the soap.

She has previously appeared in various stage productions, and her other TV credits include Summer of Rockets and Casualty. Rose use British Sign Language (BSL).

Raising awareness: Rose is the first ever deaf actor to play a deaf character on the soap (pictured with Dani Dyer)

Woo" The news was first announced on EastEnders' Twitter page: 'We're unbelievably excited to announce that our very own @RoseAylingEllis will be joining the cast of @bbcstrictly 2021'

Jonnie Peacock was the first visibly disabled person to compete on Strictly in 2017.

Will Bayley, JJ Chalmers and Lauren Steadman have also starred in the show in the following years and raised awareness for disabilities.

Earlier on Thursday, Rose's co-star Nina was announced as the 11th celebrity contestant to join the line-up.

Groundbreaking: Jonnie Peacock was the first visibly disabled person to compete on Strictly in 2017

Skilled: JJ Chalmers (left) and Lauren Steadman (right) have also starred in the show in the following years and raised awareness for disabilities

The EastEnders actress, 52, was unveiled during Lorraine and admitted the only way she would stand a chance of winning the show is if she 'blindfolded the judges'.

Speaking to stand-in host Christine Lampard, the mother-of-two admitted: 'I am so scared. I like dancing like no one's watching, so we just need to blindfold the judges and I'm going to win.

'I think I should do this before I'm too old and can't walk anymore. I just want to grab life by the horns and just enjoy it.'

Cheeky: The actress, 52, was unveiled during Thursday's episode of Lorraine and admitted the only way she would stand a chance of winning the show is if she 'blindfolded the judges'

One to watch: Nina is best known for playing Zainab Masood in EastEnders , where she won Best Onscreen Partnership and Best Comedy at the British Soap Awards

Talented: The actress also had starring roles in Goodness Gracious Me (pictured)

Nina is best known for playing Zainab Masood in EastEnders, where she won Best Onscreen Partnership and Best Comedy at the British Soap Awards, before leaving the soap in 2013.

The actress also had starring roles in Goodness Gracious Me and the Open All Hours spin-off Still Open All Hours.

Meanwhile Sense and Sensibility actor Greg Wise, 55, revealed he finally decided to sign up to Strictly to honour the five year anniversary of his sister Clare's death from cancer.

Speaking about his motivation, Greg - who is married to Emma Thompson - explained: 'Clare was a huge disco diva and we sent her out of this life in a disco ball coffin to banging 80s music.'

New contestant: Emma Thompson's husband Greg Wise signed up to Strictly in honour of his late sister who loved the show so much she was buried in a glitterball coffin

He continued: 'She's prodding me massively to do it. Clare will enjoy watching her little brother do it. She'll be sitting on my left or right shoulder depending on how well I'm doing

Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013 and started a witty and heartfelt blog detailing her battle with the disease.

She was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015 the disease dug into her bones and she was told it was incurable. There were tumours in her arms, ribs, spine and skull.

Greg cancelled a family holiday in Greece and moved into his sister Clare's London flat in the final three months of her life, in order to be her full-time carer, before her death in 2016 aged 51.

Tragic: Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013, was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015 the disease dug into her bones and she was told it was incurable (pictured in 2013)

Cute couple: Greg added that his wife Emma Thompson was 'stupidly excited' that he would be appearing on the show (pictured in 2020)

One to watch: Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown (pictured) Cranford and his breakout role in Sense and Sensibility

Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown, Cranford, Walking on Sunshine and his breakout role in Sense and Sensibility.

Also joining the line-up is Matilda 'Tilly' Ramsay. The CBBC presenter - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and her famous father also made a cameo as he recorded a clip to show to her.

In the video, Gordon, 54, cheekily warned Tilly, 19, not to date any of the dancers, while Tilly admitted she was 'terrified' of the challenge that lies ahead.

Strictly Come Dancing 2021: Gordon Ramsay's daughter Tilly, 19, was the NINTH contestant announced - as her dad warned her not to date any of the dancers!

Tilly revealed she'll be fitting in her appearance on the show around her studies, as she starts university in September, but said she's 'excited for the challenge' of making it all work.

Speaking on the show, Tilly said of the show: 'It's slightly terrifying. Obviously my mum and dad knew.

'I've tried dancing when I was younger, ballet and stuff, but I wasn't very good so I moved to football camp.

'Remembering choreography terrifies me. I'm looking forward to the glitz and the glamour, and learning something new - that's always fun.'

Proud parent: The CBBC presenter - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - was unveiled during Wednesday's episode of This Morning (pictured together in a throwback)

Katie McGlynn and Dan Walker will also put on their dancing shoes.

The former Corrie star, 28, and journalist, 44, were announced as being the seventh and eighth stars set to compete on the hit show during Tuesday's BBC Breakfast.

They will join Dragons' Den star Sara Davies, Rhys Stephenson, AJ Odudu, GBBO's John Whaite, Robert Webb and Tom Fletcher for the new series.

John will also make history as he will form part of the show's first ever all-male pairing.

Joining the show! Katie McGlynn (pictured) and Dan Walker were confirmed as celebrity contestants on the 2021 Strictly Come Dancing line-up on Tuesday

Tragic: Katie is best known for her role as Sinead Tinker in Corrie, for which she was BAFTA nominated and won a National Television Award for Best Serial Drama Performance in 2020

Joining the line-up! Sara Davies was revealed as the sixth contestant set to compete in this year's Strictly Come Dancing on Monday

From the boardroom to the ballroom! The Dragons' Den star, 37, (pictured on the show) admitted she's not too confident about her dancing skills but is excited for the challenge

Keep dancing! CBBC presenter Rhys Stephenson was recently announced as the fifth star on the line-up

Making history: Great British Bake Off winner John will be one-half of the show's first all-male partnership

Line-up: It comes after the first three names have been announced for Strictly Come Dancing 2021 [pictured McFly's Tom Fletcher (L) and presenter AJ Odudu (R)]

Starring role: Peep Show actor Robert Webb is also taking to the floor

The veteran dance show was famously disrupted in 2020 thanks to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

But it seems things are back to normal in 2021 - apart from one or two factors still deemed too tricky to navigate amid the global health crisis.

Show boss Sarah James told The Mirror: 'We're so thrilled that Strictly will be returning for a full-length series this year, and know how much viewers are looking forward to getting their full Strictly fix and seeing the return of much-loved specials.

'We are all so sad that we won't be able to get to Blackpool this year but can't wait to be back dancing at the one and only Blackpool Tower Ballroom in the future.'

The Blackpool episode ordinarily takes place near the end of the series, but was axed last year with restrictions throwing up logistical difficulties on the production.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mark Owen has reportedly made his move to America permanent after selling his sprawling Hampshire home for £6.5million.

The Take That singer, 49, has been living in California with his wife Emma Ferguson and their three children for the past few years, but has retained a base in the UK with the countryside pad.

However, Mark is said to have now sold the stunning nine-bedroom property for three-times the amount he paid for it back in 2010.

Moving on: Mark Owen has reportedly made his move to America permanent after selling his sprawling Hampshire home for £6.5million (pictured in 2019)

Despite Mark having relocated to the US on a permanent basis, sources claim that the move will not impact his duties with Take That alongside Gary Barlow and Howard Donald.

A source told The Sun: 'Mark is only a 10-hour plane ride away and will return to the UK whenever the band needs him.'

MailOnline have contacted Mark's representatives for comment.

The Shine hitmaker previously moved from London to the lavish Hampshire home 11 years ago, paying £2.25million at the time for the abode which boasts six reception rooms, a swimming pool, a tennis court, a wet room as well as stables and a paddock.

Changes: The Take That singer, 49, has been living in a California with his wife Emma Ferguson (pictured together in 2015) and their three children for the past few years, but has retained a base in the UK with the countryside pad

The 9,000 sq.ft Georgian mansion also includes two cottages - a three-bedroom and a two-bedroom - in addition to a Victorian coach house and a party barn all set within 10 acres of grounds.

Mark has occasionally given fans a glimpse of his luxury home, sharing videos of his children's playroom which is decorated with their artwork and footprints.

While other clips have seen him show inside his spacious dressing room featuring large wardrobes covered with illuminated mirrored panels.

It was also revealed in 2017 that he planned to build a recording studio in the property where he would mentor aspiring singer-songwriters.

But after spending thousands renovating the sprawling property, Mark is permanently moving on, leaving behind neighbours including Noel Gallagher.

Kerching: However, Mark is said to have now sold the stunning nine-bedroom property for three-times the amount he paid for it back in 2010

All fine: Despite Mark having relocated to the US on a permanent basis, sources claim that the move will not impact his duties with Take That alongside Gary Barlow and Howard Donald (pictured)

It comes after his band mate Gary Barlow hinted in January that Take That could reunite with all give original members.

Take That started in 1990 as a five group band, before they parted ways in 1996 and later reunited in 2005.

Robbie Williams and Jason Orange both left the band, leaving the trio of Mark, Gary and Howard Donald.

When asked if a reunion with all five stars is on the horizon, the X Factor judge said to The Mirror: 'I think there will [be], I think there will [be].

Pastures new: The Shine hitmaker previously moved from London to the lavish Hampshire home 11 years ago, paying £2.25million at the time for the abode

Glimpse: Mark has occasionally given fans a glimpse of his luxury home, sharing videos of his children's playroom which is decorated with their artwork and footprints (pictured with Emma and eldest children Elwood and Willow in 2013)

'That’s one of the thrills of being in the band. You don’t know what’s going to happen from record to record and it’s lovely. It’s a very safe place Take That.

'It’s a lovely environment. It feels like a safe haven. It’s a place to go back to when you’ve done a bit of playing around and it’s time to go home.'

Take That achieved 12 number one singles on the UK Singles Chart along with eight number one albums . They are currently the most successful boyband in UK chart history.

Robbie exited the band in 1995 and went on to have a number of solo hits including Rock DJ and Angels, while the remaining members announced their split a year later in 1996.

Back for good? It comes after his band mate Gary Barlow hinted in January that Take That could reunite with all give original members

However, they reunited in 2006, minus Robbie, and achieved great success with their reunion tour. The Rock DJ hitmaker returned once again in 2010 for their album, Progress.

However, he stepped away from the limelight in 2014 to focus on becoming a father for the second time. Jason also decided to leave because he did not wish to continue touring.

Jason said at the time of his departure: 'At a band meeting last week I confirmed to Mark, Gary, and Howard that I do not wish to commit to recording and promoting a new album.

'At the end of The Progress Tour I began to question whether it might be the right time for me to not continue on with Take That. There have been no fallings out, only a decision on my part that I no longer wish to do this.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Happiness is a choice, Una Stubbs believed. The actress, beloved for generations — from starring in Summer Holiday with Cliff Richard in the Sixties to her role as Sherlock's Mrs Hudson — was determined to be cheerful.

Una, who has died at her home in Edinburgh, aged 84, admitted her childhood in the Blitz and her mother's debilitating bouts of depression left her with a melancholy streak.

But she refused to give in to low spirits, saying: 'You realise you can either go on and on feeling sad and it affects everybody, or you think: 'Right, I'm going to start trying to pull myself together.' You have a choice to go up or down.'

That streak of no-nonsense jollity ran through almost every appearance she made across seven decades. She was unfailingly sweet but usually with a hint of toughness, like a violet cream with a chip of granite in the middle.

The actress, beloved for generations — from starring in Summer Holiday with Cliff Richard in the Sixties to her role as Sherlock 's Mrs Hudson — was determined to be cheerful. Una Stubbs is pictured above with Cliff Richard and Jacquie Daryl

She showed it as Alf Garnett's rebellious daughter Rita in Till Death Us Do Part, as Aunt Sally in Worzel Gummidge, as Miss Bat in The Worst Witch and most recently as the psychic medium Mrs Haddock in The Durrells.

One of her first TV appearances, in 1957, was advertising chocolates. She was the winsome Rowntree's Dairy Box girl, with a sweet tooth and a pixie hairdo.

Many years later, on the BBC1 ancestry show Who Do You Think You Are?, she was delighted to learn that her grandfather Arthur, whom she never knew, had been a trades union activist at the Rowntree's factory before World War II.

When she was growing up in Hinckley, Leicestershire, her father Clarry also worked on a production line, in a nylon factory. Una was the middle child of three, 'bossed around and not quite sure of myself', she later said.

She showed it as Alf Garnett's rebellious daughter Rita in Till Death Us Do Part, as Aunt Sally in Worzel Gummidge, above, as Miss Bat in The Worst Witch and most recently as the psychic medium Mrs Haddock in The Durrells

Two years old at the outbreak of war, she rarely saw her father. Home Guard duties in London kept him away, and to get back to his family he had to walk and hitch-hike, sometimes sleeping rough on the way.

She remembered he was at home one night in autumn 1940 when the bombs were falling on Coventry, 15 miles away.

With her parents, older sister and baby brother, she sheltered under the dining room table.

'I recall saying to my mother that if war came again, please could we live in the country.'

Her mother, Angela, was stricken with depression and sometimes lay in bed for days. Unable to understand, as a girl Una believed she must somehow be the cause.

'I did everything I could to try to please her,' she said. As she got older, she realised her parents' marriage was not a happy one.

Tensions were made worse because Angela felt ashamed that her husband and his mother had both been born out of wedlock.

Angela's lineage was far grander. Her grandfather was Sir Ebenezer Howard, the philanthropist who raised millions to build the Utopian town of Welwyn Garden City.

Never sure of her place in the world, Una struggled at school. But she loved dancing, and at the age of 14 was sent to the La Roche dance school in Slough. After a debut at the London Palladium, her first television appearance was on a Fifties ITV music show for teenagers, Cool For Cats.

Una jived with the Dougie Squires Dancers to pop and rock'n'roll records, while Tony Hart doodled cartoons to illustrate the songs.

A brief career in modelling followed before she joined Lionel Blair's dance troupe, first in the chorus line and later as a featured performer. She married actor Peter Gilmore (later the star of The Onedin Line) when she was 21, and they adopted a son.

Her big break came in 1963 when she was cast as Sandy, one of the girls who leaps on board the Summer Holiday bus with Cliff Richard. She showed off her energetic jazz dance steps, and it was this movie — and the follow-up, Wonderful Life, also with Cliff — that established her as an actress.

A few years later, Cliff made her a co-star on dozens of episodes of his Saturday night variety show.

Her career, she later said, consisted of unexpected sideways steps. But no one could have predicted the move that followed, to Till Death Us Do Part, the controversial sitcom starring Warren Mitchell as a foul-mouthed bigot and bully whose wife and daughter constantly defy him.

The high point of her barminess was as Holmes's fluffy yet razor-witted landlady, Mrs Hudson, in Sherlock. Una Stubbs is pictured above with Sue Vertue, the producer of Sherlock

Una played Rita, the daughter, accused by Alf of being 'poisoned and corrupted by yer bloody Women's Lib!' She was married to a 'Scouse git' and 'long-haired layabout' called Mike.

Mike was played by Tony Booth, father of Cherie, the wife of former Prime Minister Tony Blair. It may be no coincidence that Una, usually so kind-hearted in her remarks, once said she despised Blair more than any person alive, without explaining why.

After her divorce from Gilmore in 1969, she married Nicky Henson, also an actor, and had two sons. The couple parted in 1975 but stayed friends, even working together on several EastEnders episodes more than 30 years later. She had regrets about her divorces. 'I was probably a boring wife,' she said. 'Once, I saw Nicky with Marguerite [a ballerina whom he married in 1986] and I said: 'Nicky, is that how I was supposed to be?' '

As a single mother trying to bring up three sons while paying the bills, she took whatever work she could get. 'I had to work to keep the family afloat,' she said.

'Offers used to come in and I'd think: 'That pays quite well, I'll do that.' But they weren't exactly career moves. There were times I was doing theatre when I'd think: 'Oh gosh, this is so shabby.' '

Regarded by TV producers as utterly reliable, she was glimpsed in everything from Juke Box Jury in the Sixties to Fawlty Towers, Blankety Blank and The Good Old Days in the Seventies. Never starry or difficult, she was invariably professional.

In 1979, Una was a household name again as sharp-tongued Aunt Sally, a wooden fairground attraction, in the gentle children's TV drama about a magical scarecrow, Worzel Gummidge. Worzel (Jon Pertwee) was besotted with her, yet she treated him with derision, which made his scarecrow heart beat all the faster.

But Una didn't like the character. 'Aunt Sally was like Hitler, really,' she said. 'Horrible woman.'

She also appeared regularly as a team captain on the charades panel show Give Us A Clue, opposite her old boss Lionel Blair. The two enjoyed a natural rhythm in the game, perhaps because they had experimented with the format in the early Sixties in a short-lived version called Don't Say A Word.

Only when her children had grown up could Una take the artistic risks she longed to try. In 1988, Michael Grandage cast her in Twelfth Night, her first Shakespeare, at the Crucible in Sheffield.

She played Maria, a servant, and although she was mortified that a critic said she looked like a chicken (her costume stuck up at the back), it led to much stronger classic roles, such as Madame de Rosemonde in Les Liaisons Dangereuses at the National Theatre.

She also appeared at the National in The Curious Incident Of The Dog in The Night-Time, as a meddling neighbour. 'I used to play kooky,' she said happily. 'Now I play barmy.'

The high point of her barminess was as Holmes's fluffy yet razor-witted landlady, Mrs Hudson, in Sherlock. She referred to the stars, Benedict Cumberbatch and Martin Freeman, as 'my boys'.

In 2014, she revealed another talent — as an artist, when fingertip drawings of her 'boys' done on an iPad were selected for the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition.

As Mrs Hudson, she saw herself as 'more like a mother figure . . . there's so much nastiness going on that maybe to introduce something nicer is a good thing'.

And a good thing it was. There was no one nicer than Una.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sarah Jessica Parker, 56, has slipped back into the off-the-rack sundress that recently caused quite a stir among Carrie Bradshaw fans.

The Sex and the City actress was seen in the ensemble shooting the HBO reboot, And Just Like That..., with costar Cynthia Nixon, 55, in Manhattan on Thursday.

A few weeks back fans of the show were in an uproar after photos emerged of SJP filming in a dress layered over a button-up that was falsely identified to have been purchased from Forever 21.

There she goes: Sarah Jessica Parker, 56, has slipped back into the off-the-rack sundress that recently caused quite a stir among Carrie Bradshaw fans, with costar Cynthia Nixon, 55, in Manhattan on Thursday

During the scene this week, Carrie and Miranda were seen in deep conversation filming on the steps of the Grant Memorial in uptown Manhattan.

Sarah was back in the controversial paisley printed sundress that caused such a hoopla several weeks back taping another scene from presumably the same day - as Carrie doesn't dare repeat outfits.

SJP paired the layered look once more with a pricy Gucci x Balenciaga bag and chunky platform heels with her blonde tresses in a braid, coiffed by hair stylist Serge Normant.

Meanwhile, alongside her, actress Cynthia Nixon looked put together in a long-sleeved sky blue top tucked into a patchy chambray maxi skirt and a pair of denim ballet flats.

Familiar: Sarah was back in the controversial paisley printed sundress that caused such a hoopla several weeks back taping another scene from presumably the same day - as Carrie doesn't dare repeat outfits

Friends: Alongside her, actress Cynthia Nixon looked put together in a long-sleeved sky blue top tucked into a patchy chambray maxi skirt and a pair of denim ballet flats

The star was styled with a camel colored leather back pack, a cross body canvas bucket bag and a chunky statement necklace.

When Parker first appeared on the set of And Just Like That ... in the bohemian dress in late July it was identified by the And Just Like That Closet, an Instagram fan account, as a Forever 21 piece.

Fans went wild with fury that the ultra-fashionable, couture loving Carrie would deign to wear fast fashion.

'So Carrie went from stylish and sexy to frumpy?' one person complained, while someone else wrote: 'Forever21 really? On a 50-something. Patricia Field would never...'

Fancy: SJP paired the layered look once more with a pricy Gucci x Balenciaga bag and chunky platform heels with her blonde tresses in a braid, coiffed by hair stylist Serge Normant

Hoopla: A few weeks back fans of the show were in an uproar after photos emerged of SJP filming in a dress layered over a button-up that was falsely identified to have been purchased from Forever 21

Trend watch: The boho dress was identified by the And Just Like That Closet, an Instagram fan account, as a Forever 21 piece

Patricia Field is the famed costume designer responsible for Sarah Jessica Parker's iconic wardrobe throughout SATC and the subsequent films.

DailyMail.com previously exclusively reported that Field wasn't returning to the reboot.

'Patricia Field is not coming back – she is focusing on Emily in Paris,' a source said. 'This is a first for the show as the clothes for the sixth season and two movies were all styled by Patricia.'

It turns out the social media backlash surrounding the Forever 21 dress was all for naught as it turns out - while still off-the-rack - the dress was made by a different label.

Mistake! It turns out the social media backlash surrounding the Forever 21 dress was all for naught as it turns out - while still off-the-rack - the dress was made by Raga

Changes: DailyMail.com previously exclusively reported that SATC costume designer Patricia Field wasn't returning to the reboot (SJP pictured in the infamous dress on July 28)

The sundress was made by a brand called Raga which is sold at Anthropologie, Nordstrom, and Mod Sense.

Raga confirmed it was one of their pieces last week as they shared images of Sarah on set with the caption: '@SarahJessicaParker as Carrie Bradshaw wearing our Avah Ruffle Strap Maxi Dress. #SJP shows off in her boho chic ensemble for the SATC revival “And Just Like That” [cityscape emoji]'

The dress is currently sold out but had originally retailed for the modest price of $145.

And Just Like That will follows Carrie, Miranda and Charlotte as they navigate middle-aged life in New York City.

They couldn't help it: And Just Like That will follows Carrie, Miranda and Charlotte as they navigate middle-aged life in New York City

Kim Cattrall did not reprise her roll in the reboot as she and SJP have a notoriously frosty relationship.

Sarah Jessica Parker and executive producer Michael Patrick King plan to turn the limited SATC reboot into a multi-season show, a senior production source recently confirmed to told DailyMail.com

Fans can 'expect to see a second season [of And Just Like That] announced soon' by HBO Max the source said, adding that the source added that 'the door is open' for Kim Cattrall to return.

'If she ever changes her mind, she can come back,' they said.

And Just Like That is slated to premiere on HBO Max in late 2021.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@David and Victoria Beckham congratulated their son Cruz as he received his GCSE results on Thursday.

The former footballer took to his Instagram Stories and shared a recent heartwarming snap alongside Cruz, where they have their arms around each other.

The proud father, 46, wrote: 'Cruzie so proud well done big boy'.

Heartwarming: David and Victoria Beckham congratulated their son Cruz, 16, as he received his GCSE results on Thursday

Victoria, 47, shared a photo of her son going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Record numbers of top grades were awarded to pupils doing their GCSE's this year, with 30 per cent of entries in England gaining grades 7 and above - equivalent to A and A*.

David and Victoria are also parents to sons Brooklyn, 22, Romeo, 18, and daughter Harper, 10.

It comes after the family recent enjoyed an evening out at Lucali restaurant in the New York City borough of Brooklyn on Saturday.

Proud: Victoria shared a photo of her son going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Pose: The fashion designer also shared a snap of herself donning a black and white striped robe from her travel set

Style: Meanwhile on Thursday evening Romeo shared this selfie to his Instagram Story wearing a red T-shirt and 'Romeo' necklace

Fashion designer Victoria took to Instagram to share a sweet shot of her famous family during the evening out, with son Romeo notably missing.

'Special night tonight in NYC. I love you so much @davidbeckham @brooklynbeckham @cruzbeckham #HarperSeven We miss you @romeobeckham x Kisses from Brooklyn X VB,' she penned.

David rocked a casual black T-shirt, while Brooklyn and Cruz co-ordinated a white T-shirt and baseball cap look.

On Tuesday, David was hard at work at his football club Inter Miami and brought Harper along with him.

'Special night in NYC': David (centre bottom), 46, and Victoria, 47, ordered 'the best' pizza in the city with kids Harper, 10, Cruz (right), 16, and Brooklyn (centre top), 22 on Saturday night

Tasty: 'Very happy with my pie,' David captioned a photo of his bleach-blonde self relishing his pizza

Taking to Instagram, David revealed that he was enjoying a kickabout on one of the club's pitches with his daughter and shared sweet footage of their game.

Filming Harper kick a ball to him, David could be heard commentating: 'Beckham, to Beckham, yeah!' before kicking the ball into the net.

He then passed the ball back to Harper, saying: 'Yes, pass it back. Nice. Get set - Beckham, to Beckham, woohoo!' as she also scored a goal.

David captioned the post: 'Daddy daughter day at work @intermiamicf BECKHAM to BECKHAM GOOOOAAAAALLL.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liam Payne is said to have 'won back' his former fiancée Maya Henry with a 'romantic gesture', two months after calling off their engagement.

The singer, 27, shocked fans when he announced the couple had split in a surprise announcement in June, but the pair have since reconciled.

A source close to the pair told MailOnline that Liam and Maya, 21, are so sure of their rekindled romance that they've moved back in together.

'They couldn’t live without one another': Liam Payne won back ex-fiancée Maya Henry with a 'romantic gesture' two months after calling off their engagement (pictured in 2019)

The insider revealed: 'Liam started to win Maya back after she returned from the UK and eventually succeeded after a romantic gesture.

'His friends and family all love Maya because she’s such a healthy influence on him, so that probably contributed it. They realised that they couldn't live without one another.'

The source also revealed that their wedding is still scheduled for next year.

MailOnline has contacted Liam and Maya's representatives for comment.

The insider revealed: 'Liam started to win Maya back after she returned from the UK and eventually succeeded after a romantic gesture'

The reports come after Liam and Maya sparked speculation they had reunited after being spotted on a low-key date in Buckinghamshire in late July.

Liam also reached out to his former fiancée on Instagram as he shared a post about not 'letting go' of loved ones.

The singer shared a series of posts on his Instagram stories, before tagging his ex and then stating: 'I love you.'

He wrote: 'Don't let someone go if you really want to love them even if you have to learn to love them through your own mistakes let your instinct tell you that you need them and keep them close we are always running out of time we never gain it. (sic)'

Reconnecting: The pair recently sparked speculation they had reunited after they were spotted on a low-key date in Buckinghamshire in late July (pictured in 2019)

In a follow-up post, he quipped: 'F**k Me I'm Wise,' before tagging Maya, alongside a pair of prayer hands. He concluded his series of cryptic posts: 'I love you, we calm.'

The singer shocked fans after confirming his split from Maya in June, explaining that he needs to 'work on himself' but that he felt upset at 'hurting' her.

During an appearance on Steven Bartlett's Diary of a CEO podcast, Liam also revealed that he's stopped drinking, saying he had 'been sober just over a month now'.

Liam and Maya confirmed their engagement in August 2020 after Liam popped the question during lockdown with a £3 million ring.

They were first linked back in August 2018 shortly after Liam's high-profile split from Cheryl, with whom he shares four-year-old son, Bear.

Confirming he was single, Liam said on the podcast: 'I feel like more than anything at this point, I'm more disappointed in myself that I keep on hurting people.

'That annoys me. I've just not been very good at relationships. And I know what my pattern of things is with relationships at this point.

'I'm just not very good at them so I just need to work on myself before I put myself on to somebody else.'

The Strip That Down singer continued: 'That's where I got to in my last relationship.

'I just wasn't giving a very good version of me anymore, that I didn't appreciate and I didn't like being. I can honestly say I feel better out of it.

Cryptic: It comes after Liam recently reached out to Maya on Instagram

Love: The British musician then tagged his ex, before going on to state, 'I love you, we calm'

'I didn't feel good doing what I did but it had to happen. Just a corny way to say it was the best for us both.'

The split will come as a shock to Liam and Maya's fans, as although the pair haven't been photographed together since September 2020, the couple still follow each other on Instagram and have kept their pictures up with each other.

Liam popped the question to Maya last year with a dazzling diamond ring that set him back an eye-watering £3 million.

MailOnline exclusively broke the news of their engagement in August, the singer then confirmed he had popped the question over the first lockdown.

Shock: Liam revealed that he had split from his fiancée and had quit drinking alcohol while appearing on Steven Bartlett's Diary of a CEO podcast (pictured October 2019)

The pair were first linked back in August 2018 shortly after Liam split from Cheryl.

However, they first set eyes on each other three years earlier, when they were pictured together at a meet-and-greet event when One Direction fan Maya was 15.

It wasn't until September 2019 that Liam publicly spoke about his romance, while promoting his single Stack It Up.

Prior to dating Maya he is said to have enjoyed a four-month whirlwind romance with supermodel Naomi Campbell, which ended in April 2019.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's a regular gymgoer who works incredibly hard to maintain her figure.

Yet Jennifer Lopez, 52, was left feeling a little worn out after taking part in an intense couples workout with her boyfriend Ben Affleck, 48, on Thursday.

The pair came together for a martial arts training session, with Jennifer seen taking a moment to catch her breath before driving home from Ben's Brentwood mansion.

Time out: Jennifer Lopez, 52, was left feeling a little worn out after taking part in an intense couples workout with her boyfriend Ben Affleck, 48, in Brentwood on Thursday

Despite having undergone a gruelling workout, J Lo still looked picture perfect on her way back home.

The mother-of-two looked radiant with her glossy locks worn loose and tousled to frame her face, while she donned gold hooped earrings.

Also seen leaving Ben's abode was the pair's martial arts trainer, who carried out two sturdy exercise mats.

Keeping fit: With Jennifer and Ben such fitness fanatics, the pair are no doubt keen to install a gym in the new place they snap up (pictured on Tuesday)

With Jennifer and Ben such fitness fanatics, the pair are no doubt keen to install a gym in the new place they snap up.

Earlier this week, the couple were photographed near Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate, fueling rumors that the singer is looking to relocate to the West Coast from Miami, Florida for the actor.

They were reportedly touring the five-acre property once belonging to the famous British-American comedian at around 11:30AM, and spent an hour there.

Chilling: The pair came together for a martial arts training session, with Jennifer seen taking a moment to catch her breath before driving home from Ben's Brentwood mansion

The lavish home is currently owned by billionaire Ron Burkle and comes with luxurious amenities such as a one hole golf course.

In addition to Hope's former residence, Ben and Jennifer were spotted touring an $85 million estate in Beverly Hills.

The stunning property comes with everything a celebrity could want and more with 12 bedrooms, a basketball court, and boxing ring, according to TMZ.

The house tour is just another sign of how serious the couple have become, ever since rekindling their romance earlier this year.

This isn't the first time the couple have been spotted house hunting together, with the duo also spotted checking out potential homes last month.

Jennifer has also been spotted touring schools in the area for her children.

The singer shares twins Emme and Max with her ex-husband Marc Anthony.

Ben has three children with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner: Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine, who are all based in the Los Angeles area.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eminem's 19-year-old child has come out as non-binary.

The teenager made the announcement in a TikTok video last week and asked fans to 'call me Stevie (they/she/he)'.

Eminem legally adopted Stevie, formerly known as Whitney, in 2005, after the rapper, 48, briefly reconciled with Stevie's mother Kim Scott, 46.

Announcement: Eminem's 19-year-old child has come out as non-binary and asked fans to 'call me Stevie'

In a video posted on the social media site, Stevie shows their journey to non-binary- an umbrella term for people whose gender identity doesn't sit comfortably with 'man' or 'woman'.

Audio of the teenager crying with joy is played at the start of the video before a montage of photos is shown to document their transformation over the years.

The video begins with snaps of Eminem's child being known as Whitney with 'she/ her pronouns' captioned before transitioning into photos alongside the pronouns 'they/ her' 19 seconds in.

Cutting their blonde hair short and sporting a nose piercing, Stevie then poignantly reveals their name alongside the caption 'all pronouns'.

Family: Eminem legally adopted Stevie, formerly known as Whitney, in 2005 after the rapper, 48, reconciled with Stevie's mother Kim Scott (pictured in 2015)

Non-binary: The teenager made the announcement in a Tik Tok video and asked fans to 'call me Stevie (they/she/he)'

Tight bond: The musician has shielded his children from the spotlight but shared a rare insight into being a father as he said in an interview in 2004: You’ve got Daddy. And I’m here'

Stevie wrote: 'Watch me become more comfortable with myself' and 'forever growing and changing', and has used the hashtags '#genderfluid #bi and #nonbinary' in several posts.

The post was liked by their sister Hailie Jade, 25, who is Eminem's biological daughter with Kim.

According to The Sun, the teenager's new name was referenced in their grandmother Kathleen Sluck's obituary last month.

It read: 'Kathleen was a exceptional mom to her two daughters; Kim and Dawn; and was overjoyed to become a grandmother to her grandchildren; Alaina, Adam, Hailie, Stevie, P.J., and Parker.'

Profile: Stevie's Tik Tok bio reads '19, any pronouns'

Journey: The video begins with snaps of Eminem's child being known as Whitney with 'she/ her' pronouns captioned

Self-acceptance: The photos transition to the pronouns 'they/ she' 19 seconds in

Self-love: Cutting their blonde hair short and sporting a nose piercing, Stevie then poignantly reveals their name alongside the caption 'all pronouns'

Gender fluid: Stevie wrote: 'Watch me become more comfortable with myself' and 'forever growing and changing'

Acceptance: Stevie wrote: 'Watch me become more comfortable with myself' and 'forever growing and changing'

Stevie came out as bisexual in 2017, and at the time their Instagram bio requested to be referred by the pronouns she/ they.

The teenager said in a now deleted post: 'Happy national coming out day!' I am bisexual???? I would like to say you’re perfect the way you are and that love is love!?????????? be yourself!'

Stevie's biological father is Eric Hartter, a tattoo artist, who died of a suspected drug overdose in 2019, after a history of substance abuse and brush ins with the law.

Kim had Stevie six months after her divorce from the rapper in 2001. Eminem was already father to Hailie at the time.

Family: Eminem adopted Stevie in 2005, after reconciling with his ex-wife Kim and spoke about how he wanted to provide a stable environment for his child (pictured with Kim in 2004)

Eminem adopted Stevie in 2005, after reconciling with his ex-wife Kim and previously spoke about how he wanted to provide a stable environment for his child.

The Slim Shady hitmaker also has an adopted daughter Alaina, 28, whose mother is Kim's late twin sister Dawn. Dawn died of a drug overdose in 2016.

The musician has shielded his children from the spotlight but shared a rare insight into being a father in a Rolling Stones Interview in 2004, where he also spoke about Kim's history with substance abuse.

'You can never let a child feel like it’s her fault for what’s goin’ on,' he said.

Supportive: Stevie's sister Hailie Jade, 25, who is Eminem's biological daughter with Kim, has shown her support by liking their sibling's TikTok posts (pictured)

'You just gotta let her know: "Mom has a problem, she’s sick, and it’s not because she doesn’t love you. She loves you, but she’s sick right now, and until she gets better, you’ve got Daddy. And I’m here".'

Kim was hospitalised following a suicide attempt on July 30, reports TMZ.

It was claimed Kim was taken to hospital to undergo a medical and psychological evaluation, but is now at home recovering.

The ex-wife of the rapper was grieving the death of her mother and penned a heartbreaking tribute saying she wished she'd died instead of her - four days before she 'attempted to take her own life'.

Grieving: Kim was hospitalised following a suicide attempt on July 30, it has been reported (pictured in her last public sighting in August 2018)

Heartfelt: The family have been devastated by the loss of Kim's mother Kathy Sluck who passed away last month, here is Kim's tribute

Her mother Kathy Sluck passed away on July 23 at the age of 65 and her funeral took place in Michigan four days six days later. It is not known how she died.

Kim and Eminem married in 1999, only to proceed with a nasty divorce two years later during their famously stormy romance.

They remarried in January 2006 but had broken up again by April. Their relationship and Eminem's rise to global fame inspired his hit movie, 8 Mile.

Eminem and Kim's volatile relationship is one of rap music folklore - the controversial rapper has frequently taken verbal shots at his on-off lover during his recording career - rapping about killing her, her drug use and infidelity.

For confidential support in the UK - call Samaritans for free on 116 123 or visit www.samaritans.org

For confidential support in the US - call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ant and Dec performed their famous 90s song Let's Get Ready To Rhumble at the TV star's wedding to Anne-Marie Corbett earlier this month, David Walliams revealed.

The Britain's Got Talent judge made the reveal during his pre-recorded interview for The Lateish Show With Mo Gilligan, which is set to air on Friday.

According to reports, David, 49, confirmed: 'Ant and Dec also did Let's Get Ready To Rhumble on the dance floor.'

Party time! A nt and Dec performed their famous 90s song Let's Get Ready To Rhumble at the TV star's wedding to Anne-Marie Corbett earlier this month, David Walliams revealed (pictured during a performance in 2013)

The Sun adds that doting father David will continue: 'I filmed it and said to Dec, ''Can I put this on social media?''. He said no and I was really sad. It's one of the funniest things you have ever seen.'

Elsewhere during David and 33-year-old Mo's chat, the comedian cheekily reveals he once caught a glimpse of Simon Cowell's privates in a urinal, describing what he saw as 'a big one'.

David will also touch upon his and former Little Britain co-star Matt Lucas' upcoming project, revealing they hope to 'get something on screens' within the next twelve months.

It comes after David shared a glimpse inside 45-year-old Ant's star-studded reception as he posted a snap with the groom and his Best Man Dec, also 45, to his Instagram on Monday.

Sealed with a kiss! Ant and Anne-Marie married in Hampshire last weekend

Wedding: According to reports, David, 49, confirmed: 'Ant and Dec also did Let's Get Ready To Rhumble on the dance floor' (pictured in May)

The comedian beamed as he posed with the Geordie duo after close pal Ant had exchanged vows with his wife Anne-Marie, 43, at a Hampshire church.

In the snap the trio all looked in great spirits as they flashed smiles for the camera dressed up in their suits.

David turned heads when he showed up to the service with his ex Keeley Hazell, who it appears he was on holiday with in Italy in the weeks before the wedding.

The British model, 34, put on a busty display in a red and white spotty dress while David looked dapper in a light grey suit and blue tie.

Throwback: Ant and Dec - then known as PJ and Duncan - had success with the song during the nineties (pictured performing the song in 1994)

Friends: It comes after David shared a glimpse inside Ant's star-studded reception as he posted a snap with the groom and his Best Man Dec

Reunited: David turned heads when he showed up to the service with his ex Keeley Hazell, who it appears he was on holiday with in Italy in the weeks before the wedding

The couple, who were regularly spotted together on the London social circuit towards the end of the Noughties, arrived at the church service together.

It comes after David shared two loved-up snaps with Keeley from their recent holiday together, after her brief romance with Jason Sudeikis.

He posted a picture on Instagram of his arm wrapped around the beauty's waist and another of him tying her hair up.

Their trip came after Keeley's brief romance with actor Jason, 45, reportedly fizzled out in recent weeks, according to E! news.

Keeley and David appeared to have been on a holiday to Italy before pal Ant's wedding.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She rocketed to fame after first appearing on The Only Way Is Essex back in 2011.

And Gemma Collins, 40, is putting a hefty sum on her personal appearances, as she's reportedly demanding £250 a minute, according to reports.

The £15,000 an hour charge is a £2,000 increase on her pre-COVID fees, which she last increased in 2019 following her Dancing On Ice stint.

Money talks: Gemma Collins has added '£2,000 on her hourly appearance fee' which would amount to more than Boris Johnson's £161,000 a year salary

MailOnline has contacted a representative for Gemma for comment.

The reality star's prices works out more than the rate for most Premier League footballers.

A source revealed to The Sun: 'Gemma last bumped up her prices in 2019 after her stint on Dancing on Ice. Since then, the world has been hit by the pandemic but she didn't see it as time to put her feet up.

Staggering amount: The reality star's prices also work out more than the rate for most Premier League footballers

'She filmed her reality series in lockdown and, now the country has opened up again, has added £2,000 on her hourly appearance fee.'

The ex-car saleswoman has a fortune worth over 2.7million following her TV stints and endorsements.

As well as TOWIE, the GC's additional endeavours include famously lasting 72 hours in I'm A Celebrity jungle, spending 29 days in the Big Brother house and appearing on Dancing On Ice.

The GC: The source divulged to The Sun that the former TOWIE star has ideas 'above her station' and 'thrives off' her alter-ego

Television star: As well as TOWIE, the GC's additional endeavours include famously lasting 72 hours in I'm A Celebrity jungle (pictured above on the show in 2014), spending 29 days in the Big Brother house and appearing on Dancing On Ice.

Following her time on TOWIE, Gemma also launched her own reality show - Diva Forever- which gave a more in depth look at her life.

Her ex-boyfriend James Argent, 33, featured on the show during their relationship, however she how rekindled her romance with Hawash.

Elsewhere, Gemma took to Instagram on Thursday to share another new adventure - surfing.

Sharing a photograph of herself in a wetsuit, she revealed that she'd tried out the water sport at Watergate Beach during a holiday in Cornwall.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's a mother-of-three and spent three months ­training to become an NHS maternity care assistant in 2019 for the W series, Delivering Babies.

And, Emma Willis, 45, has told of her own experience with welcoming her daughter Isabella, and how she struggled to breastfeed her during a podcast with friend Giovanna Fletcher, 36, where she revealed: 'I felt like I was looked down on.'

Speaking on the Happy Mum, Happy Baby podcast, the TV presenter relived a traumatic moment when she realised her firstborn daughter Isabelle, now 12, had not been receiving her breastmilk, which ended up with a trip to A&E.

'I felt like I was looked down on': Emma Willis (pictured in 2021) teared up as she relived the moment she rushed daughter Isabelle to hospital after not producing enough breastmilk for her as a baby

Emma said: 'I felt like a bad mum because for the first three days at home, I felt like I'd been feeding her 24 hours a day, but really no milk had been coming out.

'So she'd had nothing. And literally she just turned and you could just see it and I took her to A&E immediately.'

Even after the hospital scare, The Voice presenter continued to succumb to the pressures of breastfeeding and admitted that she hit 'rock bottom' after feeling judged when she turned to formula.

Hurdles: Emma Willis has admitted that her relationship with motherhood hasn't always been so plain-sailing (pictured in 2016)

The Big Brother host continued: 'I still continued to try to breastfeed for as long as I could because that was the thing to do.

'Everybody that came in to visit me, I felt like I was looked down on.

'Every time they came in and there was a bottle of formula next to me, it was kind of like, 'Ooh, not persevering?'

Shock: Speaking on the Happy Mum, Happy Baby podcast, the TV presenter relived a dramatic moment when she realised her firstborn daughter Isabelle, now 12, had not been receiving her breastmilk

'I was like, 'I am persevering, but she wants more and I haven't got any.' So I had to top her up with [formula].'

Tearing up as she used the word 'depressed' to describe how she was feeling, Emma added: 'After six weeks of trying so hard, I was so down.

'I was just crying all the time because I wanted to, I wanted to do the best for her, that my mum just went, "Stop it." Oh it gets me all upset thinking about it.'

Speaking to herself, the former Heart FM DJ said, 'Stop it, Emma, honestly.'

Doting mum: The Circle presenter went on to wonderfully raise two more children with her McBusted bandmember husband Matt Willis: nine-year-old Ace (centre) and five-year-old Trixie (right)

With her voice cracking and her nostrils sniffling, she said, 'Aah, Gi! What have you done?

'So I got a bottle and a bit of formula and it was just happy days from then on,' Emma concluded.

The Circle presenter went on to wonderfully raise two more children with her McBusted bandmember husband Matt Willis, 38. Nine-year-old Ace and five-year-old Trixie.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's been keeping her fans entertained by sharing a number of scantily-clad snaps amid her sun-soaked family holiday to Greece.

And Amanda Holden sent temperatures soaring once again on Thursday, when she shared a photo of herself on board a speed boat.

Going braless beneath a plunging white dress, the Britain's Got Talent star, 50, looked sensational as she was whisked across the water to dinner, captioning her photo with the hashtags 'taxi', 'dinner' and 'family'.

Wow: Amanda Holden, 50, wowed on Thursday when she shared an Instagram photo of herself on a speed boat in Greece wearing a plunging white dress and no bra

Amanda teamed her eye-popping dress with a stylish pair of sunglasses and her bright blonde hair blew wildly in the wind.

The doting mother accessorised with two delicate gold necklaces and wore a gold bangle on her right wrist.

The stunning Greek sea was visible behind Amanda as she made the most of the balmy evening weather.

It comes after Amanda, who is lapping up the sunshine abroad with her husband Chris Hughes and their two daughters, Alexa, 15, and nine-year-old Hollie, apologised to Ant McPartlin for missing his wedding to Anne-Marie Corbett earlier this month.

Wow: Amanda has yet to specify where her family are vacationing, however the name of a boat seen in one of her recent sizzling snaps appears to be Greek

The television personality, who has worked with Ant for years on Britain's Got Talent, sent her well wishes to the happy couple, ahead of the nuptials last weekend.

Sharing a snap behind-the-scenes from the show, Amanda penned: 'So sorry we will miss @antanddec special day... we are still away, sending our love and huge congratulations to Ant & Amzie on this amazing day.'

The actress giggled in the photo which showed her with Ant and his sidekick Declan Donnelly, 45, along with fellow BGT judge Alesha, 42, on a private jet.

Missing out: It comes after Amanda Holden revealed she was unable to make her pal Ant McPartlin's wedding to Anne-Marie Corbett because she's away on holiday

Soon afterwards, the former Blind Date contestant uploaded a sizzling bikini-clad selfie as she soaked up the sun in the pool.

Showing off her sun-kissed arms, the bronzed beauty kept her face out of the sun with a Red Bull baseball cap.

The Heart FM presenter kept her eyes protected with a pair of oversized gold-rimmed shades, which sat upon her makeup-free face.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Harry Styles fondly reminisced on the good times with his close friend Nick Grimshaw who hosted his final BBC Radio 1 show on Thursday.

The singer, 27, spoke in a pre-recorded message where he told how one of his fondest memories from Radio 1 was stumbling into the studio with Nick, 36, after a night at the BRITs.

He said: 'Hi Grimmy, it's Harry. I cannot believe it's your last week on Radio 1.

Memories: Harry Styles fondly reminisced on the good times with his close friend Nick Grimshaw who hosted his final BBC Radio 1 show on Thursday

'My favourite time being on Radio 1 with you was probably forming the Straight Through Crew and going straight in from the Brits.

'But also, every time that could have been so scary for me playing new music, it was always so nice for me to have a friend there and it always felt so safe.

'Thank you for being my favourite show on radio, thank you for being a friend and I miss you and I can't wait to see you soon. Good luck with everything, I love you. Byeeee!'

Nick, who joined BBC Radio 1 in September 2007, is hanging up his microphone, with Jordan North and Vick Hope set to takeover his Drivetime show.

Party: The singer, 27, spoke in a pre-recorded message where he told how one of his fondest memories from Radio 1 was stumbling into the studio with Nick, 36, after a night at the BRITs

On Wednesday several of his close friends and colleagues including Clara Amfo and Annie Mac bid a farewell to the star as he moves on to work on new projects.

Nick dressed in a casual ensemble as he made his way to work, wearing a black denim jacket, checked white shirt and baggy trousers.

In an emotional opening to his final-ever show at 2pm he said: 'We are here for my final show on Radio 1 – and I feel the weirdest ever.

'I just want to have a fun show. I'm going play you some of my favourite songs I've just loved playing on Radio 1 over the years. It was my childhood dream, I've had the time of my life.'

Goodbye: Nick headed to the BBC Radio 1 studios ahead of his final show as his 14-year stint presenting with the station came to an end

He added that he had an emotional meeting with the team that work on the show ahead of his final gig.

He explained: 'It's weird. We just did a zoom in the office with everyone from radio one, like DJs, producers, management and everyone who works here. It was emotional.

'I've cried three times today. My boyfriend got me a really nice card, Caroline who I work with sent me a really nice message, that was cry number two. And, oh, I've cried four times.'

Ahead of his final show fellow presenter and close friend Clara took to Instagram with an emotional message as she shared several snaps of them together.

Alongside a picture of the pair hugging, she wrote: 'Often, especially in popular culture the notion of someone being 'born to do it' can be chucked around quite flippantly (no shade King Craig) @nicholasgrimshaw really is that guy!

'Never have I known a more natural and gifted story teller, music LOVER, with a strong commitment to FUN, who sounds like they came in to the world with a mic in hand.

Sweet: Ahead of his final show fellow presenter and close friend Clara Amfo took to Instagram with an emotional message as she shared several snaps of them together

Kind: Alongside a picture of the pair hugging, she wrote: 'Often, especially in popular culture the notion of someone being 'born to do it' can be chucked around quite flippantly (no shade King Craig) @nicholasgrimshaw really is that guy!'

'Outside of work, he is one of the most welcoming, loving and generous people I know. If he is your mate, he is YOUR mate and I'm sure you felt that through the radio during all of the golden time he has had on @bbcR1. We've been so lucky to have him.

'Salute to you darling it absolutely won't be the same, enjoy every moment of your last show today, you have truly made your mark and I'm forever excited by whatever you bring us next!'

Annie Mac - who left her show with Radio 1 just last week - also took to social media to say goodbye.

Edgy: Nick dressed in a casual ensemble as he made his way to work, wearing a black denim jacket, checked white shirt and baggy trousers

End of an era: Nick has been presenting with the radio station for the past 14 years but earlier this summer announced he was leaving

That's a wrap: Nick appeared in good spirits as he departed the BBC studios following the show

Nick said: 'I just want to have a fun show. I'm going play you some of my favourite songs I've just loved playing on Radio 1 over the years. It was my childhood dream, I've had the time of my life.'

Couple: Nick was joined in the studio by his boyfriend Meshach 'Mesh' Henry

Meeting: Nick added that he had an emotional meeting with the team that work on the show ahead of his final gig

Sharing a funny video of Nick dancing in the studio she wrote: 'Last show for @nicholasgrimshaw today and we are celebrating an iconic legacy!'

Nick has departed from Radio 1 in the latest 'diverse' line-up reshuffle from the BBC.

It is the latest big departure in recent weeks, with Annie Mac also announcing in April that she was leaving after 17 years and being replaced by Clara Amfo.

Speaking on his show, Nick said of his exit: 'I have some news guys, some big news. It's big news for me to announce. I want to do it at the start of the show otherwise I'll be weird for the next two hours.

Nick said: 'It's weird. We just did a zoom in the office with everyone from radio one, like DJs, producers, management and everyone who works here. It was emotional'

He added: 'I've cried three times today. My boyfriend got me a really nice card, Caroline who I work with sent me a really nice message, that was cry number two. And, oh, I've cried four times'

In demand: Nick stopped and posed for selfies with fans on his way home

First show: He presented the youth strand Switch before moving to the Weekend Breakfast Show

Change: He joined the Radio 1 Breakfast Show in 2012

'I've been thinking about it for a little while, after 14 years of working here I've made a big decision.'

Nick went on to say how he has kept his exit a secret and hasn't 'told anyone' as he wanted to let his listeners be the first to know.

He said: 'It a huge decision, an exciting one and a happy one. It's something I've given a lot of thought. Radio 1 is home to me. It's the only station I've wanted to work.

'I was thinking the past 18 months have been the most surreal moments ever. A lot of you guys, you take stock in times like this and look at your life. I looked at mine and I wanted to make that change.

Replacements: The presenter, 36, who joined BBC Radio 1 in September 2007, is hanging up his microphone, with Vick Hope and Jordan North (pictured) to takeover his Drivetime show

Funny: Annie Mac - who left her show with Radio 1 just last week - also took to social media to say goodbye as she shared a playful video of Nick dancing

Tribute: Clara shared a second snap with Nick as they sang at Radio 1's Big Weekend in a throwback picture

'My childhood dream was to work on Radio 1 and I have been lucky enough to make that dream come true.

'It has been everything I'd imagined and even more. I grew up wanting to connect with people and to feel accepted and the Radio 1 listeners gave me that and let me be part of their daily life, for which I will be eternally grateful.

'But over the last few months I've been doing a lot of thinking about my future and after 14 years, I've made the decision that it's time for me to move on - I'd like to thank the listeners as without them none of this could have been possible and the Radio 1 family, who have been such a huge part of my life. Thank you thank you thank you.'

Long career: Nick joined BBC Radio 1 in 2007 presenting the BBC's youth strand Switch with close friend and fellow DJ Annie

It comes as insiders told MailOnline Nick's decision to leave Radio 1 'isn't about money', but because he wants a new challenge.

A source said: 'It's not about the money. He's done Drivetime, the Breakfast show, hosted late night but now he's stepping away from radio as he wants a new challenge.

'Nick's loved every minute of his time at Radio 1 and loves broadcasting. He will still be starring on Celebrity Gogglebox.

'He has been at Radio 1 for 14 years and wanted a change.'

Statement: Nick took to Twitter in June to confirm his exit after speaking about it on his show, gushing that it was a 'childhood dream' to work on Radio 1

BBC bosses have chosen I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! runner-up Jordan, 31, and Vick, also 31, to replace him on the airwaves in the afternoons, starting from Monday, 6 September 2021.

Vick replaced Cel Spellman to co-host Life Hacks and 'Official Chart: First Look' alongside Katie Thistleton on BBC Radio 1 last August.

Landing the role, former Capital presenter Vick said: 'What a madness! Drivetime!

'I love Radio 1 so, so much, having grown up tuning in religiously every single day, it means the world to be taking the reins at home-time with the phenomenal Mr North.

'Grimmy is an absolute legend of the game, thank you mate for every laugh you've sent rippling through the country.

Bring it on: Grimshaw said the pandemic made his reassess his life and feel ready for the next chapter (pictured presenting the show from his living room last month)

'Taking over Drive is a task we won't be taking lightly, but Jordan and I are ready to put our all into making your journey home that little bit brighter.'

Jordan, meanwhile, appeared as a cover presenter on Radio 1 from 2014, and four years later was announced as the new host for the station's Greatest Hits show on Sunday mornings.

In September last year, Jordan was announced as the new regular 11am-1pm weekend host on BBC Radio 1. He also was the main cover presented for Nick and Scott Mills.

The I'm A Celeb star added: 'I am absolutely chuffed to be making the move over to Radio 1 daytime and even happier to be working alongside Vick.

Exit: It comes after Annie Mac announced she was leaving BBC Radio 1 after 17 years back in April

'Grimmy is a Radio 1 legend so we definitely have big shoes to fill but will work extremely hard to make sure afternoons on Radio 1 still sound superb.

'I am super excited to get started and look forward to this next chapter with Vick and the rest of my Radio 1 family.'

Aled Haydn Jones, Head of Radio 1, said: 'I am so excited for Vick and Jordan. The audience have taken to both of them over the last year so it's a dream to be able to bring them together to host such an important show in Radio 1's schedule.

'I can't wait for people to hear some of the ideas and projects they've got lined up, they're really pushing the boundaries of what we can do.

New host: Following Nick's announcement, Vick shared this snap of herself coming up Radio 1's elevator with the caption 'incoming'

'September is going to be a new sound for Radio 1, from established great broadcasters to bringing through the next generation of talented DJs we will continue to reflect our young audience across the UK and we'll have a lot of fun doing it.'

Ahead of this 'new sound' being unveiled, Radio 1 has seen a big change in its line-up with some of its biggest stars exiting.

Nick's exit comes shortly after Annie Mac announced she would be stepping away from the microphone after 17 years.

BBC Radio 1's line-up changes Nick Grimshaw is set to leave the station after 14 years, with Vick Hope and Jordan North named as his replacements. Their new drivetime show will first broadcast on Monday, 6 September. Also joining Radio 1 are two new hosts- Dean McCullough and Victoria Jane - who were both involved in Radio 1's Christmas Takeover where 33 new DJs and presenters were given chance to broadcast on the UK's biggest youth station. Northern Ireland's Dean McCullough will host a new weekend show (Friday – Sunday, 10:30am - 1pm). Dean's new show will be broadcast from Salford and is the first Radio 1 programme to move out of London as part of the BBC's Across the UK plans. Taking over: Vick Hope and Jordan North (pictured) will replace Nick Grimshaw on the drivetime show Newcomers: Northern Ireland's Dean McCullough and Victoria Jane will also host their own Radio 1 shows While Victoria Jane will be launching a new show – Radio 1 Future Soul. It'll be a blend of R'n'B, Neo-Soul and all related genres from across the UK, influenced by the musical scene from the North, and broadcast from Salford. The latest announcements come after it was revealed that Annie Mac is leaving after 17 years and is replaced on Future Sounds by Clara Amfo. Clara is set to present Future Sounds from Monday to Thursday 6pm to 8pm starting in September. Rickie Haywood-Williams, Melvin Odoom and Charlie Hedges Rickie Haywood-Williams, Melvin Odoom and Charlie Hedges will take on Live Lounge from Monday to Thursday from 10:30am to 1pm. Radio 1's Future Artists with Jack Saunders is moving to an earlier slot of 8am-10am Monday to Wednesday. Danny Howard, who joined Radio 1 after winning the station's Superstar DJ talent competition back in 2011, will take over as host of Radio 1's Dance Party on Fridays at 6pm. Newbies: Jack Saunders and Danny Howard are in the shake-up Signing: Jaguar and Sarah Story have signed up Jaguar has landed her own show on the station, hosting Radio 1 Dance from 10 to 11pm on Thursdays . Sarah Story will front the Friday night 8 to 10pm slot to present Radio 1 Future Dance. The station will also be bidding farewell to Diplo, who currently occupies 11pm – 1am on Saturday nights with Diplo and Friends. Radio 1's Soundsystem will move to occupy the slot on Saturday evenings, 11pm – 1am, while Radio 1's Residency will move to Thursdays 11 – 1pm. The station will also be bidding farewell to Diplo, who currently occupies 11pm – 1am on Saturday nights with Diplo and Friends Advertisement

The DJ, 42, confirmed her departure in April, telling listeners her job has been like a 'second home'.

Clara Amfo has been revealed as her replacement on BBC Radio 1's flagship music show, Radio 1's Future Sounds.

Annie later took to Twitter and wrote a statement about her decision to leave, saying she wants to spend more time with her two children who she shares with her husband and fellow BBC Radio 1 DJ Toddla T.

Nick joined BBC Radio 1 in 2007 presenting the BBC's youth strand Switch with close friend and fellow DJ Annie.

He hosted the show for 9 months solo while Mac hosted a weekend lunchtime slot.

The radio host then went on to present Radio 1's Weekend Breakfast Show, followed by the 10pm – midnight slot on BBC Radio 1 on 1 June 2009, following the departure of Colin Murray.

He was handed the prestigious Breakfast Show slot in 2012 taking over from the hugely popular Chris Moyles.

He stayed on air in the AM until 2018 when he swapped shows with Greg James. His move meant Grimshaw took over the 4-7pm drivetime slot.

In July 2017 the BBC confirmed that Nick's salary was in the £350,000 – £399,999 bracket. The BBC later reported between 2020/ 2019 he got £240,000-£244,999 per annum.

Several Radio 1 fans were left shocked by the news that Nick would no longer be hosting his shows, with some even saying they felt 'devastated' by his exit.

Others wondered why he was leaving the station so soon after Annie Mac also announced that she was stepping away from Radio 1.

One person even penned: 'What's the point in Radio 1 without Annie Mac and Nick Grimshaw?'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cristiano Ronaldo shared a sweet selfie with his son, Cristiano Jr. on Instagram on Thursday, melting the hearts of his 326million followers.

The Juventus footballer, 36, beamed in the photo alongside his son, 11, who looked delighted to be in the selfie with his father.

The Portuguese footballing legend penned: 'Nunca deixe aquilo que não pode fazer,atrapalhar aquilo que você pode fazer. LR', which translates to: 'Never let what you can't do get in the way of what you can do LR'.

'Never let what you can't do get in the way of what you can do': Cristiano Ronaldo shared a sweet selfie with son Cristiano Jr., 11, on Instagram on Thursday

The post accumulated many comments, with freestyle footballer Andrew Henderson writing: 'Massive role model for people all over the world'.

The five-time Ballon d'Or winner also took to Instagram on Thursday to share a candid moment during a recent Juventus training session.

Looking focused, Cristiano's toned legs were on full display as he prepared to strike the ball.

Garnering support: The footballing legend penned (originally in Portuguese): 'Never let what you can't do get in the way of what you can do LR'

Focused: The five-time Ballon d'Or winner also took to Instagram on Thursday to share a candid moment during a recent Juventus training session

His return to football training follows his recent getaways to Mallorca and Cannes with glamorous girlfriend Georgina Rodriguez, 27.

The pair looked smitten in matching white outfits in a snap shared on the footballer's Instagram and the sports star captioned: 'My beautiful queen.'

The loved-up pair famously met while she was working as a retail assistant in Madrid, as they caught eyes across the rails in Gucci in 2016.

Cute: Cristiano's return to football training follows his recent getaways to Mallorca and Cannes with glamorous girlfriend Georgina Rodriguez, 27

Smitten: Last year, Gina admitted that the meeting with the Portugal captain saw her 'fall in love at first sight'

Last year, she admitted that the meeting with the Portugal captain saw her 'fall in love at first sight'.

She claimed that the feeling was mutual following their encounter as she revealed in a recent interview with Italy's Elle magazine.

Georgina said: 'The first meeting with Ronaldo was at Gucci where I worked as a sales assistant. Days later we saw each other again at another brand's event.

'It was then we could talk in a relaxed atmosphere, outside of my work environment. It was love at first sight for both.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Katie Piper is set to join the Loose Women panel.

The television personality and charity founder, 37, took to Instagram on Thursday to announce she would become a regular on the ITV daytime chat show.

Katie's signing comes after Andrea McLean and Saira Khan left their co-stars in 'absolute shock' when they suddenly announced their resignation.

'I can't wait to become a regular!': Katie Piper is set to join the Loose Women panel

Exciting: The television personality and charity founder, 37, took to Instagram on Thursday to announce she would become a regular on the ITV daytime chat show

Taking to Instagram, Katie shared a photo of herself on the panel and wrote: 'It's official! I’m a @LooseWomen panellist!

'Thank you to everyone for your overwhelming support and kind messages about my recent appearances! I can't wait to become a regular and discuss some wild and wonderful things that the lovely 'loose' ladies delve in to! It’s going to be great year, and I can’t wait to take you all along for the ride.'

Katie has become a popular presenter after she bravely gave up her anonymity to document the mental and physical aftermath of a 2008 acid attack in the 2009 Channel 4 documentary Katie: My Beautiful Face.

Past: Katie's signing comes after Andrea McLean (left) and Saira Khan (far right) left their co-stars in 'absolute shock' when they suddenly announced their resignation (pictured in 2019)

The charity founder has undergone more than 400 operations following a 2008 sulphuric acid attack orchestrated by her ex-partner Daniel Lynch.

Katie survived the attack organised by her ex-boyfriend in 2008, which caused significant damage to her face and left her blind in one eye.

Although the horrifying attack was planned by Lynch, it was carried out by accomplice Stefan Sylvestre on the street outside of her north London home.

Happy: And Katie certainly had plenty to smile about as she arrived at Media City on Thursday afternoon to appear on the radio

Stylish: The author looked lovely in a lilac floral summer dress which she teamed with nude pink heels

Lynch was subsequently given two life terms behind bars, while Sylvestre served 6-years of his own life sentence. He was released in 2018.

Katie meanwhile has launched her own charity and has gone on to carve a successful career in the television.

Her signing comes months after Saira announced she was leaving the show in January after five years on the panel, just two weeks after fellow panellist Andrea departed from the show.

Time to move on: Her signing comes months after Saira announced she was leaving the show in January after five years on the panel, just two weeks after fellow panellist Andrea left

The TV personality, 50, explained her 'difficult' decision in her column for The Mirror, saying the coronavirus crisis made her 'reassess her priorities'.

Detailing how she felt she had 'nothing left to share', Saira claimed she now wants to focus on her skincare brand and other projects.

Andrea, meanwhile, struggled to hold it together as her co-stars Coleen Nolan, Janet Street-Porter and Judi Love hosted a special edition of the ITV show saying goodbye to her after 13 years in December.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's no stranger to showing off her toned body.

And Chloe Madeley, 34, put on a jaw-dropping display on Thursday, as she took to Instagram to share a very sexy snap of herself in a mystery location.

Treating her 235k followers to the peachy post, the TV personality showcased her enviable curves in an orange two-piece bikini. However, it was her bottom that caused a commotion among fans.

Peachy: Chloe Madeley looked sensational in a Thursday Instagram post as she flaunted her very toned bottom in an orange two-piece bikini during a trip to the sea in a mystery location

Where could she be? Chloe's sea-side location remains a mystery

The shot's exposure had been turned down heavily, creating a silhouette effect which highlighted Chloe's slim waist and toned pins.

Her damp blonde tresses cascaded down her bronzed back in natural waves and a breathtaking infinity sea view acted as the perfect backdrop.

'It was worth the wait,' the journalist penned in the caption before being met with a flurry of responses from her followers.

Enviable fans: It was her bottom that caused a commotion among followers

Hot stuff: Chloe is no stranger to putting her toned body on display

'As a 58 year old woman, I think I’m allowed to say that I most definitely have bottom envy!' one fan quipped.

Another took to their keyboard to write: 'Stunning photo ☺️ Have an amazing time x,' while others filled the comments section with fire emojis.

Chloe recently recalled the moment she had a panic attack on live television during a Dancing On Ice routine with dance partner Michael Zenezini.

On The Bodcast With Chloe Madeley, the fitness guru said: 'I went through a horrible period in my life where I felt horrible every single day. My anxiety got so bad at points that I didn’t sleep, I was vomiting all night long.'

Horrible: Chloe Madeley recalled the moment she had a panic attack on live television during a Dancing On Ice routine in 2011

Now, the gym enthusiast has revealed she turned her life around with weight lifting.

'One panic attack I actually had live on TV on Dancing On Ice in the middle of a routine, and it floored me for two days after,' she said on her podcast.

The model said her panic attack went unnoticed by home viewers, but those who were 'actually at the studio noticed.'

'Everyone was there who was actually at the studio noticed. But no one at home noticed, thank God.'

'Changing my body and my mindset': Chloe has turned her life around with weight lifting (pictured in 2019)

The journalist first recalled struggling with anxiety in her early 20s: 'It started to really snowball. And the anxiety started turning into quite bad panic attacks,' Chloe told her listeners.

After her panic attack on Dancing On Ice, the star sought therapy to help manage her symptoms.

'Cognitive Behavioural therapy to help me deal with it and one of the things my therapist said was, "You need to start exercising."'

Chloe, who has been married to former rugby player James Haskell for two years, took up running but stopped after her new hobby didn't bring her 'any joy'.

New hobby: The fitness guru, who has been married to former rugby player James Haskell for two years, took up running - but stopped after her new hobby didn't bring her 'any joy'

Training: 'I wanted to teach women to lift weights. I was the only woman in the weight section, Chloe said

'I wanted to teach women to lift weights. I was the only woman in the weight section and it was changing my body and my mindset,' the daughter of Richard Madeley and Judy Finnigan said.

The personal trainer continued: 'My anxiety started to plummet in a good way. I felt really strong, accomplished and driven immediately.'

For her, the logical next step was to take what she'd learnt in the gym and help others.

Dedicated: 'It took me a couple of months. I started PT-ing and it all went from there - my life changed for the better, mentally, physically and professionally,' she said

'For me it was like, "This is what I have to do." I moved back home with my parents [and] I got fully qualified.

'It took me a couple of months. I started PT-ing and it all went from there - my life changed for the better, mentally, physically and professionally.

'My life is 10 x better now because I take care of my body,' Chloe concluded.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jesy Nelson broke her Instagram silence on Thursday night to give fans a glimpse of what is in store as she prepares to launch her solo career.

The singer, 30, left Little Mix in December for the sake of her mental health and has been working hard on new music to establish herself as a solo artist over the coming months.

And in a teaser clip, Jesy tells her followers to prepare themselves for her 'new chapter' and says she has 'made the music I always wanted to make'.

The next chapter: Jesy Nelson broke her Instagram silence on Thursday night to give fans a glimpse of what is in store as she prepares to launch her solo career

A recorded audio clip of the singer plays over behind-the-scenes footage from the past months, including photoshoots, videos of her in the studio and dance rehearsals.

'For me, this is the music I've always wanted to make,' she said.

'I don't think anyone is going to expect it, this is a new chapter for me.

'If you genuinely believe something enough to happen, you can make it happen, you have to manifest it.'

Solo: The singer, 30, left Little Mix in December for the sake of her mental health and has been working hard on new music to establish herself as a single artist over the coming months

Exciting: And in a teaser clip, Jesy tells her followers to prepare themselves for her 'new chapter' and says she has 'made the music I always wanted to make'

One poignant clips shows a glamorous Jesy dressed in a white crop top and flares gaze down at the camera as she poses in an industrial building.

Other footage features the Wings hitmaker working in the studio or practicing routines with a group of male backing dancers.

Last week Jesy wiped her Instagram account ahead of her hotly-anticipated debut solo single, which allegedly will be released in September.

The former Little Mix star removed all her posts on the social media app, unfollowed everyone and changed her profile picture to a red circle.

Fans soon took to Twitter to comment on the drastic measures, asking why Jesy's online social media presence had disappeared.

Glam: A recorded audio clip of the singer plays over behind-the-scenes footage from the past months, including photoshoots, videos of her in the studio and dance rehearsals

Interesting: 'For me, this is the music I've always wanted to make,' she said. 'I don't think anyone is going to expect it, this is a new chapter for me'

Move your body: Other clips feature the Wings hitmaker working in the studio or practicing routines with a group of male backing dancers

An insider told The Sun Jesy dedicated the beginning of the year to her new music and it has all come together quickly after spending months in the studio.

'Her new record label Polydor are keen to strike while the iron is hot, so they are throwing everything at her project and want the first single out in a matter of weeks.

'It is more upbeat than some might be expecting and there will be plenty of choreography in the video.'

Meanwhile, it's said the Romford-born star is finding it 'so refreshing' working as a solo star.

Aspirations: 'If you genuinely believe something enough to happen, you can make it happen, you have to manifest it,' she said

Coming soon: The video finished with a loading sign at 27%

The source added: 'The difference this time is that she is not comparing herself to her bandmates. It's been so refreshing for her. Jesy has been working hard and is feeling really positive about this new chapter of her career.'

MailOnline has contacted Jesy's representatives for comment.

Before the wiping of her Instagram page, Jesy excited her fans by teasing that her 'new era is pending'.

Blank canvas: Last week Jesy wiped her Instagram account ahead of her hotly-anticipated debut solo single, which allegedly will be released in September

Jesy won The X Factor alongside Perrie Edwards, Leigh-Anne Pinnock and Jade Thirwall in 2011.

Together Little Mix sold over 60 million records, making them one of the biggest girl bands of all time.

Jesy confirmed her permanent departure from the band last December, just weeks after revealing she was taking a temporary hiatus from all work commitments.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ed Sheeran has revealed he and wife Cherry Seaborn have one date night a week where they are not allowed to discuss their daughter Lyra Antartica, 11 months.

The singer, 30, explained that as a parent, you sometimes 'forget who you were before' so the couple, who've been together since 2015, ban discussion of family talk.

Speaking on The Rebecca Judd Show on Apple Music 1, Ed said: 'Me and my wife have a date night. It's a strict date night every single week.

Couple: Ed Sheeran has revealed he and wife Cherry Seaborn have one date night a week where they are not allowed to discuss their daughter Lyra Antartica, 11 months

'And no matter who's in town or who wants to see us, it's always this one night in the week and we go out and our rule is we can't talk about our baby.

'We have to talk about each other and catch up because if you spend... As a parent, you spend so much time discussing being a parent that you kind of forget who you were before. So we have one night a week where we are who we were before.'

Ed and Cherry went to secondary school together and got engaged in January 2018 and married the following year.

Elsewhere during the interview, the hitmaker also recalled how he and Cherry had dinner with Beyonce and Jay-Z the night after their first date.

Relationship: The singer, 30, explained that as a parent, you sometimes 'forget who you were before' so the couple, who've been together since 2015, ban discussion of family talk

He said: 'I learned it ['Empire State Of Mind'] for a Live Lounge. And then Jay-Z and Beyonce came to a gig that I did in Brooklyn. And they were like, "Come out to this restaurant with us afterwards."

'So I went out to this restaurant and then my mates were in town. Actually my now wife. It was like the day after we'd had our first date. And she was there with my friend Martha and this guy, Foy Vance.

'So we went to dinner and then we went to this bar and I remember a guitar was getting passed around between me and Foy. And I remember playing that [Empire State of Mind']. Five of us in a room with Jay-Z and Beyoncé. I gave Beyoncé a Jägerbomb.'

Discussing his career, Ed said that when his songs are released, he no longer feels like they are his.

He said: 'So I feel like songs are mine until they're released and then they belong to other people. So I wouldn't say 'Thinking Out Loud' is my song anymore.

'I'd say it's this couple that had their first kiss to it or this couple that enjoyed their first dance to it or this couple... I've had people that have had it on in the birthing room where...

He said: 'As a parent, you spend so much time discussing being a parent that you kind of forget who you were before' (pictured in June 2021)

'Actually when we had our child, the song that came on there, it just came on randomly. But now that's our special song for that. And I feel there's songs of mine that are the most popular are no longer songs of mine.

'They're songs of the public. And they're just public domain. They're just owned by Sandra and Greg or, you know, like whoever.'

The Shape Of You star said it was a Damien Rice show that got him into writing songs.

He recalled: 'I actually can't remember the exact date, but it was definitely like lower school. What I liked about the gig is it was under eighteens only.

'And for adults to get in, they had to be accompanied by a child. And it was like four, 4:00 PM, no alcohol, no nothing.

'And afterwards my dad went for pint at the bar and Damien Rice was there. So I met him and that was the day I started songwriting.'

Inspiration: The Shape Of You star said it was a Damien Rice show that got him into writing songs (Damien pictured in 2019)

Ed later had the chance to connect with Damien, saying they met up in Iceland and went on a hike.

He said: 'There was a long time, I was kind of like; Van [Morrison] had reached out, Eric Clapton reached out, Eminem had reached out, Jay-Z had reached out. There's all these people that I loved as a kid, and they'd all reached out.

'And I was kind of like, 'Why hasn't he reached out?' Now we've had our conversation. There's so many different elements to it. He, for instance, is just a hard man to contact.

'But yeah... He lives in the middle of nowhere. He doesn't really like the pop world or whatever. But I got to meet him on mine and his own terms and we hung out in Iceland. We went on a hike. We got in a hot springs. We spent the entire day chatting.

'And had I met him, probably... I think I had an opportunity 2014 when he was releasing an album...and I think it just would've been a different vibe. I now have special memories with people that inspired me to make music rather than a selfie.'

Ed also told how he believes in the phrase 'never meet your heroes' and previously turned down an offer to meet Eminem before they worked together.

Meeting: Ed recalled being woken up by Van Morrison while staying in a hotel in Northern Ireland (Van Morrison pictured in 2020)

He said: 'My rule has always been never, ever meet your heroes unless they want to meet you.

'I know people say, "Don't meet your heroes," but I remember working with Rick Rubin and we went to New York for Saturday Night Live cause he'd done a song with Eminem and he was like, "Do you want to meet Eminem?" And I said, "No, I want to get to a point where Eminem wants to meet me."

'I left that opportunity. And then further on down the line, I had the opportunity to work with Eminem. And we've now done three tunes together and I would class him as a friend.

'But had I gone in and had a selfie, it would have been a completely different vibe. Does that make sense?'

Discussing some of his other celebrity run-ins, Ed recalled being woken up by Van Morrison while staying in a hotel in Northern Ireland.

He said: 'If you get the chance to listen to this whole album ['Irish Heartbeat'], it is so beautiful. It's so good. I've met Van a couple of times now, but the first time I met him, we were in Northern Ireland.

Collaborators: Ed also told how he believes in the phrase 'never meet your heroes' and previously turned down an offer to meet Eminem before they worked together

'I'd just played the Odyssey Arena and I was staying at this hotel and I'd stayed up really late the night before having drinks. And I'd got woken up two hours later by the concierge being like, "Van Morrison's in the lobby. He'd like to see you."

'And I just said, "No, he isn't," and just hung up the phone. And then I got a call back being like, "No," it was like seven o'clock in the morning. He's like, "He is. He wants to have breakfast with you." So I was like, "Actually, I do think he lives near here."

'So I got up and showered and went downstairs and yeah, we had salmon and cream cheese bagels and chatted about... He was obsessed with learning about streaming and stuff.

'But I remember saying that this was my favourite album of his and him being taken aback because it wasn't like 'Astral Weeks' or 'The Moon Dance' or the big albums that people would say was their favourite Van albums. But yeah, it's just a very special album to me.'

Ed told how he is currently relearning the songs from his debut album + ahead of the tenth anniversary show in London.

He said: 'I actually haven't listened to it ['+'] since it came out, but I'm doing a 10th anniversary show at some point this year, so I'm going to go back and relearn all of it. There'll be songs that I'll have to literally relearn the lyrics to, because I wouldn't have played them since the tour in 2011.'

Hits: Ed told how he is currently relearning the songs from his debut album + ahead of the tenth anniversary show in London (pictured in 2019)

Ed also revealed the first song he ever wrote, 'Typical Average Teen', almost featured on the soundtrack of a show by the creator of The Simpsons, Matt Groening.

He said: 'It was before I was a teenager and it was called 'Typical Average Teen' [sings]. The creator of the Simpsons was doing a show, my cousin knew him.

'And they were like, "Oh, they're doing this show about a typical average teen." And he was like, "My cousin wrote something like that."

'So it was actually going to be the soundtrack to this thing for a while. I don't know what happened, it would have been so weird to have my first song end up being the soundtrack of a TV show... I think that might have been the first time I've actually sung more than the first line of it.'

Ed told how performing at the Queen's Diamond Jubilee in 2012 was a 'full circle' moment for him.

He said: 'I was 11 years old and it was the Queen's Jubilee. And I watched on TV, Eric Clapton come on stage and play Layla. And I remember very clearly being like, "I want to get a guitar and I want to learn that song."

He said: 'There'll be songs that I'll have to literally relearn the lyrics to, because I wouldn't have played them since the tour in 2011' (pictured in 2019)

'So I got a guitar. It was from Cash Converters. I don't think it was even a brand. It was a black Stratocaster. I can't remember. And I learned that song over and over. It was the only song I could play for months and months.

'But what I love about that is 10 years later at the next Jubilee, I played it and it was such a weird full circle standing on stage.

'And I would like to think that I don't know how many people tuned into that, but I would love to think that there was one kid that thought the same thing and then it just carries on.

'Like someone would have been like, "Oh, I want to learn guitar because I heard that." I'd like to think, but I'm not going to presume that.

The Rebecca Judd Show on Apple Music 1. Tune in from 9am BST today to listen to the show in full, or listen back on demand once the show has aired.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is renowned for her appearance on Heart Breakfast.

But Pussycat Doll Ashley Roberts, 39, has traded the Global Studios for Greek sunshine and gave fans a peek of her idyllic surroundings on Thursday.

Taking to the poolside, the singer posed in a purple-print bikini, beaming widely as she shared the snaps with her 660,000 Instagram followers.

Getaway: Ashley Roberts looked every inch the 'happy chica' in Greece on Thursday as she shared some sultry poolside bikini snaps with her Instagram followers

The star's trim figure was on full display, as she also donned a pair of chic sunglasses.

For one pose, Ashley laid flat out by the side of the pool, bending one leg as she raised her arms above her head.

Perfect clear blue skies, shimmering pool water and the Aegean Sea were captured in the summer shots, with the radio host penning: '#travel #adventure #summervibes #gratefulheart #sea #happychica #tendingtravel.'

Idyllic: For one pose, the Pussycat Doll laid flat out by the side of the pool, bending one leg as she raised her arms above her head

Holiday: Perfect clear blue skies, shimmering pool water and the Aegean Sea were captured in the summer shots, with the radio host penning: '#travel #adventure #summervibes #gratefulheart #sea #happychica #tendingtravel'

Ashley didn't hold back from documenting other highlights of her day via her Instagram Story.

She began by thanking Trending Travel UK for helping her 'organise' and making the trip 'hassle free.'

The television personality was evidently making the most of the start to her holiday, as she recorded a video enjoying a glass of bubbly in her hotel room.

Grateful: Ashley didn't hold back from documenting other highlights of her day via her Instagram Story and thanked Trending Travel UK for making her trip 'hassle free'

Cheers! The television personality was evidently making the most of the start to her holiday, as she recorded a video enjoying a glass of bubbly in her hotel room

Wow: Ashley also showcased her tanned physique in a mirror selfie, stunning in a yellow-and-blue flowery bikini

She also showcased her tanned physique in a mirror selfie, stunning in a yellow-and-blue flowery bikini.

Showing off her style, she teamed the summer look with a white cover-up and pink bucket hat.

The stunner took to the shore later on, not afraid to be snapped in the skimpy bikini with her derriere on full display.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's currently lapping up the sunshine in Greece with her family.

And Billie Faiers looked every inch the Greek goddess on Thursday when she shared a stunning photo of herself working her best angles in a bright pink swimsuit.

Posting the sizzling snap on Instagram, Billie, 31, wore her blonde hair slicked back and kept the sunshine at bay behind an oversized pair of chic black sunglasses.

Wow: Billie Faiers, 31, wowed on Thursday when she shared a stunning photo of herself working her best angles in a bright pink swimsuit on Instagram while holidaying in Greece

Strolling down a beautiful white staircase as blue skies loomed ahead, Billie playfully captioned her post: 'Did someone say margarita?'

The TOWIE star was sporting a bright red manicure and matching pedicure and accessorised with a gorgeous necklace.

Clearly in her element, Billie beamed from ear to ear as she made the most of the balmy weather.

The TV personality and her husband Greg Shepherd are away with Nelly and son Arthur, three, as well as Billie's mum Suzanne Wells.

Family break: Billie jetted off to the Greek island of Halkidiki with her family earlier this month (pictured with husband Greg Shepherd and children Nelly, seven and Arthur, three)

On Friday, Billie shared smiley snaps of her daughter tucking into food and posing in a colourful baseball cap, and posted photos of her son riding a bike.

As well as sharing a selfie with her kids and her mother, the reality star also included a shot of herself and Billie lounging on a pizza-shaped float.

Billie captioned her upload: 'Happy On Our Holidays. We have been here quite a few days (I'm so useless on my phone when we are away)

'Time to have some fun in the sun my babies. And yes that is a giant slice of pizza me and Nelly are chilling on in the last pic.'

Holiday! On Friday, Billie relaxed in a baby blue swimsuit as she took to Instagram to show off the first few days of her sun-soaked family holiday at the Sani Resort, Greece

Fun times: Billie posted photos of her son Arthur riding a bike

The holiday comes a month after it was announced Billie's sister Sam, 30, has quit their joint reality show Mummy Diaries after seven years.

After the news was revealed, Billie posted on Instagram to confirm the show's new title The Family Diaries and thanked her fans for their support after Sam said she 'needed a break' from the show.

Billie wrote: 'As one journey ends another begins …. And What an incredible journey it has been ❤️ filming with my sister and family for the past 7 years has been the most wonderful experience and we truly have made the BEST memories all together Filming @mummydiariesoffical.'

Pizza is life: As well as sharing a selfie with her kids and her mother, the reality star also included a shot of herself and Billie lounging on a pizza-shaped float
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Elizabeth Hurley appeared to enjoy a night out on Thursday, swapping her loungewear for a sensational black and purple dress.

Posting a photo of herself in the plunging floral number on Instagram, Elizabeth, 56, penned: 'Good to take trackies off occasionally.'

The star looked gorgeous with her glossy brunette hair cascading in loose curls past her shoulders and beamed for her fans.

Wow: Elizabeth Hurley, 56, appeared to enjoy a night out on Thursday, swapping her loungewear for a busty black and purple dress

Elizabeth wrote: 'Good to take trackies off occasionally' beneath her stunning new snap

Posing against a striking piece of black-and-white artwork, doting mother Elizabeth opted for a full face of expertly applied glam.

She tilted her head slightly to the side in the stunning snap.

Flaunting her ample assets, Elizabeth's glitzy attire was in stark contrast to the more laid back looks she's been sharing on social media throughout lockdown.

Elizabeth is reportedly being supported by pals amid her fury over her son Damian, 19, being cut from his dad Steve's family fortune.

Contrast: Elizabeth's glitzy attire was in stark contrast to the more laid back looks she's been sharing on social media throughout lockdown

American businessman Steve died by suicide last June aged 55.

According to The Mirror, Elizabeth's famous pals have rallied around her, with her ex and Damian's godfather Hugh Grant, showing support, while Naomi Campbell and Tamara Mellon have sent kind messages to the pair.

A source told the publication: 'It is devastating what has happened to Damian but he and Liz have a lot of support.'

Elizabeth's turmoil comes a year on from Steve's tragic suicide, with the star gently trying to guide her only son through the conflicting emotions of losing the father he was just beginning to get to know.

Damian and Steve's relationship had almost been non-existent for most of the teen's life, but in the weeks before his death, the multi-millionaire businessman had made tentative steps towards establishing a father-son bond, calling him for the first time on his 18th birthday.

Steve died thinking that his two children — Damian and older half-sister Kira — would be financially secure.

There for you: Model Naomi Campbell, 50, is among a group of friends who have reached out to Elizabeth after Damian was cut out of his son's will (pictured together in 2007)

He had recently won a court battle, overturning his own father's attempt to exclude them both from family trust funds believed to be worth up to a billion dollars (£725 million).

Yet Damian won't receive a penny, after his grandfather succeeded in appealing the decision.

Instead, the fortune will be split between the two children of Steve's sister Mary, who crucially, unlike their cousins, were born in wedlock.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ashley Cain paid tribute to his late daughter Azaylia as he shared a montage of photos from what would have been her first birthday on Instagram on Thursday.

Azaylia sadly lost her life on April 25 at just eight months old following a courageous battle with acute myeloid leukemia.

Ashley, 30, and his partner Safiyya Vorajee were determined to mark the poignant milestone on Wednesday and headed to her graveside to lay flowers and balloons with dozens of family members turning out to support the grieving couple.

RIP: Ashley Cain paid tribute to his late daughter Azaylia as he shared a montage of photos from what would have been her first birthday on Instagram on Thursday

For their daughter, who affectionately had the nickname 'Likkle Lion' during her brave fight, the couple commissioned a special Lion King cake.

Another photo showed gold hand and feet moulds of Azaylia and a floral wreath which accompanied a gorgeous photo of her imprinted on a balloon.

During the celebrations of Azaylia's life, the family released balloons up into the sky and blew bubbles.

Ashley wrote: 'We celebrated our little Hero’s 1st birthday the only way we knew how… Together as one.

Their hero: For their daughter, who affectionately had the nickname 'Likkle Lion' during her brave fight, the couple commissioned a special Lion King cake

Touching: Ashley wrote: 'We celebrated our little Hero’s 1st birthday the only way we knew how… Together as one'

Fly high, little one: During the celebrations of Azaylia's life, the family released balloons up into the sky and blew bubbles

'We raised a glass as we remembered and reminisced how truly amazing she was, we shared so many tears from our broken hearts as we continue to suffer losing her so devastatingly and we came together to try and give her a birthday that she would be proud of as she watched down on us from heaven.

'We love you with all of our hearts Azaylia. Beautiful, Strong, Courageous and so so special. You will inspire us to be better people, encourage us to do better things and live on in our memories, hearts and souls forever champ!

'#ADC #AzayliaDiamondCain.'

Safiyya added: 'Just beautiful, happy first birthday in paradise baby'.

Happy birthday baby girl: The Ex On The Beach star also uploaded a snap a floral wreath which accompanied a gorgeous photo of her imprinted on a balloon

United and strong: The Cain family were out in force to honour Azaylia

Last month, Ashley said he wants to use the 'pain' he feels over his daughter Azaylia's death to 'achieve amazing things'.

The TV star took to Instagram to share an update where he also revealed that 'happiness is not a privilege he feels possible now in his life.'

Alongside a series of black and white photos of him stood next to his mountain bike after training he penned that his journey was now about 'strength and being a good person.'

He wrote in the caption: 'Happiness is not a privilege I feel possible now in my life. Just happy memories and happy moments.

'My journey now is about strength, being a good person and doing good things. I want to stand up to my pain, work through it and use it to push me to achieve some amazing things in this world.'

Baby girl: Another photo showed gold hand and feet moulds of Azaylia

Devoted dad: Ashley also showed off a cart of Lion King biscuits in Azaylia's memory

He continued: 'I hope my path can motivate, inspire and help others, showing that you can be strong enough to overcome any and all obstacles to become who you want to and are supposed to be in life, no matter what it throws at you.'

He signed off by saying: 'Do something today that will make you better tomorrow and remember - You're never too important to be nice to people. Compliment, comfort, encourage and inspire!'

Azaylia was diagnosed with the rare and aggressive cancer when she was just two-months-old, after being turned away by doctors three times.

Brave fighter: Azaylia was diagnosed with the rare and aggressive cancer when she was just two-months-old and tragically lost her life to the disease six months later

What are the symptoms of leukaemia in children? Fatigue and pale skin - this is because leukaemia can cause anaemia which makes a child feel weak, tired and light-headed. Infections and fever - children with leukaemia lack normal white blood cells which would normally help fight infection. Rash - children may have small, dark spots that look like common rashes if the leukemia cells spread to the skin Easy bruising or bleeding - this includes frequent nosebleeds, bleeding gums and bleeding a lot from small cuts. Bone or joint pain - this is caused by a build up of leukaemia cells near the surface of the bone or inside the joint. Swelling of the abdomen - leukaemia cells may collect in the liver and spleen causing them to enlarge. Loss of appetite and weight loss - if the spleen and liver swell, they can press against the stomach causing loss of appetite. Swollen lymph nodes - some leukaemias spread to the lymph nodes causing them to swell. Source: American Cancer Society Advertisement

She spent the majority of her life in hospital, undergoing four rounds of chemotherapy and stem cell treatment.

In January, she received her stem cell transplant but her cancer sadly returned following a third round of chemotherapy.

Azaylia underwent further surgery to discover whether her leukaemia had gone, but in February, healthcare professionals revealed her cancer had returned.

His motivation: Last month, Ashley said he wants to use the 'pain' he feels over his daughter Azaylia's death to 'achieve amazing things'

Ashley took to social media to ask fans for help in donating, explaining the treatment his daughter needed is available in Singapore.

Despite efforts from around the world, pharmaceutical companies could not release the life-saving drugs needed to beat his daughter Azaylia's battle, as her cancer was so rare and aggressive.

Azaylia was honoured with a Pride Of Britain award following her brave battle with leukaemia.

For help and support caring for children with life-limiting and life-threatening conditions, please contact Together for Short Lives on 0808 8088 100 or visit www.togetherforshortlives.org.uk

If you have been affected by the death of a baby please call Sands on 0808 164 3332 or email helpline@sands.org.uk

'Likkle Lion': Azaylia battled acute myeloid leukaemia for the majority of her life and was diagnosed just two months after she was born (pictured in February)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Adil Ray looked solemn while taking on the role of Imran Khan in newly-released images from ITV's upcoming drama, Stephen.

First look pictures from Stephen Lawrence murder investigation drama show the 47-year-old wearing a navy suit while transforming into the solicitor.

Khan had only been working as a lawyer for 18 months when he took on the case and was awarded the rank of Queen's Counsel in 2018.

Serious: Adil Ray looked solemn as he took on the role of solicitor Imran Khan in the ITV drama which detailed Stephen Lawrence's murder probe

Working hard: Unseen pictures from the first episode of the Stephen Lawrence murder investigation drama show Steve Coogan (playing Clive Driscoll) with his team

Stabbed to death in a 1993 racist attack in South-East London, it was not until 2012 that justice was brought to the family of 18-year-old Londoner Stephen.

Two men were convicted of his murder only after a campaign for justice was launched by his parents Doreen and Neville.

Set in 2006 and due on ITV later this month, the drama tells the story of how detective chief inspector Clive Driscoll, played by Steve Coogan, led the probe that finally secured the convictions.

Hero: Khan had only been working as a lawyer for 18 months when he took on the case and was awarded the rank of Queen's Counsel in 2018 (Real-life Imran in 1998, right, Adil as Imran in 2021, left)

In character: Steve Coogan is playing the role of DCI Clive Driscoll - who put together an investigation that secured the convictions of the two gang members

Talented: Stephen's mother, now Baroness Lawrence, is played by Sharlene Whyte (right) and his father by Hugh Quarshie (left)

It also stars Sian Brooke as Met Police chief Cressida Dick – acting deputy commissioner at the time of the verdict – and Jorden Myrie as Stephen's brother Stuart.

Stephen's mother, now Baroness Lawrence, is played by Sharlene Whyte and his father by Hugh Quarshie.

Both actors said they did not meet the Lawrences while researching the roles as they felt it would be unfair to make them relive the case again.

The senior officer: It also stars Sian Brooke (right) as Met Police chief Cressida Dick (left) – acting deputy commissioner at the time of the verdict

In charge: Clive Driscoll (left) headed the Racial and Violent Crime Task Force and is played by Steve Coogan (right)

The family: Stuart Lawrence (left), Doreen Lawrence (middle) and Neville Lawrence (right)

'I was trying to keep a respectful space,' Miss Whyte added.

The drama is a sequel to The Murder Of Stephen Lawrence, which was screened in 1999.

Actor Quarshie said he spoke to Neville Lawrence 'the first time around'.

He added: 'I was very aware of the fact that I don't sound anything like him, I don't look anything like him so it was important to grab his essence or some aspect of it.

Respectful: Both actors said they did not meet the Lawrences while researching the roles as they felt it would be unfair to make them relive the case again (Hugh Quarshie plays Neville Lawrence, left, and Sharlene Whyte plays Doreen Lawrence, right)

Doting mum: Sharlene Whyte, in character, poses alongside a photo of Stephen Lawrence

Success: The drama tells the story of how detective chief inspector Clive Driscoll, played by Steve Coogan, led the probe that finally secured the convictions.

'This time around I felt that I had his impersonation in the bank, so to speak. But I had a feeling that it was going to be kind of intrusive to ask a man whose son had been murdered, 'how did you feel about the second investigation?'.

'And it was pretty clear that this script is less a reconstruction and more of a dramatic interpretation of events, so it was less about trying to imitate or impersonate Neville and more about trying to interpret the script.'

On not meeting Doreen, Miss Whyte added: 'I didn't feel that it was right that I go to her and start asking her questions and asking her to relive the experience yet again, because I can imagine how raw and traumatic that would be.

On the phone: Actor Quarshie said he spoke to Neville Lawrence 'the first time around'

Holding back: On not meeting Doreen, Miss Whyte added: 'I didn't feel that it was right that I go to her and start asking her questions'

Skilled: 'I was very aware of the fact that I don't sound anything like him, I don't look anything like him so it was important to grab his essence or some aspect of it,' Hugh said

Also in the cast is Richie Campbell as Duwayne Brooks, who was a friend of Stephen's and who was with him at the time he was murdered.

Stephen was killed on the evening of 22 April 1993 in a racially motivated attack whilst waiting for a bus in Well Hall Road, Eltham.

Even though Doreen and Neville Lawrence knew the identity of their son’s killers, the original investigation had failed to convict those responsible.

Frustrating: Even though Doreen and Neville Lawrence knew the identity of their son’s killers, the original investigation had failed to convict those responsible

Captivating: Yazmin Mwanza plays Georgina Lawrence, Stephen's sister

Spellbinding: Sharlene Whyte as Doreen Lawrence (left), Jorden Myrie as Stuart Lawrence (middle) and Hugh Quarshie as Neville Lawrence (right)

The killers: David Norris, played by Rob Witcomb (left) and Gary Dobson, played by Stephen Patten (right)

The family's extraordinary campaign for justice led to a public inquiry which branded Metropolitan Police institutionally racist.

It also brought about sweeping changes in the law and police practices, transforming thinking and understanding of racial inequality in the UK.

Yet six years on from the Inquiry no progress had been made into the case.

The ongoing struggle by Doreen and Neville to achieve justice is documented in the series.

Gripping: The drama tells the story of the ongoing struggle by Doreen and Neville to achieve justice

Justice: DCI Driscoll puts together an investigation that finally – more than 18 years after his death – secures the convictions of two of the gang who committed the murder of Stephen

The drama has been produced by HTM (Hat Trick Mercurio) Television in association with Baby Cow Productions and executive produced by Mark Redhead, who produced the original drama in 1999.

Paul Greengrass, award winning screenwriter and director, who wrote and directed the Murder of Stephen Lawrence will also serve as an Executive Producer. Jimmy Mulville and Jed Mercurio are also executive producers.

Stephen was directed by Alrick Riley and produced by Madonna Baptiste. The sequel is written by Frank Cottrell Boyce and Joe Cottrell Boyce.

Tragic: Stephen (pictured) was killed on the evening of 22 April 1993 in a racially motivated attack whilst waiting for a bus in Well Hall Road, Eltham

The production team are producing this sequel with the full support of the Lawrence family, most notably Baroness Doreen Lawrence and Dr Neville Lawrence, who have given the drama their blessing.

Producer Madonna Baptiste said: 'The Lawrences' campaign for justice totally transformed attitudes to race and equality in the UK and it's an honour to be able to help tell what is an untold chapter in their story.

'Current events only highlight how relevant and important Stephen's case remains and it is such a privilege to work with Hattrick, Frank and Joe Cottrell-Boyce, Alrick Riley and our amazing cast to bring this important story to screen.'

Stephen will air on ITV later this month.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jonathon Ross, 60, couldn't resist sharing a saucy snap of his stunning wife on his Instagram on Thursday.

Pictured laying in bed with the dozy looking family dog, Jonathan posted the Instagram of his wife captioned: 'My two beloveds'.

The pair have been madly in love since marrying 32 years ago and Jonathan never misses a chance for an appreciation post.

Loved-up! Jonathon Ross, 60, couldn't resist sharing a saucy snap of his stunning wife on his Instagram on Thursday

Jonathan's wife, Jane Goldman, is an established screenwriter who has written for Kingsman, X-Men and Stardust.

Screenwriter Jane, 51, looked happy and relaxed as she cosied up to their family dog.

Just last week, Jonathan Ross showcased his quirky sense of style when he and wife Jane Goldman made their way to Lily Allen's new show in the West End.

Credentials: Jonathan's wife, Jane Goldman, is an established screenwriter who has written for Kingsman, X-Men and Stardust

Married: The pair have been madly in love since marrying 32 years ago and Jonathan never misses a chance for an appreciation post

Stepping out in the capital wearing green pinstripe trousers and animal print brogues, the presenter, 60, teamed his statement bottoms with a patterned black and white coat and covered his nose and mouth with a mask.

Screenwriter Jane, 51, wore her bright orange hair loose and opted for a plunging black camisole and trousers teamed with an unbuttoned checked shirt as they headed inside The Noel Coward Theatre to watch 2:22 A Ghost Story.

Last month, Jonathan and his family, including his daughter Honey, made their debut on Celebrity Gogglebox - leaving viewers divided following the episode.

Stepping out: Just last week, Jonathan Ross showcased his quirky sense of style when he and wife Jane Goldman made their way to Lily Allen's new show in the West End

Some moaned that the presenter was taking part on yet another prime time show, but others questioned why he hasn't featured on the Channel 4 show until now.

Meanwhile, some viewers were left stunned by the size of Jonathan's massive sofa, which comfortably seated his daughter Honey Kinny, 24, son Harvey, 24, and Honey's boyfriend Zane Saz - as well as the family's dogs.

The foursome joined the plethora of famous faces on the show, where they gave their thoughts on TV moments including Anne Robinson's Countdown debut and a nail-biting nature programme.

New kids on the block: Last month, Jonathan and his family, including his daughter Honey, made their debut on Celebrity Gogglebox - leaving viewers divided following the episode

Taking to Twitter, fans shared their thought's on Jonathan's appearance on the show, with fans giving mixed reviews.

'Not impressed!! Is there no TV show safe from Jonathan Ross? Can't enjoy' tweeted one person.

While another shared: 'Fabulous to see @wossy & family on #CelebrityGogglebox.'

Thoughts: While some moaned that the presenter, 60, was taking part on yet another prime time show, others questioned why he hasn't featured on the Channel 4 show until now

'No, no, no - Don’t need Jonathan Ross on #CelebrityGogglebox' tweeted a third person.

'How has @wossy never been on @C4Gogglebox til now?' shared a fourth.

Remarking on his laidback stance, a fifth shared: '@wossy is the most chilled Dad, EVER!

While another fumed over his feet, writing: '@wossy enjoying watching you on @C4Gogglebox but my mum says you need to wash your feet or wear socks please xoxo #footgate.'

Having their say: Taking to Twitter, fans shared their thought's on Jonathan's appearance on the show, with fans giving mixed reviews

Meanwhile, some appeared fascinated by the size of The Masked Singer judge's sizable furniture.

'What size sofa is that Jonathan Ross is on? And who are the crowd he’s with?' questioned one.

With another adding: 'Fascinated by the massive bed/sofa absolute DREAM piece of furniture in @wossy lounge!! What is this???'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Love Island's Faye Winter and Teddy Soares may have recently rekindled their romance - but fans were left unimpressed during Wednesday night's episode when she announced to the villa that he lasted 'three pumps' during sex.

Four couples appeared to get busy underneath the bedsheets, with Millie, Liberty, Chloe and Faye later implying that they had gone 'all the way' with their partners.

However, viewers used Twitter to vent their anger after a clip showed Faye and Teddy laying in bed the morning after, whereby she didn't hold back from revealing the intimate details of their night together.

Oh dear: Love Island fans were left enraged on Wednesday night after Faye announced to the villa that Teddy lasted '3 pumps' during sex

Faye said frankly: 'It happened for about three pumps, maybe five.'

The revelation immediately received backlash.

'How rude Faye exposing Teddy was finished in 3-5 pumps,' one enraged viewer penned.

Unimpressed: Viewers used Twitter to vent their anger after a clip showed Faye and Teddy laying in bed the morning after, whereby she didn't hold back from revealing the intimate details of their night together

Shocked: Another fan remarked that the lettings manager was 'mugging' Teddy off again with the comment

Speaking out: A viewer believes that the comment was to 'embarrass' Teddy

Another fan remarked that the lettings manager was 'mugging' Teddy off again with the comment.

'Faye publicly saying Teddy did 3-5 pumps to embarrass him,' another viewer voiced, adding, 'she loves to humiliate him but he doesn't mind. If he likes it, I love it for him.'

The producers' conscious decision to not show all of the islanders' X-rated moments is a large contrast to previous seasons of Love Island, however it's believed to be a part of their duty of care.

Stepping back: The producers' conscious decision to not show all of the islanders' X-rated moments is a large contrast to previous seasons of Love Island, however it's believed to be a part of their duty of care

Faye and Teddy's reconciliation comes after she was ordered to apologise to him by producers who threatened to kick her out of the villa for her expletive rant last week.

TV execs told Faye if she refused to back down her place on the show could be in jeopardy, after it took her days to take responsibility for her behaviour.

She called Teddy a 'two-faced p****' and warned the rest of the male cast 'I'll f***ing fall out with all you p***** if I need to' during last Friday's episode, which has since sparked a record 25,000 Ofcom complaints.

'Grovel for forgiveness': Faye and Teddy's reconciliation comes after she was ordered to apologise to him by producers who threatened to kick her out of the villa for her expletive rant

A TV insider told MailOnline: 'Faye was ordered by producers to apologise to Teddy, and not only that but to grovel for forgiveness.

'They warned if she refused to back down her place on the show could be in doubt and as the latest arrivals have shown, there's always a new contestant waiting in the wings.'

Ofcom are deciding whether to launch an investigation.

'Do I look like I give a f***? No': TV execs told Faye if she refused to back down her place on the show could be in jeopardy after it took her days to take responsibility for her behaviour

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her newest film Free Guy was met with solid reviews when it was released earlier this month.

But in a new interview, Jodie Comer revealed that her time on the Boston set of the blow-out blockbuster wasn't always smooth sailing, telling Glamour on Thursday: 'There was an accident one day and I got kicked in the face.'

Jodie, 28, was speaking on Josh's Reign podcast and also shared that the sheer force of the kick 'knocked her glasses off'. The Liverpudlian star said: 'I have no sense of coordination [and] I had to work a lot with the stunt department. I wanted to do as much as I possibly could. I did my best [but] my best wasn't good enough!'

Ouch: Jodie Comer, 28, has revealed that she was kicked in the face while filming new movie Free Guy in Boston

Gushing about the stunt team working on Free Guy, the blonde beauty added: 'I had an incredible stunt double who did all the really, really cool stuff.'

Elsewhere in the interview, Jodie revealed that her cover of Mariah Carey's Fantasy in the film 'wasn't planned'.

Explaining that her co-star Ryan Reynolds asked her whether she would be willing to record the cover 'months after' filming, Jodie said: 'That wasn't planned!

'That was something that happened months after. Ryan had messaged me and he was like, ''I'm just curious, would you be up for singing an alt version of Fantasy for a certain part of the film?''

Jodie explained: 'There was an accident one day and I got kicked in the face' she added that the sheer force of the kick 'knocked her glasses off'

'I went into my bathroom, did a couple of recordings just to check that I was good enough and then I was like, ''I'll give it a go!'' I went to LA and we recorded that in Capitol records where The Beatles and The Rolling Stones have recorded!'

Jodie - who has recently been filming the final season of Killing Eve - also candidly spoke about letting go of bad habits.

'Having to sit with myself in the last year, finding myself a little bit more and realising habits that don't serve me or things that don't make me feel good - I have actively been trying to remove myself from them,' she explained.

She added: 'That's something that I've really been trying to practice. I've definitely seen a difference in just taking control of those things. If I'm actively doing something that makes me feel bad I go, ''why am I doing that? Do something else that's going to make me feel good!'''

Jodie continued: 'Just tiny choices of just trying to be a bit more conscious of putting myself first in that way, like looking after myself, working out, feeling strong, feeling good. I have to literally be forced to exercise but it makes me feel so good.'

Spontaneous: Jodie also revealed her cover of Mariah Carey's Fantasy 'wasn't planned' and Ryan Reynolds asked her whether she would record the cover 'months after' filming

The award-winning star also shared that she tries not to let other people's opinions affect her.

'This is my first film and people know you a little bit more and they form opinions of you and it's just making sure that I can witness all that, but not take it on and let that affect my own views and opinions of myself,' she explained.

'There's been times when that line has gotten a little bit blurry and I think that's really dangerous,' added Jodie.

'It's about listening to your inner voice. I always felt like I was that person but then I was kind of falling away from that a little bit. I feel like I have re-found it and gained a lot of strength.'

Reviews: Jodie's new film Free Guy was met with solid reviews when it was released earlier this month

Jodie also admitted that over the last year she has noticed that her job has the power to affect her mental health.

She told Josh: 'I think in the last year, I've definitely just noticed how it affects my mood in the slightest way.

'It was my mum actually, who was like, ''I'm trying to have a conversation with you and you're just not, you're not listening! You're not giving me anything!'' It's my family who get the brunt of it because it's just that my head's in a completely different space.'

Jodie also spoke about her upcoming role in Ridley Scott's The Last Duel, which follows actor Alex Lawther as King Charles VI as the royal settles a dispute with one of his squires by challenging him to a duel.

Admitting that she hadn't yet read the script when she met with Ridley for the first time to discuss the role, Jodie said: 'It came through my agent that Ridley really wanted to meet me for this project.

'I went and met him in his offices in London and we just had the chat and there was a bit of miscommunication because he thought I'd been sent the script and I hadn't.

'And he was like, ''so what did you think?'' and I was like, ''about what?!'' He said, ''I want you to go away. I want you to read it. I want you to give me your honest opinion.'' Luckily I started reading the book because I was like, I should probably do homework once in your life.'

Jodie added that it had been a lifelong dream of hers to star in a costume drama, and when she first started out in the industry declared to her agent: 'I want to be like Keira Knightley!'

'I'd also dreamed since I was like 16 of doing a costume drama,' Jodie began.

'I had a flashback on set and I texted my agent and said, ''do you remember when I came to Oxford Street to meet you for the very first time?''

'She sat me on her couch and she was like, ''so what do you want to do?'' I think I actually said, ''I want to be like Keira Knightley.'' I think those were the words that came out of my mouth!' I was obsessed with period films!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ryan Serhant and Steve Gold teamed up to sell a four-bedroom apartment for $8 million on Thursday's episode of Million Dollar Listing New York.

The season nine episode titled 'Wined, Dined, Deal?' showed Ryan, 37, and Steve, 36, hustling for commissions in a sluggish market amid the coronavirus pandemic.

Developer's representative Dan tasked Steve with selling the $8,995,000 four-bedroom apartment in the Zaha Hadid Building before gaining a lucrative listing for a $29.5 million penthouse duplex in Hudson Yards.

Pandemic pricing: Ryan Serhant and Steve Gold teamed up to sell a four-bedroom apartment for $8 million on Thursday's episode of Million Dollar Listing New York

Steve invited Ryan who had a buyer from California at $6.5 million to lunch in order to negotiate more and purposefully served him wine.

'Never hurts to loosen Ryan up. I mean, the guy is pretty tightly wound,' Steve said in a confessional.

Ryan stood firm on his offer and noted that it had been a long time since property in that area sold for more than $4,000 a foot.

He pretended to snooze as Steve praised the quality of the home by Pritzker Architecture Prize-winning architect Zaha Hadid.

Wine time: The season nine episode titled 'Wined, Dined, Deal?' showed Ryan, 37 and Steve, 36, hustling for commissions in a sluggish market amid the coronavirus pandemic

'It's her only residential project in New York. Quality of construction there surpasses most developments in the city, if not all,' Steve said.

'Sorry, I just woke back up. Can someone get me coffee, please? Keep talking, Steve. I'm here for you. I can tell who you work for. I get it. I get it. It's also on a block with a significant amount of competition. It's also Covid, and there's also the strip club a couple blocks down, and they're coming here for their kids,' Ryan countered.

Steve said that he could go as low as $8.5 million, but Ryan assured him that his buyer would walk away at that price.

Tightly wound: 'Never hurts to loosen Ryan up. I mean, the guy is pretty tightly wound,' Steve said in a confessional of his plan to serve wine during their negotiations

Ryan in a confessional noted that Steve was still negotiating with him and figured there was room to bargain, while Steve claimed Ryan was being 'super aggressive' and putting him in a position of power.

Steve called Dan and shortly later received a text saying the bottom line offer was a flat $8 million.

Ryan then called his buyer in California and suggested they 'should jump all over it' as the price was the lowest per square foot sold in the building.

California buyer: Ryan then called his buyer in California and suggested they 'should jump all over it' as the price was the lowest per square foot sold in the building

The buyer agreed and Ryan then renegotiated his commission with Steve to bring it up to $320,000 from their even $240,000 split.

'You know what? Let's get the deal done,' said Steve as he agreed to the smaller commission.

'Big sale, smaller commission, but I'm glad there's some wine, because I am celebrating something way bigger,' Steve said in a confessional.

Lower commission: Steve agreed to lower his commission by $80,000 to complete the deal

'I'll even finish my wine for you. Cheers. To selling a four-bedroom during Covid, Steve Gold, Ryan Serhant, 8 million bucks,' Ryan said as he took a triumphant sip.

'You know what, Ryan? You've just gotten me the f***ing penthouse at 15 Hudson Yards!,' Steve informed him.

Ryan then playfully cursed Steve as he finished his glass of wine.

Higher commission: Ryan renegotiated to raise his commission from $240,000 to $320,000

Hands shook: The guys shook hands after agreeing to the deal that also gained Steve a lucrative listing at Hudson Yards

Lucrative listing: Dan earlier offered Steve a lucrative listing at Hudson Yards if he sold the four-bedroom unit

Penthouse unit: Steve was given a tour of the penthouse going for $29.5 million

The episode opened with Ryan checking in on a listing at The Aldyn along the Hudson River.

The 5,847 square-foot home was given a fresh look by interior decorator Sofia to help get the Upper West Side property moving after being listed by Ryan for eight months.

Sofia worked on the original renovation and her insight helped Ryan showcase the space.

Masks on: The episode opened with Ryan checking in on a listing at The Aldyn along the Hudson River amid the pandemic

Fresh look: The 5,847 square-foot home was given a fresh look by interior decorator Sofia to help get the Upper West Side property moving after being listed by Ryan for eight months

Empty pool: An empty pool wasn't helping Ryan sell the place

Fredrik Eklund, 44, meanwhile met up with his developer friend Yan in the East Village to go over a $8.7 million penthouse project.

The bi-coastal broker pledged to sell the 2,766 square foot penthouse that featured $750,000 worth of custom furniture, chef's kitchen and a 1,200 square foot wrap-around terrace.

Yan also revealed that Ryan had reached out to him about the listing and Fredrik became very upset and called it unethical.

Fredrik in a confessional said that Ryan should be honest with him and stated they did not have to be friends.

Million Dollar Listing New York will return next week on Bravo.

Penthouse unit: Fredrik Eklund, 44, meanwhile met up with his developer friend Yan in the East Village to go over a $8.7 million penthouse project

Reached out: Yan also revealed that Ryan had reached out to him about the listing and Fredrik became very upset and called it unethical
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@14 years after their first collaboration, 2007's Raising Sand, Robert Plant and Alison Krauss are reuniting for another album.

The duo announced their new album on Thursday, entitled Raise the Roof, which will be released November 19.

The duo also released the first single from the album, a cover of Lucinda Williams' Can't Let Go.

New album: 14 years after their first collaboration, 2007's Raising Sand, Robert Plant and Alison Krauss are reuniting for another album

Their first album, Raising Sand, won all six Grammy Awards it was nominated for and was certified double-platinum in the UK.

Both Raising Sand and Raising The Roof were produced by T-Bone Burnett, with accompaniment by drummer Jay Bellerose, guitarists Marc Ribot, David Hidalgo, Bill Frisell and Buddy Miller, bassists Dennis Crouch and Viktor Krauss, pedal steel guitarist Russ Pahl and many others.

The 12-track album will feature new renditions of classic songs by artists such as Merle Haggard, Allen Toussaint, The Everly Brothers, Anne Briggs, Geeshie Wiley, Bert Jansch and more.

Grammy winners: Their first album, Raising Sand, won all six Grammy Awards it was nominated for and was certified double-platinum in the UK

Producer: Both Raising Sand and Raising The Roof were produced by T-Bone Burnett (right), with accompaniment by drummer Jay Bellerose, guitarists Marc Ribot, David Hidalgo, Bill Frisell and Buddy Miller, bassists Dennis Crouch and Viktor Krauss, pedal steel guitarist Russ Pahl and many others

Plant and Burnett also collaborate for an original song called High and Lonesome on the album.

The songs picked for Raise the Roof are said to, 'reflect deep-rooted influences and new revelations.'

Plant wanted to introduce new audiences to English folk traditions he grew up with on the album.

Folk traditions: Plant wanted to introduce new audiences to English folk traditions he grew up with on the album

Krauss said that after hearing the album's first song, Quattro (World Drift In), originally performed by Calexico, that was, 'the moment I knew we’d make another album.'

'We wanted it to move. We brought other people in, other personalities within the band, and coming back together again in the studio brought a new intimacy to the harmonies,' she added in a statement.

'You hear something and you go "Man, listen to that song, we got to sing that song!"' Plant added.

Another album: Krauss said that after hearing the album's first song, Quattro (World Drift In), originally performed by Calexico, that was, 'the moment I knew we’d make another album'

'It’s a vacation, really—the perfect place to go that you least expected to find,' he added in his statement.

Robert Plant and Alison Krauss will tour together in 2022 to support the album, with dates to be announced soon.

Both Plant and Krauss have 35 Grammy awards between them, with Krauss' 27 Grammys the most ever for a female artist until she was dethroned earlier this year by Beyonce.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kourtney Kardashian shut down body shamers Thursday who speculated on social media that she's pregnant.

The 42-year-old reality star posted six selfies from her closet on Instagram that showed off her stomach and one person commented, 'SHES PREGNANT'.

Kourtney according to E! Online clapped back in a reply, 'I'm a woman with a BODY.'

Clapped back: Kourtney Kardashian shut down body shamers Thursday who speculated on social media that she's pregnant

The KUWTK alum in the Instagram snaps gave fans a glimpse of her walk-in closet inside her $8.5M six-bedroom mansion at the gated community, Estates at the Oaks.

The Poosh founder - who boasts 186.7M social media followers - captioned the six pictures of herself: 'Say hi to my closet.'

According to her hairstylist Sienree - who coiffed her 'perfectly undone top knot' - Kourtney was wearing no make-up for the Instagram snaps.

However, Kardashian made sure to rep her younger sister Kim's $32 SKIMS 'Fits Everybody' scoopneck bra after pulling down her silky red dress.

The 42-year-old Poosh founder - who boasts 186.7M social media followers - captioned the six pictured of herself: 'Say hi to my closet'

The half-Armenian socialite was getting glam to attend the 40-year-old SKIMS CEO's private screening of PAW Patrol: The Movie in which she voices Delores the Poodle.

Missing from Kourt's side on Thursday was her neighbor-turned-boyfriend since December, Grammy nominee Travis Barker.

The Calabasas neighbors reportedly knew each other for years before going Instagram official with their relationship on February 16.

'Makeup: NONE!' According to her hairstylist Sienree - who coiffed her 'perfectly undone top knot' - Kourtney was wearing no make-up for the Instagram snaps

Mirror, mirror: However, Kardashian made sure to rep her younger sister Kim's $32 SKIMS 'Fits Everybody' scoopneck bra after pulling down her silky red dress

Movie night! The half-Armenian socialite was getting glam to attend the 40-year-old SKIMS CEO's private screening of PAW Patrol: The Movie in which she voices Delores the Poodle

Calabasas neighbors: Missing from Kourt's side on Thursday was her neighbor-turned-boyfriend since December, Grammy nominee Travis Barker (L, pictured August 4)

The 45-year-old Blink-182 drummer was too busy bonding with his daughter Alabama Luella.

The 15-year-old platinum blonde watched with pride as Travis practiced drums in a blue-lit recording studio.

Barker is also father to 17-year-old son Landon Asher from his on/off three-year second marriage to Hollywood Exes star Shanna Moakler, which ended in 2008.

Kardashian has three children - daughter Penelope, 9; son Reign, 6; and son Mason, 11 - from her on/off nine-year romance with Talentless CEO Scott Disick, which ended in 2015.

'Dad love!' The 45-year-old Blink-182 drummer was too busy bonding with his daughter Alabama Luella (R)

Daddy's girl: The 15-year-old platinum blonde watched with pride as Travis practiced drums in a blue-lit recording studio

Ex-wife #2: Barker is also father to 17-year-old son Landon Asher (R, pictured December 4) from his on/off three-year marriage to Hollywood Exes star Shanna Moakler (L), which ended in 2008

2020 family portrait: Kardashian has three children - daughter Penelope, 9; son Reign, 6; and son Mason, 11 - from her on/off nine-year romance with Talentless CEO Scott Disick (L), which ended in 2015

Streaming in late 2021! On December 10, the University of Arizona grad and her famous family signed a new multi-year global content deal with Hulu/Star

On December 10, the University of Arizona grad and her famous family signed a new multi-year global content deal with Hulu/Star, which starts streaming in late 2021.

The heavily-tattooed musician is currently hard at work producing the upcoming album Born With Horns for pop-punk rocker Machine Gun Kelly.

Travis is also featured on Willow Smith's track Transparent Soul, which was nominated for the best alternative trophy at the fan-voted MTV Video Music Awards airing September 12.

'Back for round two!' The heavily-tattooed musician is currently hard at work producing the upcoming album Born With Horns for pop-punk rocker Machine Gun Kelly (L)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On Wednesday, he called out anti-vaxxers and anti-maskers in a no holds barred appearance on a CNN YouTube show.

And on Thursday, Arnold Schwarzenegger was spotted enjoying his daily bicycle ride around his West LA neighborhood.

Joining him was his longtime girlfriend Heather Milligan, whom he started dating in 2015 following his split from Maria Shriver.

Daily exercise: Arnold Schwarzenegger, 74, enjoyed a bicycle ride around his West LA neighborhood with longtime girlfriend Heather Milligan on Thursday

The Hollywood star and former bodybuilder put his muscles on display in a black t-shirt and shorts.

The 74-year-old sported a silver beard and a baseball cap and added sunglasses.

Milligan, a physical therapist who is 27 years younger than Arnold, wore a hoodie with mesh shoulders and cropped leggings.

Icon: The Hollywood star and former bodybuilder put his muscles on display in a black t-shirt and shorts. He sported a silver beard and a baseball cap and added sunglasses

In a video posted to YouTube, the ex Republican governor of California had taken to task those who refuse to get vaccinated against COVID-19 and who protest mask mandates.

Calling them 'schmucks', he told them: 'Screw your freedom.'

Arnold explained: 'There is a virus here, it kills people, and the only way we prevent it is get vaccinated, get masks, do social distancing, washing your hands all the time, and not just to think about 'well my freedom is being kind of disturbed here.' No, screw your freedom.'

The 74-year-old Terminator star said that just because people wanted liberty wasn't an excuse not to follow rules, comparing it to obeying traffic lights on the roads to keep other people safe.

Made headlines: On Wednesday, Arnold called out anti-vaxxers and anti-maskers calling them 'schmucks' and telling them 'screw your freedom' during appearance on CNN YouTube show

Didn't mince words: Arnold explained: 'There is a virus here, it kills people, and the only way we prevent it is get vaccinated, get masks, do social distancing... and not just to think about 'well my freedom is being kind of disturbed here.' No, screw your freedom'

He said: 'We put the traffic light at the intersection so someone doesn't kill someone else by accident… you cannot say, 'no one is going tell me that I'm going to stop here at this traffic light here, I'm going to go right through it', yeah, then you kill someone else and then it is your doing.'

The Hollywood legend has been a vocal proponent of Covid-19 safety measures and earlier this year shared an Instagram post of himself getting the vaccine.

He received his coronavirus jab at a drive-through clinic on January 20 and shared video of it on his social media.

In this week's video the Austrian-born actor warned of the rise of fascism in America, by comparing the pro-Trump mob that stormed the Capitol to Adolf Hitler's Brownshirt thugs in the streets of 1930s Germany.

He warned about the dangers of 'lying to the nation' and said it had to be stopped at all costs.

He said that people like Dr. Anthony Fauci had been 'studying this stuff their entire lives' and needed to be respected and listened to by Americans.

'Yeah, you have the freedom to wear no mask. But you know something, you're a schmuck for not wearing a mask because you're supposed to protect the fellow members around you,' Arnie said.

'I don't want to villainize anyone here,' he continued, 'but I just wanted to tell everyone, let's work together and let's stop fighting because there is a virus, and it's better to get vaccinated [and] to wear a mask.'

Jabbed: The Hollywood legend has been a vocal proponent of Covid-19 safety measures and in January, he shared an Instagram video of himself getting the vaccine at a LA drive-thru clinic
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Broadway star Laura Osnes has been fired from an upcoming theater production over her alleged refusal to get vaccinated against COVID-19.

The news about the 35-year-old performer was initially reported by Page Six, who noted that she was originally set to appear in a one-night production of Crazy For You at the Guild Hall in East Hampton later this month.

Theater staff and performers must either be vaccinated or present a negative COVID-19 test result, the Guild Hall told the site.

Ousted: Broadway star Laura Osnes has reportedly been fired from an upcoming theater production after she allegedly refused to be vaccinated against COVID-19; she is pictured in 2019

However, the actress was removed from the cast after she allegedly revealed she had not received the jab and did not trust any of the COVID-19 vaccines.

Insiders told Page Six Osnes made the revelation after that matter was brought up by her costar Tony Yazbeck, who has two children. She was then reportedly let go from the cast.

The website noted Osnes has characterized herself in past interviews as a Christian conservative.

The performer was reportedly replaced by Sierra Boggess, who previously portrayed Ariel in a Broadway production of The Little Mermaid.

Reasoning: Insiders told Page Six Osnes made the revelation after she was pressed by her costar Tony Yazbeck, who has two children; she is pictured in May

Switching out: Osnes will be replaced by Sierra Boggess in the forthcoming production; Boggess seen earlier this month

The theater's artistic director Josh Gladstone told Page Six of the matter: 'We have a requirement now along the lines of what Actors' Equity is requiring, and what Broadway is requiring, for performances.

'So yes — we're very excited with the cast that we have, and we're delighted Susan has put together a beautiful evening.

'We're sorry not to have Laura on this, [and] we will look forward to working with Laura again. We are concerned about maintaining the safety of our staff and our audiences.'

Future opportunities: The Guild Hall's artistic director noted that the theater 'will look forward to working with Laura again'; she is seen in May

The Broadway League recently announced that audiences, performers, and backstage crew, and theater staff must provide proof of COVID-19 vaccination.

A Guild Hall rep told the site: 'The policy of Guild Hall is that performers have the option to provide proof of full vaccination or a recent negative COVID test result.'

The rep also confirmed Osnes had left the show, but did not reveal why.

Osnes is currently set to appear in a forthcoming West End production of Bonnie & Clyde, which will premiere next year.

Safety first: 'The policy of Guild Hall is that performers have the option to provide proof of full vaccination or a recent negative COVID test result,' a Guild Hall rep told the site (pictured Guild Hall of East Hampton)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dakota Johnson has a slew of new co-stars for her new movie Cha Cha Real Smooth, which has started production in Pittsburgh.

Leslie Mann, Brad Garrett and Raul Castillo have joined the cast, along with Odeya Rush, Vanessa Burghardt, Evan Assante and Colton Osorio, via Variety.

The film comes from writer-director Cooper Raiff (S***house), who also stars in the film himself.

New cast: Dakota Johnson has a slew of new co-stars for her new movie Cha Cha Real Smooth, which has started production in Pittsburgh

The story follows a 'directionless college grad' who has been making ends meet as a bar mitzvah hype man.

While he's embarking on this new occupation, he is also starting a new relationship with a young mother and her teenage daughter.

No details were given for the roles that any of the cast members have at this time, though that may change as production continues.

No details: No details were given for the roles that any of the cast members have at this time, though that may change as production continues

'We are thrilled to begin production on this heartwarming, heartbreaking, heart-pumping and unique film of Cooper Raiff’s, with our friends and partners at TeaTime and Endeavor Content,' said Erik Feig, who will produce and provide financing through his Picturestart company.

'Cha Cha Real Smooth is going to become a whole bunch of people’s favorite movie of all time pretty soon,' Feig added.

Johnson will also produce alongside Ro Donnelly through their production company TeaTime Pictures.

Favorite: 'Cha Cha Real Smooth is going to become a whole bunch of people’s favorite movie of all time pretty soon,' Feig added

Producer: Johnson will also produce alongside Ro Donnelly through their production company TeaTime Pictures

Both Picturestart and Endeavor Content will provide financing, with Endeavor co-repping worldwide distribution rights with ICM Partners.

No release date plans were revealed quite yet, and it's unclear when this film may be released at this time.

Johnson has The Lost Daughter coming later this year, which is directed by Maggie Gyllenhaal and stars Olivia Colman and Peter Sarsgaard.

Coming soon: Johnson has The Lost Daughter coming later this year, which is directed by Maggie Gyllenhaal and stars Olivia Colman and Peter Sarsgaard

Mann plays Margot Cleary-Lopez in the upcoming TV series The Power and her husband Judd Apatow's new movie The Bubble.

Castillo recently starred in Wrath of Man and Army of the Dead, and he has The Same Storm coming soon.

Garrett most recently starred in Penny Dreadful: City of Angels and Single Parents and he'll next be seen voicing T-Bolt in The Clockwork Girl.

New movie: Mann plays Margot Cleary-Lopez in the upcoming TV series The Power and her husband Judd Apatow's new movie The Bubble

Recent roles: Castillo recently starred in Wrath of Man and Army of the Dead, and he has The Same Storm coming soon
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They've been nearly inseparable since rekindling their romance in April.

And Ben Affleck proved to be a devoted boyfriend as he joined girlfriend Jennifer Lopez on the set of her latest project at a studio in Los Angeles on Wednesday.

The 48-year-old actor 'spent around 4 1/2 hours' on set of Lopez's forthcoming film, often interacting with crew members and Lopez's longtime manager Benny Medina, as per TMZ.

Hands-on beau: Ben Affleck proved to be a devoted boyfriend as he joined girlfriend Jennifer Lopez on the set of her latest project at a studio in Los Angeles on Wednesday

Ben, with a cigarette in hand, was photographed having a passionate exchange with one crew member as they hung out near a slew of filming equipment.

The Gone Girl star had an earpiece in, with its coinciding battery pack featuring a sticker that read: 'Ben'

He kept casual for his day on set by donning a black sweater layered over a plain white tee and a pair of dark wash denim jeans.

Affleck also happened to be wearing Franck Muller Curvex model watch that the On The Floor songstress famously gifted him years ago.

In his element: The 48-year-old actor 'spent around 4 1/2 hours' on set of Lopez's forthcoming film, often interacting with crew members

Casual: He kept casual for his day on set by donning a black sweater layered over a plain white tee and a pair of dark wash denim jeans

Ben and Jennifer are, both, no strangers to film sets. The pair famously costarred in the 2003 box office bomb Gigli and 2004's Jersey Girl.

After shooting scenes for her new project, Jennifer treated her boyfriend and 13-year-old daughter Emme to dinner at Craig's in West Hollywood.

The 52-year-old triple threat showcased her toned arms in a beige tank top which she tucked into a pair of sharp white trousers.

Costars: Ben and Jennifer are, both, no strangers to film sets. The pair famously costarred in the 2003 box office bomb Gigli and 2004's Jersey Girl; Jennifer and Ben pictured in 2003's Gigli

She toted her belongings around in a white leather designer bag and accessorized with several pieces of glitzy gold jewelry.

Lopez wore her honey blonde tresses down and styled in loose waves that framed her seemingly ageless visage.

Emme sported her go-to grunge style, consisting of a pair of cut-off shorts and an oversized flannel top.

Lopez shares Emme, as well as her twin brother Max, with ex husband Marc Anthony. They were married from 2004 until their split in 2014.

Date night: After shooting scenes for her new project, Jennifer treated her boyfriend to dinner at Craig's in West Hollywood

Wow! Jennifer, 52, showcased her toned arms in a beige tank top, which she tucked into a pair of sharp white trousers

The day prior to their evening out in Los Angeles, Jennifer and Ben were photographed near Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate, fueling rumors that the singer is looking to relocate to the West Coast from Miami, Florida for the actor.

They were reportedly touring the five-acre property once belonging to the famous British-American comedian at around 11:30AM, and spent an hour there.

The lavish home is currently owned by billionaire Ron Burkle and comes with luxurious amenities such as a one hole golf course.

Ageless: Lopez wore her honey blonde tresses down and styled in loose waves that framed her ageless visage

Family affair: The couple, who rekindled their romance in April, were joined by Lopez's 13-year-old daughter Emme at the celeb-friendly restaurant

Grunge gal: Emme rocked her go-to grunge style, consisting of a pair of cut-off shorts and an oversized flannel top

Ever the doting boyfriend, the Goodwill Hunting star drove his ladylove in his luxurious Mercedes Benz while she peered out the open window.

In addition to Hope's former residence, Ben and Jennifer were spotted touring an $85 million estate in Beverly Hills.

The stunning property comes with everything a celebrity could want and more with 12 bedrooms, a basketball court, and boxing ring, according to TMZ.

Chauffeur: Ben had retrieved the couple's vehicle from the valet post-dinner, sliding into the driver's seat

Last words: Before zooming out of the Craig's parking lot, the coupe enjoyed some brief back-and-forth as they looked both ways

The house tour is just another sign of how serious the couple have become, ever since rekindling their romance earlier this year.

This isn't the first time the couple have been spotted house hunting together, with the duo also spotted checking out potential homes last month.

Jennifer has also been spotted touring schools in the area for her children.

Ben has three children with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner: Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine, who are all based in the Los Angeles area.

On the hunt? The day prior to their evening out in Los Angeles, Jennifer and Ben were photographed near Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate (pictured), fueling rumors that the singer is looking to relocate to the West Coast from Miami, Florida

Rekindled: The house tour is just another sign of how serious the couple have become, ever since rekindling their romance earlier this year; Ben and Jen pictured in July

While planning for relocating her children, J.Lo has reportedly been looking forward to living with her boyfriend again.

'Ben and Jen are spending almost every night together when they’re not working,' an insider told Us Weekly last month. 'They plan on moving in together very soon.'

Jennifer and Ben have been seemingly attached at the hip ever since reconciling, 17 years after ending their engagement in 2004.

The couple recently celebrated Jennifer's 52nd birthday on board a massive yacht as they explored the likes of St. Tropez and Capri together.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Hilton took to Twitter Thursday to express her relief that Britney Spears' father Jamie Spears said he will step down from running the pop star's 13-year conservatorship.

'I’m so happy to hear this news,' the socialite, 40, wrote with emojis of clapping hands and a heart. 'It’s been so long overdue but I’m so glad that Britney is on her way to finally being free.'

The hotel heiress added, 'Sending so much love!' adding the now-ubiquitous hashtag #FreeBritney.

The latest: Paris Hilton, 40, expressed her relief that Britney Spears' father Jamie Spears said he will step down from running the pop star's 13-year conservatorship on Thursday

The Stars Are Blind singer spoke out following Jamie Spears filing court docs that he was leaving the head of the conservatorship.

'Mr. Spears continues to serve dutifully, and he should not be suspended or removed, and certainly not based on false allegations,' his legal team said in court docs. 'Mr. Spears is willing to step down when the time is right, but the transition needs to be orderly and include a resolution of matters pending before the Court.'

Jamie Spears' lawyers said that their client has been 'the unremitting target of unjustified attacks,' adding that 'he does not believe that a public battle with his daughter over his continuing service as her conservator would be in her best interests.'

Rosie O'Donnell also took to Instagram to comment on the latest development in the case, sending her well-wishes to the pop star, as she said: 'That's right, he's stepping down, all the pressure worked, good for you Britney, being brave - tick tock you don't stop!'

Confidantes: The reality star shared kind words with her longtime friend on social media

Details: The Stars Are Blind singer spoke out following Jamie Spears filing court docs that he was leaving the head of the conservatorship

Jamie Spears, pictured with Britney in 2015, on Thursday resigned as her conservator. He said that he was stepping down because he did not feel the continued public battle was in her best interests

Jamie Spears, 69, has been paying himself $16,000 a month since 2008 to manage his daughter's multimillion dollar fortune.

On Thursday he announced that he would stepping down, as his daughter has long demanded, provided Judge Brenda Penny asked him to and there was a plan in place for Britney's care.

His lawyers write that Jamie will assist with 'an orderly transition to a new conservator,' but said that he will not step down immediately.

Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, said it was 'a vindication for Britney'.

'We are pleased that Mr. Spears and his lawyer have today conceded in a filing that he must be removed,' he said. 'It is vindication for Britney.'

In the court documents, obtained by TMZ, his lawyers wrote: 'There are, in fact, no actual grounds for suspending or removing Mr. Spears as the Conservator of the Estate ... and it is highly debatable whether a change in conservator at this time would be in Ms. Spears' best interests.'

Jamie, 69, is pictured in 2008 leaving Los Angeles County Superior Courthouse - when her conservatorship was introduced. After 13 years, it now finally seems to be coming to an end

Britney Spears is seen with her brother Bryan and her father Jamie in February 2016. She posted the image to Instagram with the caption: 'The fam!'

Jamie, who has always insisted he was acting in the best interests of his superstar daughter, said that he will work with the legal teams to bring the complex case to an end.

'So, even though he must contest this unjustified Petition for his removal, Mr. Spears intends to work with the Court and his daughter's new attorney to prepare for an orderly transition to a new conservator,' his lawyers wrote.

Jamie, who is not believed to have spoken to his daughter since before Christmas, said that he will continue to look out for his daughter's best interests.

'Regardless of his formal title, Mr. Spears will always be Ms. Spears' father, he will always love her unconditionally, and he will always look out for her best interests,' the lawyers said.

'If the public knew all the facts of Ms. Spears' personal life, not only her highs but also her lows, all of the addiction and mental health issues that she has struggled with, and all of the challenges of the Conservatorship, they would praise Mr. Spears for the job he has done, not vilify him.'

He said that the arrangement 'has worked as intended' and it was not surprising that Britney had felt 'constrained'.

The lawyers wrote: 'The Conservatorship has provided Ms. Spears with a structure to help her navigate the daily challenges of her personal life, family matters, medical issues, and career.

'By nature, the structure includes safeguards to protect the Conservatee from self-harm or harm from others.

'It is not surprising that Ms. Spears has often felt constrained or subject to excessive supervision.

'But, at least for the greater part of the past thirteen years, the Conservatorship has worked as intended.'

Britney is pictured on stage in London in August 2018, during the Piece of Me tour

The court filings come as Britney's former bodyguard claimed she is living 'like an inmate in a golden prison' as the singer has her phone calls monitored and is not allowed out unsupervised

Britney's parents Jamie and Lynne are seen in November 2012. They had divorced in 2002

Jamie then attacked his ex-wife Lynne, who he divorced in 2002 after 30 years of marriage.

Jamie claims that Lynne has had scant involvement in Britney's life, and pointed out that Britney refused to even see Lynne when she was at a mental health facility in 2019.

He said that Britney pays in excess of $150,000 a year for Lynne's Louisiana mansion, despite having been largely absent for the past 12 years.

'Unfortunately, it appears that Lynne has not accepted the full extent to which Ms. Spears has had addiction and mental health issues or the level of care and treatment she needs,' Jamie's team wrote.

He said that her monthly medical expenses routinely exceeded $10,000.

Jamie said in the court documents that he stepped in at a dire moment, when she was 'in crisis, desperately in need of help' 13 years ago.

His lawyers wrote: 'Not only was she suffering mentally and emotionally, she was also being manipulated by predators and in financial distress.

'Mr. Spears came to his daughter's rescue to protect her.'

He says he has never forced her to do anything, including performing.

'Mr. Spears has not coerced Ms. Spears to do anything. By her own admission, Ms. Spears is strong and stands up for what she wants,' the lawyers stated.

'Mr. Spears has tried to do everything in his power to accommodate Ms. Spears' wishes, whether regarding her personal life, family, or career, while fulfilling his duties and obligations as Conservator, protecting her from others seeking to take advantage of her, and ultimately, looking out for Ms. Spears' bests interests.

'Sometimes, that has meant telling Ms. Spears that, as an adult, she must follow through on agreements or promises she makes – whether it involves her medical care, career, or personal life.

'This is not coercion – it is the type of good advice that a conservator, or a father, must give.'

Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, who was appointed in July - replacing a court-appointed attorney - told TMZ: 'We are pleased but not necessarily surprised that Mr. Spears and his lawyer finally recognize that he must be removed.

Mathew Rosengart, Britney Spears's lawyer, was appointed on July 14 to represent her - replacing the court-appointed Sam Ingham

'We are disappointed, however, by their ongoing shameful and reprehensible attacks on Ms. Spears and others.

'We look forward to continuing our vigorous investigation into the conduct of Mr. Spears, and others, over the past 13 years, while he reaped millions of dollars from his daughter's estate, and I look forward to taking Mr. Spears's sworn deposition in the near future.

'In the interim, rather than making false accusations and taking cheap shots at his own daughter, Mr. Spears should step aside immediately.'

What is a conservatorship? A conservatorship is a legal concept whereby a probate court appoints a person to manage an incapacitated person or minor's financial and personal affairs. It is often a relative. The terminology and details vary state-by-state, but the general principals are all similar. The conservator's duties include overseeing finances, medical care and living arrangements. In Britney's case, the conservators also oversee visitation arrangements with her two teenage sons, who are under the full custody of her ex-husband, Kevin Federline. It is most frequently used for someone who is severely mentally incapacitated, or suffering from dementia. Yet in the 13 years of Britney's conservatorship, she has released four albums - two of them going platinum; appeared as a judge on both The X Factor and American Idol; and had a four-year residency in Las Vegas that reportedly grossed close to $138 million. The specific details of Britney's case have not been revealed. Unless a judge says otherwise, they still retain rights to make certain decisions, according to the California handbook. They can control salaries they earn, spend an allowance, retain legal representation, vote in elections, get married, draft their own wills, make medical decisions for themselves and ask a judge to terminate conservatorships or replace their guardians. 'All conservatees have the right to be treated with understanding and respect and to have their wishes considered. They have all basic human rights, as well, and the right to be well cared for by you,' the California handbook says. Britney says that she has not had these rights. It is unclear whether this is a violation of her case, or as agreed. There are two types of conservators: a conservator of the person, who looks after meals, housekeeping, transport, housing and recreation, and a conservator of the estate who manages finances and protects assets. Sometimes one person can play both roles. The conservator of the estate must file periodic activities reports by the first year after their appointment and every two years following, until the relationship is terminated. The estate managers have to disclose asset values, gains and losses, and show receipts for all expenditures of conservatorship funds. They are also prohibited from borrowing money from the conservatee or lending out their cash. Many countries have similar systems. In the U.K. it is called a deputyship. In Britain, however, the court will appoint an independent conservator, rather than a family member. Advertisement

Less than a week ago, Jamie was arguing in court that he should not step aside.

On August 6 he claimed in a court filing that Britney is struggling so much with her mental health that court-appointed professional Jodi Montgomery, who overseas the pop star's life decisions, recommended hospitalizing her on emergency psychiatric hold.

In court documents, Spears said Montgomery had called him, distraught, last month and sought his help with his daughter's mental health struggles.

He claimed that Montgomery had explained that Britney was not taking her medications properly and refused to see some of her doctors and that she was 'spiraling out of control'.

But Montgomery and her lawyer said in response that Jamie 'misrepresented and manipulated' the call to use it to his own advantage'.

Jamie stepped aside from the part of the conservatorship that controls his daughter's life decisions in 2019, with Montgomery taking over, though her official status remains temporary.

Jamie said on August 6 that the call for his urgent removal was 'ironic', considering the call he received from Montgomery on July 9.

'Ms. Montgomery sounded very distraught and expressed how concerned she was about my daughters' recent behavior and overall mental health,' Jamie said in a personal declaration included with his court filing.

'Ms. Montgomery explained that my daughter was not timely or properly taking her medications, was not listening to the recommendations of her medical team, and refused to even see some of her doctors.

'Ms. Montgomery said she was very worried about the direction my daughter was heading in and directly asked for my help to address these issues.'

Jamie said they discussed the possibility of hospitalizing Britney on an emergency psychiatric hold.

Montgomery acknowledged, in a statement through her attorney Lauriann Wright, having concerns about Britney Spears' behavior and mental health, but said Jamie Spears' stepping down would only help.

The statement said 'having her father Jamie Spears continuing to serve as her Conservator instead of a neutral professional fiduciary is having a serious impact on Ms. Spears' mental health.'

At no time during the phone call did Montgomery suggest Britney Spears qualifies for a psychiatric hold, the statement said.

The fighting between those involved in the conservatorship has grown increasingly heated, and increasingly public, since Britney's dramatic testimony at a hearing on June 23, when she told a judge ' I just want my life back.'

She told the court that she was forced to have an IUD implanted against her wishes, and that she wanted to marry her boyfriend, Iranian actor and personal trainer Sam Asghari, and have more children - but was prevented from doing so.

She said she was forced to perform against her wishes, and denied even basic freedoms.

In July, Britney told a court in LA that she wants her father charged with conservatorship abuse.

Speaking on the phone, an emotional Britney said: 'I would like to charge my father with conservatorship abuse. I want to press charges against my father today. I want an investigation into my dad.'

She described once again the torment of her conservatorship, in a repeat of her explosive June 23 testimony.

Britney claimed her father and others involved in the conservatorship had threatened her, and added: 'There should be no threats to me at all, ever. I have serious abandonment issues.'

She said that her car keys, hair vitamins and coffee had been taken from her.

She tearfully told Judge Brenda Penny, according to Sky News: 'Ma'am, that's not abuse, that's just f****** cruelty. Excuse my language but it's the truth.'

Britney then told the court: 'I thought they were trying to kill me. If this is not abuse, I don't know what is.'

The court filings come as Britney's former bodyguard claimed she is living 'like an inmate in a golden prison' as the singer has her phone calls monitored and is not allowed out unsupervised.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jared Padalecki has started a GoFundMe campaign to support the children of Holli DeWees, with whom he worked on Supernatural.

The 39-year-old actor started the initiative earlier this week in memory of the late 'family member,' who recently passed away following a bout with breast cancer, which she documented on her Instagram account.

The campaign has surpassed its intended goal of $10,000 and currently stands at $24,434 after just three days of activity.

A good cause: Jared Padalecki has launched a GoFundMe campaign for his late Supernatural 'family member' Holli DeWees; he is seen in 2019

Padalecki, who portrayed Sam Winchester on the series, also wrote a message on the GoFundMe page to notify his fans about the reason for the campaign.

The actor began the statement by writing: 'Hey y’all. As some of you may have seen, one of our own #SPNFamily members has recently passed away from a brave battle with cancer.'

The performer went on to note that DeWees was loved by many who knew her and encouraged her fans to offer their financial assistance to her family.

'She worked to make so many lives better, and now we have an opportunity to take up her mantle and provide some help to the most important people in her life - her kids,' he wrote.

Lending a hand: The performer encouraged his fans to donate to the campaign, which is meant to support DeWees' family

The Walker star went on to express his gratitude for the continued support of the campaign, as he was personally affected by the tragic loss of DeWees.

'Thank y’all so much for helping her family make it through this incredibly difficult time,' he expressed.

DeWees is survived by her husband, Michael, and their two children.

Padalecki previously offered to have a Zoom call with a fan as part of a raffle for the campaign, although he later learned that GoFundMe did not allow for donations to be taken in that manner.

Expressing his gratitude: The actor also wrote a message where he thanked his supporters for 'helping her family make it through this incredibly difficult time'; he is pictured in March

Incentive: The Walker star is also hosting a raffle for a Zoom call as part of the campaign; he is seen in 2019

The actor remained committed to his offer in memory of DeWees, and the raffle for the call, which is being done through Rafflecopter, is still ongoing.

The Room 401 host previously 'photobombed' one of her pictures with his Supernatural co-star, Misha Collins, that was shared to her Instagram account in 2016.

DeWees humorously wrote that the performer jumped in on that shot 'after having pushed us around a bit, (it was all in good fun he's just very strong).'

Her last post on her Instagram account was made this past May, where she expressed excitement over growing her hair back after receiving chemotherapy treatments.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Los Angeles County made masks mandatory again in indoor public places last month due to the surge in COVID-19 cases caused by the Delta variant.

And Cindy Crawford made sure to obey the rules as she enjoyed a lunch date with husband Rande Gerber on Thursday.

The couple were snapped arriving at members-only club SoHo House in Malibu.

Scroll down for video

Casually smart: Cindy Crawford headed to a lunch date in Malibu with husband Rande Gerber on Thursday wearing one of her favorite looks - a white blouse tucked into blue jeans

While her famous face was covered up, the supermodel, 55, showed her signature style in choice of outfit.

She opted for one of her favorite looks, a white cotton blouse tucked into blue jeans.

She added inches with nude sandal heels and left her lovely long brunette hair loose.

Cindy carried a large beige purse and brought along a wide-brimmed sun hat.

Covered up: The supermodel's famous face was hidden behind a mask in line with LA County rules as she headed into the members-only SoHo House clutching a wide-brimmed sun hat

Couple: Rande, 59, wore a navy t-shirt and jeans with a black leather belt and sneakers. He donned a trucker's hat and used a blue bandana as a face covering

Cindy has been a household name since the 1980s and is regarded as one of the foremost supermodels in the world.

From 1991 to 1995, she was in a high-profile marriage to Hollywood star Richard Gere.

Following their divorce, she tied the knot with male model turned entrepreneur Rande in 1998.

The couple are parents to son Presley, 22, and daughter Kaia, 19, both of whom have followed their famous parents into modeling.

Famous face: Cindy has been a household name since the 1980s and is regarded as one of the foremost supermodels in the world (pictured in an Instagram snap in April)

Family: Cindy and Rande have been married since 1998 and share daughter Kaia, 19, and son Presley, 22. Cindy was previously wed to Hollywood star Richard Gere from 1991 to 1995

Kaia, who has taken the fashion world by storm since making her catwalk debut at the age of 16, has now also ventured into acting.

Following small roles in 2016 and 2017, she booked her largest part to date in the Ryan Murphy anthology series American Horror Stories.

The show is a spin-off of the similarly named American Horror Story and the teen was seen in the second of a two-art episode that was released in July.

She also has a role in the upcoming new AHS season titled Double Feature.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Big Bang Theory alum Kaley Cuoco enlisted a masked umbrella handler while filming her new rom-com Meet Cute in 95F-degree summer humidity in Manhattan on Thursday.

The 35-year-old SoCal native - who plays Sheila - was wearing a midi-length slip dress and flip-flop sandals as she head to the set to shoot a scene.

Kaley accessorized with mirrored sunglasses and pulled her ombre locks into a messy updo to keep it off her neck in the heat.

Diva move! Big Bang Theory alum Kaley Cuoco (L) enlisted a masked umbrella handler (R) while filming her new rom-com Meet Cute in 95F-degree summer humidity in Manhattan on Thursday

Later, Cuoco kept hydrated while clutching - not one but - two rechargeable handheld fans to stay cool.

Ice water was everywhere on set in the behind-the-scenes snap the new Smirnoff brand ambassador Instastoried with the caption: 'Shooting in a heatwave.'

The film's impossible premise centers on a couple magically returning to the past to 'heal their partner's past traumas and problems' in order to 'perfect' them, according to Deadline.

On Thursday, second assistant camera person AJ Strauman-Scott Instastoried a curious on-set snap of the camera captioned: 'Tanning bed time machine.'

Showing a little leg: The 35-year-old SoCal native - who plays Sheila - was wearing a midi-length slip dress and flip-flop sandals as she head to the set to shoot a scene

Glued to her phone: Kaley accessorized with mirrored sunglasses and pulled her ombre locks into a messy updo to keep it off her neck in the heat

Hands full: Later, Cuoco kept hydrated while clutching - not one but - two rechargeable handheld fans to stay cool

Ice water was everywhere on set in the behind-the-scenes snap the new Smirnoff brand ambassador Instastoried with the caption: 'Shooting in a heatwave'

Time travel: The film's impossible premise centers on a couple magically returning to the past to 'heal their partner's past traumas and problems' in order to 'perfect' them

Missing from Kaley's side was her onscreen leading man - SNL star Pete Davidson - who plays her boyfriend Gary in Meet Cute, which is helmed by DP-turned-director Alex Lehmann (Paddleton).

For her role as Cassie Bowden in The Flight Attendant, Cuoco will compete for the lead actress in a comedy series trophy at 73rd Primetime Emmy Awards, which air September 19 on CBS.

The Harley Quinn actress will face off against Shrill's Aidy Bryant, Mom's Allison Janney, Black-ish star Tracee Ellis Ross, and Hacks' Jean Smart.

The Flight Attendant also scored nods for comedy series, supporting actress (Rosie Perez), directing (Susanna Fogel), writing (Steve Yockey), and four other technical nods.

On Thursday, second assistant camera person AJ Strauman-Scott Instastoried a curious on-set snap of the camera captioned: 'Tanning bed time machine'

Castmate: Missing from Kaley's side was her onscreen leading man - SNL star Pete Davidson (pictured Wednesday) - who plays her boyfriend Gary in Meet Cute

Kaley also happens to be an executive producer on the series, which HBO Max has already renewed for a second season.

Meanwhile, the 27-year-old comedian and Jon Stewart will next co-host NYC Still Rising After 20 Years: A Comedy Celebration, which takes place September 12 at Madison Square Garden.

Performers include Dave Chappelle, Michael Che, Colin Jost, Jimmy Fallon, Amy Schumer, Wanda Sykes, John Mulaney, Colin Quinn, Tom Segura, Bill Burr, Dave Attell, and Ronny Chieng.

Pete's firefighting father tragically perished in the 9/11 terrorist attack and he was last seen running up the stairs of the Marriott World Trade Center.

'First timer over here!' For her role as Cassie Bowden in The Flight Attendant, Cuoco will compete for the lead actress in a comedy series trophy at 73rd Primetime Emmy Awards, which air September 19 on CBS
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bella Hadid sent temperatures soaring on Thursday afternoon as she unloaded countless glamour shots onto her Instagram page.

The 24-year-old runway maven displayed her fit physique in an orange and yellow tie-dye bikini and a matching sarong.

For the sizzling snaps, Bella struck poses amid a desert-inspired backdrop complete with rocky textures and cacti.

Hot! Bella Hadid sent temperatures soaring on Thursday afternoon as she unloaded countless glamour shots onto her Instagram page

Tie-dye: The 24-year-old runway maven displayed her fit physique in an orange and yellow tie-dye bikini and a matching sarong

Hadid's slinky swimwear consisted of a standard bikini top and a pair of tie bottoms that remained mostly concealed by her sarong.

She accessorized the pool-worthy ensemble with a glistening gold belly chain featuring medallion charms.

The Vogue covergirl also had on a gold wrist cuff with a green stone, as well as a choker necklace and hoop earrings spelling out her first name.

Bella wore her lengthy brunette hair in tightly wound braids that flowed out from under a patterned headscarf.

Desert dream: For the sizzling snaps, Bella struck poses amid a desert-inspired backdrop

Every detail: Hadid's slinky swimwear consisted of a standard bikini top and a pair of tie bottoms that remained mostly concealed by her sarong

She concealed her ice blue eyes with a pair of red-tinted sunglasses, while seemingly rocking a makeup-free visage.

The supermodel completed her getup with some chunky black flip-flops reminiscent of ones worn in the early 2000s.

Bella let her countless snaps do the talking by foregoing a caption on her Instagram posts.

Golden girl: She accessorized the pool-worthy ensemble with a glistening gold belly chain featuring medallion charms

Throwback: The supermodel completed her getup with some chunky black flip-flops reminiscent of ones worn in the early 2000s

For her impromptu photo shoot, Hadid posed on a set of stairs with her knees pressed together and her hands tucked under her chin.

Some of the images were taken from a high vantage point that made it appear as if Bella's followers were looking down upon her and her gloriously posed figure.

Along with some of the more unfiltered shots, Bella included several low-fi images due to the fact they were captured on the model's cellphone from a professional camera.

Cohesive: Bella wore her lengthy brunette hair in tightly wound braids that flowed out from under a patterned headscarf

Artsy: Along with some of the more unfiltered shots, Bella included several low-fi images due to the fact they were captured on the model's cellphone from a professional camera

Her sultry snaps may have been taken by her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, who she has been nearly inseparable from since going public with their relationship last month.

Kalman was recently featured on Hadid's Instagram page, which boasts 44.8million followers.

Kalman was included in Wednesday's photo dump from his and Bella's 'Day off in paradise' together, which was shot back in February.

The snap showed Bella planting a kiss on Marc's cheek, while other showed the model prancing around a tropical destination in various bikinis.

Bella: The Vogue covergirl also had on a gold wrist cuff with a green stone, as well as a choker necklace and hoop earrings spelling out her first name

Scenery: Bella's desert backdrop was complete with rocky textures and cacti

Her newest photos confirm that her romance with Marc has been going on for months.

The two were only romantically connected in July, when she shared a photo of them embracing in a since-deleted post, but a source shared with Page Six that the lovebirds had been together since the summer of 2020, though they 'hid it well.'

Their scheme to hide the relationship reportedly involved having Marc drive her car, but when they arrived at their destination he would let her out but would stay in the car and park it elsewhere, so as to be less conspicuous.

At the time that she went Instagram official with her Marc, who's an art director, her older sister Gigi Hadid left a smiley face emoji in the comments section.

Love: The model's sultry snaps may have been taken by her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, who she has been nearly inseparable from since going public with their relationship last month; the pair pictured in February
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's been enjoying a new romance with music entrepreneur Elliot Grange since March.

But on Thursday, Sofia Richie was without her beau as she shopped for groceries in Beverly Hills.

The daughter of pop superstar Lionel Richie showed off her trim figure as she ran her errand in athleisurewear.

Ran some errands: Sofia Richie flashed her taut midriff as she shopped for groceries Thursday in Beverly Hills wearing a cropped white sleeveless top and black leggings

Sofia, 22, opted for a cropped white sleeveless top and paired it with skintight black leggings.

She stepped out in monochrome trainers and carried a black purse over her shoulder.

Her long hair was tied back into a ponytail and she added sunglasses and a face mask.

Shopped for groceries: The 22-year-old stepped out in monochrome trainers and carried a black purse over her shoulder. Her long hair was tied back into a ponytail

Followed the rules: The daughter of pop superstar Lionel Richie added sunglasses and donned a face mask as required in Los Angeles County

Since going public with their relationship in late March, Sofia has kept her Instagram followers updated by sharing pics of herself and Elliot, 27, on their dates.

Back in April, a source told Entertainment Tonight that the pair are 'happy together and having fun.'

The insider added: 'They have been friends for years and Elliot is also close with Sofia's brother, Miles.'

Her man: Sofia has been enjoying a new romance with music entrepreneur Elliot Grange whom she started dating in March (pictured in an early Instagram snap together)

Couple: Back in April, a source told ET the pair are 'happy together and having fun.' The insider added: 'They have been friends for years and Elliot is also close with Sofia's brother, Miles'

Prior to becoming involved with Elliot, Sofia was romantically linked to Kourtney Kardashian's baby daddy Scott Disick.

She and the much older reality star started dating in 2017 but went their separate ways in spring 2020.

Disick, 38, is currently dating reality star Lisa Rinna's 20-year-old daughter Amelia Hamlin.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Christy Carlson Romano is opening up about working for the Disney Channel more than two decades ago, revealing she didn't also get along with her Even Stevens co-star Shia LaBeouf.

Romano played Ren with LaBeouf playing her brother Louis in Even Stevens, which followed their drastically different personalities, running from 2001 to 2003.

The 37-year-old actress took to her YouTube channel on Thursday where she talked about her experiences working with the Disney Channel, and her experiences working with LaBeouf.

Opening up: Christy Carlson Romano is opening up about working for the Disney Channel more than two decades ago, revealing she didn't also get along with her Even Stevens co-star Shia LaBeouf

Personalities: Romano played Ren with LaBeouf playing her brother Louis in Even Stevens, which followed their drastically different personalities, running from 2001 to 2003

'I remember all of the things that ended up becoming my first job with Disney, I remember the moments leading up to it like it was yesterday because it was just so intense for a young person to go through. So you just don't forget that sort of thing,' she said.

She added that she remembers, 'seeing Shia LaBeouf in the lobby of the audition room' and she was just 14 when she auditioned for Even Stevens.

'We had a perfect amount of space just doing homeschooling and what not at the set,' she said, adding they used the same studio that Baywatch was used for.

First job: 'I remember all of the things that ended up becoming my first job with Disney, I remember the moments leading up to it like it was yesterday because it was just so intense for a young person to go through. So you just don't forget that sort of thing,' she said

Teens: She added that she remembers, 'seeing Shia LaBeouf in the lobby of the audition room' and she was just 14 when she auditioned for Even Stevens

'We literally, me and Shia, had David Hasselhoff's dressing room split in half so that we each had a side because I guess it was that big,' she said.

'There's also kind of like, set politics, here's some tea for you guys. Every set has some people that don't get along. On my set, from time to time it was like, me and Shia, but I think there was other people that didn't gel well as well,' she said.

The actress continued that LaBeouf was, 'a very negative presence amongst everybody.'

Me and Shia: 'There's also kind of like, set politics, here's some tea for you guys. Every set has some people that don't get along. On my set, from time to time it was like, me and Shia, but I think there was other people that didn't gel well as well,' she said

Dressing room: 'We literally, me and Shia, had David Hasselhoff's dressing room split in half so that we each had a side because I guess it was that big,' she said

She added she would sometimes speak against Even Stevens' 'physical gags' that she didn't think were too safe.

'But then all I had to do was tell them, "Look, guys, I don't want to do this' and then they never wrote those gags for me anymore and that's fine because my character was like, a teenage girl anyway,"' the actress said.

'She found comedy in ways that didn't have to do with physical humor — and Shia was more than willing to clown it up for everybody on the set so I just kind of let him have that and take the bullet when it came to doing the craziness,' she said.

Unsafe: She added she would sometimes speak against Even Stevens' 'physical gags' that she didn't think were too safe

Clown: 'She found comedy in ways that didn't have to do with physical humor — and Shia was more than willing to clown it up for everybody on the set so I just kind of let him have that and take the bullet when it came to doing the craziness,' she said

She also talked about the kinds of things that she couldn't do as a typical kid, because it would make them, 'uninsurable.'

'You can't go surfing, you can't rollerblade, you can't do high impact sports, you can't do team sports, you can't do certain things, unless the executives I think like, have to really evaluate it case-by-case,' she said.

'And I'm not saying that they're going to say no every time, but it's a consideration,' she added.

Uninsurable: She also talked about the kinds of things that she couldn't do as a typical kid, because it would make them, 'uninsurable'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tony Bennett has canceled his fall and winter 2021 tour dates.

The 95-year-old singer will not be performing his rescheduled shows, according to Variety, which were put off last year due to the onset of the global pandemic.

Bennett's shows were scheduled to begin next month, with the tour originally being set to kick off in Mashantucket, Connecticut.

Not happening: Tony Bennett has canceled his fall and winter 2021 tour dates; he is seen performing in 2019

The six-date run was also intended to conclude after the entertainer played a duo of concerts in December.

No specific reason for the cancellation of the singer's shows was immediately given.

The news about the Grammy-winning artist comes just days after he appeared in a set of shows under the title One Last Time: An Evening With Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga.

The concerts, which took place at Radio City Music Hall, were notably billed as his last public performances in New York City.

Recent activity: The Grammy-award winning singer recently performed a series of shows with Lady Gaga, which were billed as his last shows in New York City; he is seen in 2019

The shows were also meant to promote the pair's upcoming collaborative album, entitled Love for Sale, which will be released in October.

The album was also promoted as being Bennett's 61st and final studio release.

Its first single, I Get a Kick Out of You, was made available to the public earlier this month and was met with a positive critical reception.

A documentary feature covering the production of the project is reportedly being developed.

Working well: Bennett is set to release a collaborative with Lady Gaga, entitled Love For Sale; the two are seen performing in 2019

The pair previously worked with the 35-year-old singer on Cheek to Cheek, which made its debut in 2014.

The studio release notably won the Grammy Award for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album during that year's ceremony.

Earlier this year, Bennett made it known to the public that he had been diagnosed with Alzheimer's Disease.

Serious accolades: The pair's first collaborative album, entitled Cheek to Cheek, won the Grammy Award for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album; Bennett is seen earlier this month

The singer made the announcement through an interview with AARP, where it was noted that he had first been notified about his condition in 2016.

During the sit-down, the performer's son and manager, Danny, expressed that his father was still dedicated to his craft despite living with Alzheimer's.

He specifically noted that Bennett 'never ceases to inspire me with his passion and dedication to all that life has to offer. The last four years has been no exception. He continues to sing and stay fit on a daily basis.'

Making it work: The singer's son Danny expressed that, despite being diagnosed with Alzheimer's Disease, his father 'continues to sing and stay fit on a daily basis'; Bennett is seen performing with Liza Minelli in 1992

The singer's son went on to note that the performer's decision to make the news about his condition public was made in an effort to offer solace to those suffering from its effects.

'By openly sharing his challenges with Alzheimer's...[Bennett] will give hope to all that face this condition and will help end the stigma surrounding this disease,' he said.

Danny also remarked that Bennett and his family 'want to be able to help raise awareness, advocate for advancing new therapies and one day soon, finding a cure' for the condition.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jennifer didn't mind anyone seeing her in prep mode on Thursday afternoon as she prepared for her appearance on The Late Show With Stephen Colbert.

The 39-year-old Oscar winner looked ultra casual with her hair done up in curlers and a pair of fuzzy pale pink slippers on her hair as she relaxed outdoors near the studio in New York City.

The actress and singer was dropping by to promote her upcoming Aretha Franklin biopic Respect, which arrives in theaters on Friday.

Curl power! Jennifer Hudson, 39, was dressed casually with curlers in her hair as she waited outside before her appearance on The Late Show With Stephen Colbert on Thursday in New York City

Jennifer was spotted walking down the street in a beige cropped tank top that highlighted her toned tummy as she took a call on her phone.

She covered up with a thin black jacket that hung loosely on her frame, and she paired it with baggy high-waisted black sweatpants.

The 5ft9in American Idol star wore long, pointed nails and referenced her upcoming film with a necklace reading 'Respect.'

Later, she tied off her jacket around her waist and and took a seat on a stoop near the studio entrance while continuing her conversation.

No fuss: Jennifer was spotted walking down the street in a beige cropped tank top that highlighted her toned tummy as she took a call on her phone

Totally at ease: She wore a black jacket and matching sweatpants, plus fuzzy pink slippers

She was also joined by people who appeared to be member's of the late night talk show's crew, who sat around her.

Jennifer's new film has received a largely positive, if tepid, reception from critics and currently boasts a 62 percent fresh rating from reviewers surveyed by Rotten Tomatoes.

The Dream Girls star was a logical choice to play the late singer, as she and Aretha were friends up until the late singer's death in 2018 at age 76.

Taking a break: She was also joined by people who appeared to be member's of the late night talk show's crew, who sat around her

Coming soon: She stars in the upcoming Aretha Franklin biopic Respect, which is out in theaters on Friday

Reception: Jennifer's new film has received a largely positive, if tepid, reception from critics and currently boasts a 62 percent fresh rating from reviewers surveyed by Rotten Tomatoes; still from Respect featuring Titus Burgess (L)

On Monday, Jennifer spoke to The Hollywood Reporter about the final phone call she ever received from Franklin.

'She sang to me on our call,' she recalled. 'I truly miss hearing from her.

'The last time I heard her voice was August 8,' Jennifer explained. 'It’s odd that here we are again, on August 8, three years later,' she said of the film premiere.

'Right after we spoke, they told me she was no longer competent enough to speak but she sang to me on our call and we talked about my son and his cooking.'

'She loves to cook and so does he. I sent her a video of him cooking,' she recounted before emotionally adding: 'I truly miss hearing from her.'

Last week, the actress told Variety: 'She's still with me, almost every day in some way.'

Old friends: Jennifer was a logical choice to play Aretha, as they were friends and Jennifer spoke on the phone to her shortly before her death in 2018 at age 76; seen together in 2015 in NYC

'Sometimes, coming off of the film, while taking pictures with someone, I'm like, "Oh wow, I'm smiling like Aretha." Or "That response was more Aretha-like."

'You identify little things like that in yourself that are still there. Or, a lot of my own personal wardrobe now is things that resemble things that she would wear — a lot of fluffy, furry little jackets with leopard prints and things like that,' said Jennifer, who sang at Aretha's funeral.

She continued: 'Those things helped me embody character at times, because clothing can make you feel like the character you're portraying. And I still do the piano [after learning it for the film]. I'm still trying to master it. And guess what? The song I can play the most is Natural Woman so far.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Home Alone reboot starring Archie Yates in a role made famous by Macaulay Culkin has been given a November release date on the Disney+ streaming service.

Home Sweet Home Alone will premiere exclusively on Disney+ on November 12 as the sixth installment in the Home Alone franchise.

Macaulay, 40, starred as young Kevin McCallister in the original Home Alone that was released in November 1990.

November release: The Home Alone reboot starring Archie Yates, shown in December 2019 in New York City, has been given a November release date on the Disney+ streaming service

Archie, 12, portrays Max Mercer in the reboot and his character gets left behind while his family is in Japan for the holidays.

Max then protects the family home when a married couple attempt to break-in to retrieve a priceless heirloom.

Ellie Kemper, 44, Kenan Thompson, 43, and Rob Delaney, 44, also star in the family comedy directed by Dan Mazer with a script by Mikey Day and Streeter Seidell.

Macaulay also will make a cameo appearance reprising his role as Kevin from the first two Home Alone movies.

The original: Macaulay Culkin is shown in a still from the 1990 film Home Alone

Also starring: Ellie Kemper, shown in May 2019 in Los Angeles, also has a starring role in Home Sweet Home Alone

Archie is best known for playing Yorki in the 2019 comedy-drama Jojo Rabbit.

The British child actor received a Critics' Choice Movie Award nomination in the Best Young Actor/Actress category for his portrayal of Jojo's best friend.

Home Sweet Home Alone also features Aisling Bea, Tim Simons, Pete Holmes, Devin Ratray, Ally Maki and Chris Parnell.

Funny guy: Kenan Thompson, shown in March in Santa Monica, California, will be featured in the reboot

The film was announced after The Walt Disney Company acquired 21st Century Fox and gained the film rights to the Home Alone Franchise.

The reboot is the first in a line planned by Disney since its acquisition of Fox titles.

Revivals of Fox titles such as Cheaper By The Dozen, Night At The Museum and Diary Of A Wimpy Kid also have been in the works, according to Deadline.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Bachelorette alum Jef Holm on Monday received a temporary restraining order in Los Angeles from his former roommate Robby Hayes, claiming repeated instances of harassment.

In court documents reviewed by US Weekly, Holm, 37, claimed that he was once roommates with Hayes, 32, who has continued to linger around the residence they shared after he moved out.

'Robert used to live at my house but does not now,' the St. George, Utah native said in docs filed in Los Angeles Superior Court. 'He continues to enter the premises & harass me & I do not feel safe around him.'

The latest: The Bachelorette alum Jef Holm, 37, on Monday received a temporary restraining order from his former roommate Robby Hayes, 32, claiming repeated instances of harassment

Holm, who won the Bachelorette's eighth season, said that Hayes, a Jacksonville, Florida native, 'threatens [him] and still hasn’t stopped to this day.

'He claims he has belongings there and that's why he enters but he is not on the lease and is making me fearful.'

Holm told the court that in one instance last month, Hayes 'yelled at me and threatened me and entered [the home] without permission.

'I was alone in my home when he entered abruptly and aggressively started threatening me & I felt very unsafe,' he said, adding that Hayes has made repeated appearances at his abode.

Details: Holm, who won the Bachelorette's eighth season, said that Hayes, a Jacksonville, Florida native, 'threatens [him] and still hasn’t stopped to this day'

Out and about: Holm was snapped on the red carpet in LA in 2014

Holm, who was linked with Emily Maynard on the series in 2012, said that 'once a week,' Hayes 'enters the property and becomes hostile' with him.

The judge in the case ruled that Hayes, a native of Florida, must remain at least 100 yards away from Holm's residence, work and vehicle.

The judge in the case ruled that Hayes, a native of Florida, must remain at least 100 yards away from Holm's residence, work and vehicle

The case is due back in court later this month, as both sides will be able to present their arguments as to how much longer the temporary restraining order should be kept in effect.

Holm and Hayes initially met in 2017 at a party at a Venice Beach, California home Holm resided in, as they also resided with The Bachelorette alum Chase McNary, 32, according to the outlet.

The party was held in the wake of a Women Tell-All taping for former contestant Nick Viall.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Shia LaBeouf has reportedly signed on to play the lead in Abel Ferrara's next feature film, despite his ongoing legal woes and accusations of abuse by former partner FKA twigs.

And Selling Sunset star Chrishell Stause, after catching wind of the news reported by Variety on Thursday, criticized Ferrara's decision to award the 35-year-old actor a 'comeback role.'

Replying to Variety's Twitter post, the 40-year-old real estate agent wrote: 'Shoots dogs. Beats women. Ummmm I'm gonna pass.'

Criticism: Selling Sunset's Chrishell Stause has criticized director Abel Ferrara's decision to cast embattled actor Shia LaBeouf as the lead in his forthcoming feature film; Chrishell pictured in May

Pass! Replying to Variety's Twitter post, the 40-year-old real estate agent wrote: 'Shoots dogs. Beats women. Ummmm I'm gonna pass'

She concluded the tweet by sarcastically adding that she was 'Glad [Shia] got a Comeback Role though.'

Ferrara told Variety that the Shia-starring film will 'center on the younger years of Italian Saint Padre Pio,' with the actor portraying the Padre in his youth.

'He was very young before he became a saint, so Shia LaBeouf is going to play the monk,' he explained, adding that hooking Shia as the lead means 'the project is "all set" to shoot in the very near future.'

The unnamed feature, according to Ferrara, will start shooting 'on location in Puglia, located in Italy’s famous heel, in late October of this year.'

Variety added that 'the project’s financing could collapse or other logistical hurdles could derail the film' due to it being independently made.

Sarcasm: She concluded the tweet by sarcastically adding that she was 'Glad [Shia] got a Comeback Role though'; Shia pictured in 2019

Chrishell's tweet was directly referencing accusations made by LaBeouf's ex FKA twigs, who filed a lawsuit against the actor in December 2020 alleging that he had mentally, physically, and emotionally abused her during the span of their relationship.

The pair met on the set of his movie Honey Boy in 2018 and dated for nine months, before splitting in May 2019 over what was reported at the time as 'conflicting work schedules.'

FKA claimed during a CBS This Morning with Gayle King that Shia's emotional and mental 'gaslighting' eventually evolved into physical abuse.

Bad taste: LaBeouf has reportedly signed on to play the lead in Abel Ferrara's (pictured in 2020) next feature film, despite his ongoing legal woes and accusations of abuse by former partner FKA twigs

Allegations: Chrishell's tweet was directly referencing accusations made by LaBeouf's ex FKA twigs, who filed a lawsuit against the actor in December 2020 alleging that he had mentally, physically, and emotionally abused her during the span of their relationship; Shia and FKA pictured in 2018

'Eventually it did become physical,' she said. 'There were certain instances where he would push me and say, "You fell." And I would get really confused and think maybe I did.'

She recalled one horrifying instance of Shia's alleged abuse, which involved him threatening to slam his car into a wall while driving on Valentine's Day in 2019 if she didn't confirm her love for him.

She accused LaBeouf of terrorizing her at night and claimed she woke up to find herself being strangled multiple times over imagined slights, like his claims that she had been masturbating in bed next to him or that she was secretly plotting to leave him.

'He made me feel like I wasn't allowed joy, basically. That's what it boils down to: I wasn't allowed joy unless it directly revolved around him,' FKA added.

Evolved: FKA claimed during a CBS This Morning with Gayle King that Shia's 'gaslighting' eventually evolved into physical abuse; FKA twigs pictured in 2019

The songwriter also accused the Nymphomaniac star of knowingly giving her a sexually transmitted disease.

The 'Shoots dogs' portion of Chrishell's tweet pertains to a claim FKA made while speaking with the New York Times regarding her ongoing lawsuit against Shia.

She told the outlet that Shia would allegedly shoot stray dogs that he saw while driving Los Angeles as a sick form of method acting for his role 2020's The Tax Collector.

The performer said Shia was attempting to get into the 'mindset' of his character Creeper, who is described as 'a tax collector who works for one of the biggest gang leaders in Los Angeles.'

Honey Boy: The pair met on the set of his movie Honey Boy in 2018 and dated for nine months, before splitting in May 2019 over what was reported at the time as 'conflicting work schedules'; former couple pictured at Honey Boy premiere in 2019

No joy: 'He made me feel like I wasn't allowed joy, basically. That's what it boils down to: I wasn't allowed joy unless it directly revolved around him,' FKA added in the interview; Shia and FKA pictured in 2019

'Because I take my art seriously. You're not supporting me in my art. This is what I do. It's different from singing,' FKA claimed Shia said to her regarding his actions, adding that he doesn't 'just get up on a stage and do a few moves. I'm in the character'

LaBeouf's attorney said in a court filing that the Honey Boy actor 'denies generally and specifically each and every allegation' in FKA's complaint.

He claimed to have apologized to 'those he had hurt' but 'denied each and every' assault allegation by the singer and wants her to pay his legal costs.

According to legal documents obtained by People, Shia denied that '[Barnett] has sustained any injury or loss by reason of any act or omission on the part of [LaBeouf], and denies that [Barnett] is entitled to any relief or damages whatsoever'.

Devastating: The songwriter also accused the Nymphomaniac star of knowingly giving her a sexually transmitted disease; FKA pictured in 2020

His lawyers added that 'none of the acts alleged were based on sex and/or the conduct was not sexual' as they try to get the sexual battery allegations dismissed.

The actor also told The New York Times that 'many' of the allegations were not true, and that he has 'no excuses for my alcoholism or aggression, only rationalizations.'

He only partially apologized, saying, 'I have been abusive to myself and everyone around me for years. I have a history of hurting the people closest to me. I'm ashamed of that history and am sorry to those I hurt. There is nothing else I can really say.'

LaBeouf that he owed the women 'the opportunity to air their statements publicly and accept accountability for those things I have done.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's enjoying a summer in The Hamptons with wife Hilaria and their six children.

And on Thursday, Alec Baldwin was spotted on a solo coffee run in the tony hamlet of Amagansett.

The actor, 63, who's sporting a full gray beard during his vacation, was casually attired in a navy polo shirt and royal blue shorts.

Errand: He's enjoying a summer in The Hamptons with wife Hilaria and their six children. And on Thursday, Alec Baldwin was spotted on a solo coffee run in the tony hamlet of Amagansett

The 30 Rock star made headlines earlier this week when he defended NY York Governor Andrew Cuomo after the politician resigned amid a sexual harassment scandal.

Taking to Twitter, he claimed cancel culture and party politics were what took the governor down.

Baldwin tweeted on Tuesday: 'Regardless of what you think of Cuomo, this is a tragic day.

'Party politics in this country draw ambitious but ultimately isolated, even socially maladjusted men and women who, given the current cancel culture, will likely have their shortcomings exposed and magnified.'

Relaxed: The actor, 63, who's sporting a full gray beard during his vacation, was casually attired in a navy polo shirt and royal blue shorts

Outspoken: The 30 Rock star made headlines earlier this week when he defended NY York Governor Andrew Cuomo after he resigned amid a sexual harassment scandal. Taking to Twitter, he claimed cancel culture and party politics were what took the governor down

Baldwin had his own experience with 'cancel culture' when his wife Hilaria, 37, was called out late last year for 'faking' her Spanish heritage.

At the end of December 2020, it emerged that Hilaria - who in the past claimed to have grown up in Majorca and spoke with a Spanish accent - actually spent her childhood in Beacon Hill, Boston, and went by Hillary.

She subsequently apologized via her Instagram for misleading her followers and noted that she 'should have been more clear' about her past.

Her famous husband took to Twitter to call out social media users who want to 'destroy the undeserving and deserving alike.'

In a heated message, he wrote: 'Cancel culture is like a forest fire in constant need of fuel. Functioning objectively. No prejudice. No code.

'Just destroy. The deserving and the undeserving alike.'

Alec and Hilaria, who married in 2012, are parents to six children.

They share daughter Carmen, seven, sons Leonardo, six, Rafael, four, Romeo, three, and Eduardo who turns one next month.

The couple also welcomed a daughter Maria Luci via a surrogate in February.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Billy Crystal is opening up about a minor health scare and how he got through an MRI by getting high with edibles.

The 73-year-old actor was promoting Monsters at Work and Here Today on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, where he revealed he's been 'working out as much as I can.'

The City Slickers star said he recently felt, 'a strange pain' in his right hip and he went to get it checked out, where he decided to take four edibles while getting an MRI.

Edibles: Billy Crystal is opening up about a minor health scare and how he got through an MRI by getting high with edibles

Pain: The City Slickers star said he recently felt, 'a strange pain' in his right hip and he went to get it checked out, where he decided to take four edibles while getting an MRI

He said the doctor said the best way to find out if it's anything serious is to get an MRI, though he's not a fan of those procedures because he's, 'very claustrophobic.'

The comedian even joked that he was a month premature because he's so claustrophobic.

He added that they shoot dye into the hip and put him in a gown, 'with your ass hanging out in the back. Nothing is good about this.'

MRI: He said the doctor said the best way to find out if it's anything serious is to get an MRI, though he's not a fan of those procedures because he's, 'very claustrophobic'

Not good: He added that they shoot dye into the hip and put him in a gown, 'with your ass hanging out in the back. Nothing is good about this'

'So, to make a long story short, when I was alone, I swallowed four edibles, all right?' Crystal said.

'The guy at the cannabis place said — because there's a section for seniors — "two will make you feel good." So I said, 'I really want to feel fabulous,'" Crystal joked.

He got into the tube and added they gave him a 'thing to squeeze' if he's in trouble, which he used in an unusual way when he got hungry a half hour in.

Four edibles: 'So, to make a long story short, when I was alone, I swallowed four edibles, all right?' Crystal said

Trouble: He got into the tube and added they gave him a 'thing to squeeze' if he's in trouble, which he used in an unusual way when he got hungry a half hour in

'So I squeeze the thing and he goes, "Are you OK Mr. Crystal?" I said, "Yeah, yeah. Is there a Taco Bell nearby?"' Crystal joked.

He added that, 40 minutes in, he hit the thing again and said, 'Yeah, I'm thinking, Postmates, would they deliver? I'm thinking gumbo or Nutella French Toast.

The beloved actor eventually fell asleep in the tube, but when the procedure was over, he had another mishap.

Taco Bell: 'So I squeeze the thing and he goes, "Are you OK Mr. Crystal?" I said, "Yeah, yeah. Is there a Taco Bell nearby?"' Crystal joked

Asleep: The beloved actor eventually fell asleep in the tube, but when the procedure was over, he had another mishap

Eventually, he fell asleep and after the procedure was over, he walked out of the hospital — but there was a slight mishap.

'So they take me out and I walk out of the building and someone says, 'um, sir — you're still in your gown and your ass is hanging out,'" Crystal admitted.

'So I come back in, I got dressed and I went to a Taco Bell and had a nacho fry box,' he said, adding he's feeling better now.

Mishap: Eventually, he fell asleep and after the procedure was over, he walked out of the hospital — but there was a slight mishap
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lily-Rose Depp was spotted taking a stroll with a friend in New York City on Thursday afternoon.

The 22-year-old actress was seen having a chat with her pal as the two enjoyed the pleasant summertime weather while making their way through the Big Apple.

The performer's outing comes not long after she was spotted sharing a kiss with Austin Butler during a romantic dinner date in London.

Getting a bit of sun: Lily-Rose Depp was seen taking a stroll with a pal in New York City on Thursday afternoon

Depp wore a white tank top that exposed her toned arms as well as a matching pair of sneakers as she spent time with her friend.

The Crisis actress also sported a pair of light blue cutoff denim shorts that offset the color of her top.

The performer accessorized with a necklace and a pair of sunglasses and kept two bags slung over both arms during the outing.

Her beautiful blonde locks remained tied back in a loose ponytail as she strolled with her pal.

Keeping it casual: The performer was seen wearing a white tank top and a pair of cutoff denim shorts as she spent time with her friend

Extra storage: The actress notably kept a bag slung over each shoulder as she made her way along the Big Apple's streets

Depp was recently spotted kissing Austin Butler during a trip to London.

The daughter of Vanessa Paradis and Johnny Depp and the 29-year-old actor were pictured making out after they finished up a dinner date.

The two had previously been chauffeured to a restaurant with a friend and were also seen waving at their pal after they left the pair's company.

Neither of the two has made any public comments regarding the steamy makeout session as of yet.

New flame: Depp was recently pictured making out with Austin Butler after a romantic dinner date in London; he is seen at the 2019 premiere of Once Upon A Time In Hollywood

The Disney Channel alum was previously in a long-term relationship with Vanessa Hudgens, which came to an end last year.

Before she became involved with the Once Upon A Time In Hollywood actor, Depp was linked to Timothee Chalamet.

The two met on the set of the 2018 Netflix film The King and began spending time together following its release.

The actress and the performer, 25, were later spotted going on dates in various locations around the world over the next year.

In the past: The actress was previously romantically connected to Timothee Chalamet, with whom she starred in The King; they are seen at the 76th Venice Film Festival in 2019

In 2019, the pair was pictured making out on a boat during a trip to Venice, which seemingly confirmed that they were romantically involved.

During an interview with GQ, the Call Me By Your Name star notably referred to Depp as 'someone I really loved.'

The pair were later spotted spending time with each other in New York City earlier this year, although the actress has appeared to move on with her current romantic interest.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Hills: New Beginnings star Heidi Montag Pratt underwent hysteroscopic polypectomy surgery at a LA hospital on Wednesday amid her fertility struggles.

'Hopefully after this, I can get pregnant right away,' the 34-year-old reality star said in her 11-minute vlog on The Pratts' YouTube channel.

Heidi prayed that removing uterine polyps was the only thing standing in her way from getting pregnant with baby No. 2.

'Hopefully after this, I can get pregnant right away!' The Hills: New Beginnings star Heidi Montag Pratt underwent hysteroscopic polypectomy surgery at a LA hospital on Wednesday amid her fertility struggles.

A dazed Montag then filmed herself after the procedure where she thanked the doctors and nurses and revealed she'll have spotting over the next few days and she can't pick up anything over 20lbs.

'I can have intercourse in two days,' the Colorado-born blonde smiled.

'Hopefully I am ovulating because [the doctor] was like, "Well maybe you're ovulating every other month." We'll see. I'm just so happy I had this done. I'm feeling good. I have no cramping and the anesthesia felt great.'

Heidi's husband of 12 years Spencer Pratt then picked her up and bought her a bouquet of flowers.

Vlogger: The 34-year-old reality star prayed that removing uterine polyps was the only thing standing in her way from getting pregnant with baby No. 2

'All done!' A dazed Montag then filmed herself after the procedure where she thanked the doctors and nurses and revealed she'll have spotting over the next few days and she can't pick up anything over 20lbs

The Colorado-born blonde said: 'I can have intercourse in two days. Hopefully I am ovulating because [the doctor] was like, "Well maybe you're ovulating every other month." We'll see'

'Thank you!' Heidi's husband of 12 years Spencer Pratt then picked her up and bought her a bouquet of flowers

On Thursday morning, Montag was 'really nauseous' and admitted via Instastory that she probably should have had the recommended soup rather than Mexican food after her surgery.

That same afternoon, the Black Easter actress spoke with her doctor, who informed her 'there were not as many polyps removed as I thought.'

'Part of me was a little disappointed like, "Aw man is that not the reason that I'm not getting pregnant?"' Heidi - who boasts 3M social media followers - lamented over Instastory.

'So I kind of felt a little defeated, but I'm just going to count my blessings. I'm glad I got them removed for process of elimination and also they can turn cancerous so it's good to have them out...

Oops! On Thursday morning, Montag was 'really nauseous' and admitted that she probably should have had the recommended soup rather than Mexican food after her surgery

'Part of me was a little disappointed': That same afternoon, the Black Easter actress spoke with her doctor, who informed her 'there were not as many polyps removed as I thought'

Heidi continued: 'So I kind of felt a little defeated, but I'm just going to count my blessings. I'm glad I got them removed for process of elimination and also they can turn cancerous so it's good to have them out'

'I'm so thankful for the child I have. I'm going to have faith. I'm meant to have another one. I'm gonna have another one. Let it go. I have a beautiful house, food, water, a husband I love, a healthy son. What else can you do?'

Montag and her three-year-old son Gunnar Stone will next celebrate the Pratt Daddy Crystals owner's 38th birthday this Saturday.

The Erewhon Market-obsessed couple don't think that MTV will be renewing their reality series for a third season following the second season finale on August 4.

July 8 family portrait: Montag and her three-year-old son Gunnar Stone will next celebrate the Pratt Daddy Crystals owner's 38th birthday this Saturday

'It's not getting renewed, it's not even a maybe': The Erewhon Market-obsessed couple don't think that MTV will be renewing their reality series for a third season following the second season finale on August 4

'It's not getting renewed, it's not even a maybe,' Spencer said on the Unpopular with Jacques Peterson podcast on July 12.

'They would have to use another production company. This production company wouldn't even do it. They won't even mess with this cast. There's no way. I think it would be like Gossip Girl with a new cast of kids. That's the only chance.'

Back in 2006-2010, the Laguna Beach spin-off was frequently criticized for fabricating storylines.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The life of beloved actress Selma Blair comes to the big screen with the first trailer for her new documentary Introducing Selma Blair.

The 49-year-old actress was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS) in August 2018, with Blair revealing in the trailer she was told to, 'make plans for dying.'

The new documentary film from director Rachel Fleit will debut in theaters October 15 before debuting on the Discovery Plus streaming service October 21.

Trailer: The life of beloved actress Selma Blair comes to the big screen with the first trailer for her new documentary Introducing Selma Blair

Make plans: The 49-year-old actress was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS) in August 2018, with Blair revealing in the trailer she was told to, 'make plans for dying'

The trailer begins with the actress carefully walking down a set of stairs in her home, as she says, 'I always thought I was on a reality show.'

'Like a documentary, but only God would see it and disapprove,' she added, while getting to the bottom of the stairs and striking a pose in the mirror.

She's also seen talking on a toy phone stating, 'I'm so sorry I can't talk right now, we're shooting the final days of my life.'

Pose: 'Like a documentary, but only God would see it and disapprove,' she added, while getting to the bottom of the stairs and striking a pose in the mirror

Can't talk: She's also seen talking on a toy phone stating, 'I'm so sorry I can't talk right now, we're shooting the final days of my life'

A number of photos of Blair with celebrity friends like Reese Witherspoon are shown, as a friend says Selma is 'famous enough to get the wrong kind of attention at the wrong time.'

She's seen walking with a rather severe limp, as the friend says if people see that they might think she's drunk.

Blair says those issues were just the onset of MS, 'which is just a symptom of a really unhealthy immune system.'

Friends: A number of photos of Blair with celebrity friends like Reese Witherspoon are shown, as a friend says Selma is 'famous enough to get the wrong kind of attention at the wrong time'

Limp: She's seen walking with a rather severe limp, as the friend says if people see that they might think she's drunk

The actress is seen walking up the stairs with a cane, hunched over, as she says, 'Don't worry, I know what I'm doing.'

Blair ads that things were 'moving backwards' and her medication was making her feel worse.

Selma adds that a stem cell transplant might be her best option, while another friend adds that the actress has, 'got grit like nobody.'

She knows: The actress is seen walking up the stairs with a cane, hunched over, as she says, 'Don't worry, I know what I'm doing'

Backwards: Blair ads that things were 'moving backwards' and her medication was making her feel worse

She's seen playing dodgeball with her son Arthur, but she's seen on the bed after stating, 'That was really hard.'

The actress is seen talking with someone on the phone, stating, 'You know how you called me maudlin before? You ain't seen nothing yet.'

The Cruel Intentions star is seen in a hospital bed after her first round of chemotherapy, adding, 'I would like it to be as dramatic as I am.'

Very hard: She's seen playing dodgeball with her son Arthur, but she's seen on the bed after stating, 'That was really hard

Maudlin: The actress is seen talking with someone on the phone, stating, 'You know how you called me maudlin before? You ain't seen nothing yet'

'I was told to make plans for dying. Not because I have MS, because I'm fighting MS,' as she's seen making a fake mustache with the hair Arthur shaved off.

Blair is seen talking into the camera and saying she had a 'complication' and she felt, 'the most horrible pain in my heart.

She jokes that she feels like she's in a Tom Hanks movie and she's stranded on an island, 'and I'm eating Wilson,' as she eats a watermelon.

Plans: 'I was told to make plans for dying. Not because I have MS, because I'm fighting MS,' as she's seen making a fake mustache with the hair Arthur shaved off

The trailer winds down with a number of various shots as Blair said she promised herself she wouldn't 'judge the process,' but that's exactly what she's doing.

'Everything beautiful that I've known, that I've encouraged other people, will it be true for me too?' Blair says, as the trailer comes to a close.

The final shot shows Blair in all black lying on the floor as she says, 'I'm trying to look dead for a dramatic ending.'

Encouraged: 'Everything beautiful that I've known, that I've encouraged other people, will it be true for me too?' Blair says, as the trailer comes to a close
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amy Adams was the picture of summer chic as she stepped out to run errands in Beverly Hills.

The 46-year-old two-time Golden Globe winner turned heads in a colorful semi-sheer floral dress when she was spotted on Thursday.

Amy rocked a bright orange frock embellished with a pattern of pink flowers, purple hydrangeas and green leaves.

Stylish: Amy Adams was the picture of summer chic as she stepped out to run errands in Beverly Hills

The short-sleeved chiffon dress featured a pleated bodice and a ruffled edge hem that billowed around the Arrival actress's knees as she strolled to her car.

The Sharp Objects star sported pale pink slip on slide sneakers and carried an emerald green leather clutch bag embossed with her initials in gold.

As COVID-19 cases continue to rise due to the spread of the Delta variant, Adams covered her face with a white surgical mask.

Eye-catching: Amy rocked a bright orange frock embellished with a pattern of pink flowers, purple hydrangeas and green leaves

The beauty wore her trademark red tresses in a low ponytail. She held a water bottle and her car keys in one hand as she reached inside her purse.

Amy recently played an agoraphobic psychologist in the 2021 Netflix thriller The Woman in the Window. She is reprising her role as Princess Giselle in the sequel to the beloved 2007 fantasy romance Enchanted.

Last week, director and producer Adam Shankman announced that filming for the much-anticipated follow-up, titled Disenchanted, had completed filming in Ireland.

Exciting: Last week, director and producer Adam Shankman announced that filming for the much-anticipated follow-up, titled Disenchanted, had completed filming in Ireland

Shankman shared an image of himself on Instagram in which he was seen from behind as he posed with Adams in a field.

'Myself and Giselle…errrr….@amyadams would just like to say: And that's a wrap. #Disenchanted Coming to you in #2022 @disney @disneyplus @disneystudios,' Adam wrote in the caption.

In the original film, Amy played a young maiden who was banished from her animated kingdom Andalasia on the eve of her wedding to a prince. She was transported to New York City where she fell in love with Robert (Patrick Dempsey), a divorce lawyer, and befriended his daughter Morgan (Rachel Covey).

Modern fairytale: In the original film, Amy played a young maiden who was banished from her animated kingdom Andalasia on the eve of her wedding to a prince. She was transported to New York City where she fell in love with Robert (Patrick Dempsey), a divorce lawyer. Seen in 2007

Disenchanted will take place 15 years after the events of the first film and will follow Giselle as she moves to the suburbs with Robert and Morgan. As Giselle begins to question her happy-ever-after, she accidentally sets off a chain of events that threaten her family and her animated homeland.

Dempsey, James Marsden, Idina Menzel, and Susan Sarandon are all returning to reprise their roles. Maya Rudolph is also set to star as the villainous Malvina Monroe.

Disenchanted will be released on Disney+ in 2022.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They're reprising their roles as Mr. Big and the inimitable Carrie Bradshaw for the upcoming Sex And The City reboot, titled And Just Like That..., which started shooting last month.

And Chris Noth treated fans to a snapshot of himself and onscreen wife Sarah Jessica Parker snuggling in bed as they filmed a scene together on Thursday.

'Just like the old days!' captioned the 66-year-old actor, who could be seen smirking sweetly at his 56-year-old costar in the behind-the-scenes snap.

Good old days! Chris Noth treated fans to a snapshot of himself and onscreen wife Sarah Jessica Parker snuggling in bed as they filmed a scene together for the forthcoming Sex And The City reboot

Sarah, with her eyes closed, grinned in Chris' direction as their bodies remained concealed beneath a cozy white comforter.

Taking to the comment section, Parker joked that their character's Big and Carrie must have 'overslept. Again. X,' alluding the lovers' famously passionate - and often reckless - romance.

Sarah and Chris have been teasing their fans on social media in recent days as they continue to shoot scenes for And Just Like That..., which is set to premiere in late 2021 on HBO Max.

Last Saturday, the Emmy Award-winning actress uploaded a sweet shot of Noth cradling her face in his hands, with the caption: 'These 2. I bet they stay out late tonight.'

Meanwhile, the Law And Order alum shared a candid photo of himself and Sarah that showed her with one arm wrapped around his shoulders.

Whoops! Taking to the comment section, Parker joked that their character's Big and Carrie must have 'overslept. Again. X,' alluding the lovers' famously passionate - and often reckless - romance

Iconic lovebirds: They're reprising their roles as Mr. Big and the inimitable Carrie Bradshaw for the Sex And The City reboot, titled And Just Like That..., which started shooting last month; Noth and Parker pictured

'Together again!' he exclaimed in the post's caption, which was seen by his 324,000 followers at some point last Saturday.

Wanting to take fans along for the ride on the production of the forthcoming SATC reboot, Parker captured several videos in her glam room as she got ready for another day in front of the camera on Tuesday.

She happened to be preparing to film one of many scenes featuring Noth as her husband M. Big, which was set in the beloved TV couple's NYC abode.

The shoe designer looked youthful as she was makeup free with her rose-tinted gold-rimmed aviator glasses on. Her thick hair was pulled back in a messy knot as she had two clips in front.

Teasing: Sarah and Chris have been teasing their fans on social media in recent days, with SJP uploading a sweet shot of Noth cradling her face in his hands, with the caption: 'These 2. I bet they stay out late tonight' on Saturday

Familiar: The pose from Saturday's on-set snap looked similar to many tender moments shared between Carrie and Mr. Big throughout the duration of SATC and its respective theatrical films; Sarah and Chris pictured in 2010's Sex and The City 2

Sarah wore a light gray top that fell over her tanned shoulders as she had on no jewelry.

The star's squad members - Elaine, CJ and Serge - milled around her as all of the products used on Sarah Jessica were seen in front of her.

Parker both looked bored and then shared a shocked expression as she filmed away with her phone.

After her hair was done, Parker took another photo.

Her honey blonde locks were nicely styled into soft waves that fell over her shoulders. In this image she wore a black face mask.

Longtime costars: Meanwhile, the Law And Order alum shared a candid photo of himself and Sarah that showed her with one arm wrapped around his shoulders; Chris and Sarah pictured Saturday

Also with her were the glam members: two men and a woman.

There was incense burning as music played in the background and Sarah gave fans a look at her silver Mary Jane SJP heels.

Also on the table were two bottles of red Vitamin Water.

'I think this is my first selfie Story, OK there is Elaine, invaluable, there is CJ, invaluable, Serge, invaluable,' said Parker during her clip.

She then sings to the song, humming as well.

Behind-the-scenes: Wanting to take fans along for the ride on the production of the forthcoming SATC reboot, Parker captured several videos in her glam room as she got ready for another day in front of the camera on Tuesday

'OK we are shooting on the stage today, I wonder who I am shooting with today hmmmm.'

She was going to shoot a scene with her on screen husband, Mr Big, played by Law & Order vet Chris Noth. The setting was their home.

And she gave a look at the set: 'Backlot. Stage. Married domicile. They build. They shoot. They make sure story is heard. They make our day. X, SJ.'

On Monday the cast of And Just Like That... was been spotted filming a funeral scene sparking wild speculation about which Sex and the City character will meet their demise.

Shooting: She happened to be preparing to film one of many scenes featuring Noth as her husband M. Big, which was set in the beloved TV couple's NYC abode

The team: 'I think this is my first selfie Story, OK there is Elaine, invaluable, there is CJ, invaluable, Serge, invaluable.' She then sings to the song, humming as well. 'OK we are shooting on the stage today, I wonder who I am shooting with today hmmmm'

It was recently reported that a major cast member will be killed off in the revival series and a TikTok video shows extras dressed in black milling around the Wolf Building in New York City.

Fans of the series went into meltdown after the clip was released as they attempt to work out which character will be meeting their maker.

Samantha Jones (Kim Cattrall) and Mr Big (Noth) are among the frontrunners to be killed off while Steve Brady (David Eigenberg) and Magda (Lynn Cohen) have also been tipped to meet a grisly end by fans.

A source close to the show recently teased that 'it is going to be a big death' – suggesting that it could be Mr. Big – the husband of Carrie Bradshaw (Parker).

Other show insiders have suggested that Samantha could die as Kim is not involved in And Just Like That..., turning down the chance to reprise her most famous role.

The mood: There was incense burning as music played in the background and Sarah gave fans a look at her silver Mary Jane SJP heels. Also on the table were two bottles of red Vitamin Water

The things that glam up SJP: There was lotion and hair spray as well as brushes

Fans on social media speculated about the possible victim, with one writing: 'Rumour has it it's Mr. Big?'

Another added: 'Lord forgive me please be Big. I can't handle more back and forth with him and Carrie, enough is enough lol.'

However, another fan was saddened by Mr Big's possible demise.

They wrote: 'Ok why do they have to do something so depressing? Why would Big have to die? That will ruin it for me.'

Only senior cast and crew have been made aware of which character will die and are sworn to secrecy. A source said: 'In the first episode fans will be served up a jaw-dropping storyline where one of the major names on the show will die. Those in the know are calling it a ''big death'', which obviously has everyone leaping to the conclusion that Mr. Big will be no more.'

And in late July DailyMail.com shared that the reboot is reportedly getting a second series.

On stage: The look of the set which seemed to be Parker's NYC apartment

Looks like Carrie's home: On one of the tables was Carrie Bradshaw's book Sex And The City

A crew member at rest: One of the rooms had a table and bookshelves with a laptop

Filming of 'And Just Like That...' has been such a 'resounding success' that executive producers Michael Patrick King and Sarah Jessica Parker (Carrie Bradshaw) are considering extending the show past its currently confirmed 10 episodes.

A source told the outlet that another instalment is 'expected to be announced soon by HBO Max.'

It's even been claimed that the 'door is open' for Kim Cattrall to return as sex-obsessed PR executive Samantha Jones, despite her feud with Sarah Jessica and not taking part in the first season.

The source said: 'There was obviously a concern that people would miss Kim and not be engaged but the response so far has been phenomenal. And for fans of Kim, the door is open for her to return. If she ever changes her mind, she can come back.

'The ladies love and value her and would love to see her on the new show. The whole point of this series is to show that friendships evolve and change over time, so Kim is always welcome to come home.

Proof! One of the rooms was labeled Carrie and Big's living room. Big is Mr Big played by Chris Noth

He is ready to roll: A camera man looks at his cell phone as he wears a black mask

'If Kim's reps called us now and said she was available – we'd book her on the first flight to New York. There's still time.'

HBO Max claimed the character won't be returning for the spin-off series because they wanted to reflect the 'actual stages of life' which often see friends part ways.

When only Sarah Jessica, Cynthia Nixon (Miranda Hobbes), and Kristin Davis (Charlotte York Goldenblatt ) were confirmed for the new show, questions were raised as to why Kim wasn't on the list to return.

However, HBO Max's chief content officer Casey Bloys explained that show bosses thought it would be unrealistic for all four of the original leading ladies to still be best friends almost 17 years after the original show came to an end in 2004.

He said: 'They're not trying to say that these characters are reliving their 30s. It is very much a story about women in their 50s, and they are dealing with things that people deal with in their 50s.'

Last week Sarah told DailyMail.com that she is proud of her award-winning wine Invivo X, SJP.

On the go: Sarah with Cynthia Nixon, left, and Kristin Davis, right, in the Sex And The City reboot And Just Like That...

The star talked to DailyMail.com a week ago about the wine she launched in 2019.

The siren said she is happy that the label has been a major success. 'It's such an honor to be awarded two gold medals and the Europe Rosè trophy from the 2021 New York International Wine Competition,' the blonde told DailyMail.com.

'Lots of love has gone into making our wines, from vineyard through to blending, and we are thrilled and honored to be recognized,' added the former child star.

The red carpet wonder added, 'We thank everyone who has brought a bottle home and included us as part of their special moments. We're delighted to share this exciting recognition with you.'

Having her wine take off like this is a joyful moment for the actress: 'We are proud. And stunned. And honored. And delighted.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Horatio Sanz has been accused in a new lawsuit of grooming and sexually assaulting a then-17-year-old fan at a 2002 afterparty for the NBC show.

The Saturday Night Live personality, according to court docs reviewed by TMZ, was accused by a Pennsylvania woman of groping her breasts and touching her genitals without any consent while in the presence of multiple NBC employees.

Sanz's attorney Andrew Brettler denied the accusations to TMZ, calling them 'ludicrous' and 'categorically false,' as he said that Sanz's accuser had previously reached out with a financial demand.

Details: SNL alum Horatio Sanz, 52, has been accused in a new lawsuit of grooming and sexually assaulting a then-17-year-old fan at a 2002 afterparty for the NBC show. He was snapped in LA in 2019

'Before filing this lawsuit anonymously, she demanded $7.5 million in exchange for her silence,' Brettler said. 'We, of course, refused and will vigorously contest these totally meritless claims.'

In court docs, the woman accused the Santiago, Chile-born star, 52, of getting her drunk on multiple occasions at parties for the NBC comedy series.

Sanz's accuser, who is identified as Jane Doe in legal docs, said was 15 when she first began corresponding with Sanz, via her involvement in a fan site dedicated to the long-running comedy series.

Sanz is accused of grooming the woman with flirty behavior and sexual advances in the suit, which states that the comic was fully aware of her age.

Flashback: Sanz, who appeared on the NBC staple from 1998-2011, was seen in the Weekend Update segment in 2002

Sanz was seen working alongside Amy Poehler in a segment in 2005

The woman accusing the actor said that because of her experience, she suffered shame and depression, eventually beginning to use 'dissociative drugs' to an extent that she required hospitalization.

Sanz's accuser said she crossed paths with the actor two years ago at a comedy show in New York City, and the actor said they had engaged in 'cybersex' at a time she was underage, according to court docs.

Sanz is named in the suit along with SNL Studios and NBCUniversal.

Sanz appeared on the NBC staple from 1998-2011. In recent years, he's been seen in films including Zeroville, The Sex Addict and Actors Anonymous; and TV shows such as GLOW, Black Monday, Duncanville and The Mandalorian.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He dismissed critics of his family's parenting amid the controversy following his wife Coco Austin's admission that she still nurses their five-year-old daughter Chanel.

And in case it wasn't already clear, Ice-T made it explicit that he and Coco weren't 'normal parents' in a risqué photo he tweeted on Thursday.

The 63-year-old rapper and actor looked off guard with his face covered in shaving cream, while Coco, 42, had her nether regions lathered up for a shave.

High and low: Ice-T, 63, gave his fans more than they asked for with a risqué photo of himself and his wife Coco Austin shaving on Thursday, after he dismissed people complaining that she still breastfeeds their five-year-old daughter Chanel

The snap showed Coco putting on a busty display in a white lace bra and nothing else.

She was nude below the waist and had her bikini line area covered in shaving cream, with a razor at the ready in her hand.

She sported hot pink hair that was tied up in a bun and had a playfully shocked expression on her face.

Meanwhile, Ice-T squinted with fake anger while his face was covered in shaving cream, and he wore a black tank top and matching pants.

The photo instantly aroused criticism from other Twitter users, who objected to its explicit nature, but the Law & Order: Special Victims Unit star wasn't having it.

Not his problem: Shortly afterward, the Law & Order: SVU star told his followers to unfollow him if his 'Twitter page offends you in any way'

Following through: He showed his finger was hovering over the block button in a follow-up

Taking her time: The rapper and rocker, born Tracy Marrow, was responding to waves of criticism he and Coco received on social media after she revealed last month that she still breastfeeds Chanel, five

'*Attention* If my Twitter page offends you in any way.. PLEASE unfollow. It's that simple...' he tweeted shortly afterward.

He showed his finger was hovering over the block button in a follow-up.

'Blocked,' he wrote simply while quoting a user who previously replied, 'Yeah but who needs this pic really?'

On Wednesday, Ice retweeted a user who posted a steamy photo of his wife from years earlier, only to tell another person to 'go eat multiple D***s…. And worry about your pathetic life' after they criticized her for her comments about breastfeeding.

Late last month, Coco revealed to Us Weekly that her daughter sometimes still nurses, though she described it as more of a 'snack' than a full meal.

Just a snack: Late last month, Coco revealed to Us Weekly that her daughter sometimes still nurses, though she described it as more of a 'snack' than a full meal

Coping: In a previous breastfeeding update last year, the 42-year-old beauty said: 'At a time when the world feels like its coming to an end.. suck up as much love as you can!

She explained that Chanel likes to 'eat steak and hamburgers,' but she 'likes a little snack every now and then.'

'Chanel still likes my boobs,' the blond beauty continued. 'It’s a big bonding moment for a mother and your child.'

She added: 'Why take that away from her? … If she doesn’t want it, all right, that’s where you stop it. But I’m not just going to say no.'

Coco's previous update on breastfeeding came more than year earlier in an Instagram post from March of 2020, in which she said Chanel mainly nursed for 'comfort.'

'Believe me, the girl loves meat so it’s not like she isn’t eating real food,' she wrote in her caption. 'Thank you to all that understand my view. I see most of you are so eager to side with me and I too root for you in your journey as well. Us moms are connected.'

Solid update: The 63-year-old rapper took to Twitter to defend his family after online trolls criticized Coco for breastfeeding the child

Earlier in August, Ice took to Twitter to defend his wife and daughter.

'News Flash!' We feed Chanel FOOD...' he clarified. 'She just likes to suck moms boob every now and then... Me too!!!'

During an appearance this week on E!'s Daily Pop, Coco said she thought it was wrong for 'society' to pressure moms to stop breastfeeding 'at two.'

'I'm [not] going to stop because I feel like it's a great bonding experience between her and I,' she said. 'She's my only child, it's not like I have a big family of kids, and so I'm savoring every moment with this child.'

She conducted the interview with Chanel, who looks shockingly like her father, sitting on her lap.

Her way: Coco said it's wrong for 'society' to pressure women to stop breastfeeding 'at two' and added she'll keep nursing five-year-old daughter Chanel until her little one 'says so' this week on E!'s Daily Pop

Coco added that she and her husband were completely in agreement over allowing Chanel to breastfeed as long as she wanted.

'Well, he loves the boobs too,' she joked.

'He's got one side, she's got the other. She's going to be a boob freak.'

In the same interview, Coco revealed that the whole family still co-sleeps in a big bed, which has also elicited criticism from fans.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She surprised her fans earlier this week with the news she's pregnant with her second child.

And on Thursday, Christina Ricci took to Instagram to show off her baby bump.

Posing in a sports bra and cropped leggings, the actress, 41, joked: 'Time to traumatize the childless at the gym.'

Baby on board: Posing for a mirror selfie in a sports bra and cropped leggings, Christina Ricci, 41, showed off her bare baby bump on Thursday ahead of a gym session

Ricci announced her happy baby news on Tuesday by posting an image from a sonogram on her Instagram.

'Life keeps getting better,' she wrote in the caption.

Her hairstylist and boyfriend Mark Hampton also shared some sonogram images, referring himself as 'daddy'.

Her pregnancy comes comes just months after Ricci was granted a restraining order against estranged husband James Heerdegen, amid allegations of domestic violence.

She and Heerdegen, who married in 2013 and split a year ago, have a six-year-old son Freddie who lives with his mother.

Surprise: Ricci announced her happy baby news on Tuesday by posting an image from a sonogram on her Instagram. 'Life keeps getting better,' she wrote in the caption

Ricci and Hampton appear to have got close this past year, working on a number of fashion shoots together.

Often, Ricci has left a series of heart emojis under pictures of herself that Hampton has posted.

She also dropped a hint with a birthday tribute to the hairstylist in July, commenting: 'favorite person, gorgeous human, bringer of all things happy, magical and good. I love you ... this next year is going to be the best one yet.'

Hampton - a hairstylist and makeup artist - is an industry professional who has worked with A-List talent and big name brands like Banana Republic and Hugo Boss.

Family focused: The actress is already mom to six-year-old son Freddie whom she shares with estranged husband James Heerdegen. She filed for divorce in July 2020

Partner: Her hairstylist and boyfriend Mark Hampton also shared some sonogram images, referring himself as 'daddy'

He was congratulated on his post by British supermodel Jourdan Dunn. Last year, he worked with Elon Musk's girlfriend Grimes, doing her hair and makeup for a V Magazine fashion shoot, and described her as being a 'super sweet heart!'

Hampton also styled Oscar-nominated actress Carey Mulligan's hair in February last year for the cover of Heroine magazine and previously worked with the Olsen twins.

His impressive work includes editorials for Vogue, Dazed and Confused, Elle and Q Magazine, and has worked on fashion shows for Miu Miu, Marc Jacobs, Prada, Louis Vuitton, and Calvin Klein.

He's the daddy! Mark replied to a well wisher on his own pics of the sonogram, with the message 'daddy shark'

His and hers: Mark posted a similar sonogram snap to Christina's and made sure to tag the actress on Tuesday

Meanwhile, Ricci is already mother to six-year-old son Frederick 'Freddie' Heerdegen - who was born in 2014 - and who she shares with her ex James.

In April this year, Ricci and her estranged husband reached a custody arrangement after their contentious split prompted accusations of abuse from both sides.

The arrangement was submitted to the Los Angeles County Superior Court in May, according to reports at the time.

The agreement favored Ricci, allowing the actress custody of their son after she relocates to Vancouver, Canada to film a new project, with Heerdegen getting visitation rights.

Who is Christina Ricci's new man Mark Hampton? Christina Ricci appears to be in a new romance with celebrated hairstylist Mark Hampton, after the pair both confirmed they are expecting a child together on Tuesday. The hairstylist first made a name for himself in London, where he began his career at the age of 17, and qualified just before he reached the age of 21. As well as fashion, Mark has also worked extensively in the music industry styling hair on videos for artists including Kate Nash, Calvin Harris, Ladyhawke and La Roux. Professional: Mark Hampton seen in action as a hairstylist Last year, he worked with Elon Musk's girlfriend Grimes, doing her hair and makeup for a V Magazine fashion shoot, and described her as being a 'super sweet heart!' Hampton also styled Oscar-nominated actress Carey Mulligan's hair in February last year for the cover of Heroine magazine and previously worked with the Olsen twins. His impressive work includes editorials for Vogue, Dazed and Confused, Elle and Q Magazine, and has worked on fashion shows for Miu Miu, Marc Jacobs, Prada, Louis Vuitton, and Calvin Klein. Advertisement

Ricci also agreed to pay 'reasonable costs for travel and accommodations,' which include 'economy airfare' for her ex. She will also get to choose where he stays during his visitation trips.

The Addams Family star was granted a restraining order against Heerdegen in January. He attempted to obtain his own restraining order later that month but was denied.

Heerdegen made shocking accusations while filing for a temporary restraining order, claiming his ex abuses alcohol and prescription drugs, making her a danger to their young son.

He also claimed he had to check their son's bottles of breast milk for fear of it being contaminated with alcohol she drank the night before.

His filing came just days after Ricci accused her estranged husband of physically abusing her.

She said she had to hide knives in the house because she feared Heerdegen could kill her after he allegedly said he would only feel sorry for her if she was 'dismembered into small pieces'.

A judge granted Ricci a domestic violence restraining order against Heerdegen in early January, six months after she filed for divorce.

Ricci and Heerdegen were married on October 26, 2013, they welcomed their son together the following year.

In 2017, Ricci talked about how becoming a mother changed her.

'Marriage shows you your flaws in how you deal with things, and having a child forces you to grow up at the speed of light,' she told Net-a-Porter's digital magazine The Edit.

'I'm a completely different person than I was before I had my child.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kylie Jenner shared two new pictures of her toddler daughter Stormi swimming with a mermaid tail on Thursday.

The images feature the star's baby girl with rapper Travis Scott enjoying her afternoon in sparkling blue water as LA hit ninety degree weather.

Stormi, 3, wore a ruffled, blue halter swimsuit top and a long, matching bottom in the shape of a mermaid tail.

Swimming beauty: Kylie Jenner, 24, shared two beautiful new pictures of her daughter Stormi, 3, swimming with a tail on Thursday

The makeup mogul dropped a single mermaid emoji as the caption and fans gushed over the cute shots in the comments.

The billionaire celebrated her 24th birthday just days ago with a lavish gathering at her $36 million home.



The festivities kicked off with two kinds of cocktails and a celebratory toast alongside Khloé, Kourtney, Kim Kardashian, and their momager Kris Jenner.

Growing up: The billionaire celebrated her 24th birthday just days ago with a lavish gathering at her $36 million home

Aside from family, Jenner's guests included her on-again boyfriend Travis Scott, her former assistant Victoria Villarroel, and her best friend Anastasia Karanikolaou.

The Kylie Skin CEO recently rekindled her on/off romance with the 29-year-old rapper-designer Travis after splitting in 2019.

Kylie and Travis (born Jacques Webster) are the proud parents of three-year-old daughter Stormi. However, the eight-time Grammy nominee continues to reside in his own $23.5M Brentwood mansion.

Raise a glass: The festivities kicked off with two kinds of cocktails and a celebratory toast alongside Khloé, Kourtney , Kim Kardashian , and their momager Kris Jenner

One of the plates of sushi included a a decadent dash of gold leaf - perhaps an ode to the Kylie Cosmetics CEO's 24k Birthday Collection, which dropped Tuesday.

Kourtney then showed off the desserts as she Instastoried a yummy emoji over a plate of three scoops of green ice-cream.

The tight family all Instastoried glimpses of the party décor, like the candlelit path surrounding her swimming pool and the palm trees and bushes covered in Christmas lights.

On December 10, the Jenner-Kardashian clan signed a new multi-year global content deal with Hulu/Star, which starts streaming in late 2021.

Regal: One of the plates of sushi included a a decadent dash of gold leaf - perhaps an ode to the Kylie Cosmetics CEO's 24k Birthday Collection, which dropped Tuesday
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Heather Rae Young is one busy woman.

The reality star, 33, who is in the midst of planning her wedding to Flip or Flop star Tarek El Moussa, was spotted filming her hit Netflix series Selling Sunset on Wednesday.

Despite having her hands full planning her upcoming nuptials, Heather couldn't have looked any happier as she flashed her bare midriff in a bright emerald green crop top.

Making them green with envy! Heather Rae Young showed off her flat abs in an emerald crop top and blazer as she filmed Selling Sunset on Thursday

The reality had all eyes on her with a matching bold green blazer, head full of silky straight hair, and gold hoop earrings.

While she was all dressed up from the waist up, Heather opted to keep things a little more casual when it came to her trousers and footwear.

The star sported a pair of black sweatpants and fluffy white slippers.

She appeared to be holding a small pink makeup bag and another black garment in her arms.

Comfort first! While she was all dressed up from the waist up, Heather opted to keep things a little more casual when it came to her trousers and footwear

The actress was smiling from ear to ear as she strode down a staircase and through a parking lot, ready for another drama-packed day of filming.

On her Instagram Stories, Heather shared several behind-the-scenes snaps capturing her on the makeup chair as she discussed re-wearing one of her 'favorite' outfits.

'Back at it! We are here for confessionals for Selling Sunset! So we are repeating the emerald green outfit.... it's one of my favorites. Juicy, juicy, season four!' she said while getting glammed up.

Pep in her step! The reality star hydrated herself with a yummy shake

She also proudly showed off her the more comfortable aspects of her outfit.

'I wear on the bottom, sweats and slippers!' she said.

Heather will be returning for season four of the hit Netflix series Selling Sunset, which follows the lives of the glamorous Oppenheim Group realtors.

Outside of her day job selling houses, Heather is also happily engaged to HGTV star Tarek.

Behind-the-scenes! Young was in the makeup chair prepping for Selling Sunset in video she posted to her Instagram Stories

Love it! The 33-year-old described the green look as 'one of my favorites'

Comfort first! She also proudly showed off her black sweatpants and fluffy slippers

The couple have been busy planning their wedding, but Heather recently revealed they had decided to scrap the entire plan for the upcoming nuptials and completely start over from scratch in recent months.

'Spent the whole day wedding planning and it just made me so excited for our special day,' Heather posted on Instagram recently. 'I haven't fully shared this but in the beginning, Tarek and I hired a wedding planner, sent out our save the dates, and then after rethinking some things we decided to completely change everything.'

'Tarek saw how stressed I was getting so we decided to go in a different direction with the wedding planner, hired a new one, changed the wedding location, and sent out new save the dates that said "just kidding" on them (laughing crying emoji) but I'm a biggg believer that everything works out the way it should and after seeing so much of our vision come together today we couldn't be happier (heart face emoji).

'Tarek and I are the kind of people who want a big celebration with our closest friends and family but we also want it to feel really intimate and be about our love and our marriage. This is a big day for us and for our family and we don't take that lightly. All I can say is that I'm so lucky to have someone who's on the same page as me and I think we're both just ready for the day to finally come (hugs and heart emoji).'

Soulmates: Outside of her day job selling houses, Heather is also happily engaged to HGTV star Tarek
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Megan Thee Stallion demanded the attention of fans on Thursday with three show-stopping images of herself in a light blue bikini and beige straw cowboy hat.

The chart-topping performer wowed her Instagram followers with the simple but stunning pictures of her on a pristine tropical beach with white sand and turquoise water.

Fresh off the release of a new magazine cover, the rapper kneeled on the shore while her hair fell down her back in soft curls.

Sheesh: Megan Thee Stallion demanded the attention of fans on Thursday with three show-stopping images of herself in a bikini and cowboy hat

Meg topped off the look with a classic cowboy hat. The only jewelry she wore was a chain with the letter M hanging on it and a sparkling belly-button ring.

Her hair was in long, ombré faux locs, and she rocked a bare face as she struck three poses on a beach with white sand and an overcast sky.

The Houston native captioned the post with a smiling cowboy hat and wave emoji.

No paint needed: She rocked a bare face as she struck three poses on a beach with white sand and an overcast sky

Cool cowgirl vibes: Her hair was in long, ombré faux locs, and she rocked a bare face as she struck three poses on a beach with white sand and an overcast sky

Looks like a storm is coming soon: The clouds were an inky color and held plenty of water for a downpour but Megan did not seem concerned as she posed away

The 26-year-old superstar rapper looked glamorous with thick platinum blonde hair and a lustrous white satin robe on the cover of the Global Black Fashion issue of Essence, which dropped on Thursday.

Icy hot: The 26-year-old superstar rapper looked glamorous with thick platinum blonde hair on Essence

Megan opened up in the accompanying interview about completing her highly anticipated 'aggressive' sophomore album and how she balances her fame with a desire for solitude.

The Savage rapper remained tight-lipped about the material that will appear on her upcoming album in the accompanying profile.

Though she was willing to describe it as an attempt to get back to her roots.

'I feel like [my new album] will be aggressive,' she shared. 'I feel like this project is definitely something very well thought out.

'This project is me talking my s***, getting back comfortable with myself, getting back to the Megan that was on the come-up.'

With this album, and with each subsequent project, she seems to be trying to outdo herself.

'Every time I make a move, I'm like, Okay, how can we be better than Megan last month?' she said. 'How can we be better than Megan last year?'

The full Essence magazine interview will be on stands August 23.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britney Spears made a pointed remark about 'letting go' and 'freedom' as it emerged her father Jamie would be stepping down as her conservator after 13 years.

The singer, 39, has been fighting to replace her father, 69, as conservator in a highly publicised court battle, filing legal documents in which she dubbed him 'threatening' and 'scary'.

As it emerged on Thursday that Jamie would be stepping aside, Britney wasted no time sharing a slew of videos on Instagram, in one of which she posed topless.

Pointed: Britney Spears made a pointed remark about 'letting go' and 'freedom' on Thursday as it emerged her father Jamie would be stepping down as her conservator

Britney also shared a video montage of herself dancing around on a trip to Maui, which she accompanied with a barbed caption.

She penned: 'You can see the last dance in red top I’m very hesitant when dancing but letting go is freedom !!!!

'I’m not sure exactly why I’m being so cautious ... it might be my left foot that was broken talking to me !!!! You can tell when I turn but hopefully I will let go thoroughly and follow through soon !!!! [sic]'.

In the video, Britney mashed together various clips of her spinning around and showing off her moves in a variety of colourful crop tops.

Speaking out: Britney also shared a video montage of herself dancing around on a trip to Maui, which she accompanied with a barbed caption

Letting go: In the video, Britney mashed together various clips of her spinning around and showing off her moves in a variety of colourful crop tops

Earlier in the day, Britney shared a highly seductive video of herself taken in the back yard of her Thousand Oaks, California mansion.

The pop icon began the clip by posing in a white shirt with a collar that was tied in front, showing her stomach, adding unbuttoned denim shorts that hung off her hips.

Then the Toxic hitmaker carefully unties the top and unbuttons the shirt. The clip jumps to her topless as she cradles her chest while moving her hair around.

Done: The post came the same day that her father Jamie agreed to step down as Britney's conservator as part of 'orderly transition to new conservator' (pictured in 2015)

It is a striptease as she flirts with the camera by giving bedroom eyes and flipping her long blonde hair over her shoulders while wearing heavy black eye liner.

'Made you look,' wrote the former Disney star in her caption to her over 33million followers.

Britney's boyfriend Sam Asghari also took to Instagram to share a tattoo picture of a princess lioness, which is how he has described Britney as she battled her father.

Crikey: Earlier in the day, Britney shared a highly seductive video of herself taken in the back yard of her Thousand Oaks, California mansion

She took her time: The Las Vegas performer performed a strip tease for the camera as she slowly unbuttoned her blouse

This posts came the same day that her father Jamie agreed to step down as Britney's conservator as part of 'orderly transition to new conservator,' according to TMZ.

According to the site, which looked at court documents, he wants a peaceful transition to the new conservator.

Jamie's lawyer wrote: 'There are, in fact, no actual grounds for suspending or removing Mr. Spears as the Conservator of the Estate.

'... and it is highly debatable whether a change in conservator at this time would be in Ms. Spears' best interests.'

Made you look,' wrote the former Disney star in her caption to her over 33million followers

It was also shared: 'Nevertheless, even as Mr. Spears is the unremitting target of unjustified attacks, he does not believe that a public battle with his daughter over his continuing service as her conservator would be in her best interests.

'So, even though he must contest this unjustified Petition for his removal, Mr. Spears intends to work with the Court and his daughter's new attorney to prepare for an orderly transition to a new conservator.'

He had been paying himself $16,000 a month since 2008.

Britney previously spoke out about her conservatorship, insisting she 'just wants her life back'.

His note: After news broke that Jamie would be stepping down, Britney's boyfriend Sam Asghari shared this photo of a princess lioness, which is how he has described Spears as she battled her father

The singer said in a court hearing: 'I am not happy, I can't sleep. I'm so angry, it's insane. And I'm depressed. I am traumatised. I just want my life back. I want to end this conservatorship without being evaluated.

'This conservatorship is doing me way more harm than good. I deserve to have a life, I've worked my whole life. I deserve to have a two to three-year break.'

The hitmaker went on to accuse her father and her conservatorship team of refusing to allow her to marry her boyfriend, Sam Asghari, or have children with him.

Britney – who is mother to Sean, 15, and Jayden, 14, whom she has with her ex-husband Kevin Federline – claimed: 'I want to be able to get married and have a baby.

'I have an IUD inside of myself so that I don't get pregnant, but [my team doesn't] want me to have any more children.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Blake Lively is a supportive wife.

The Shallows star posted a cheeky picture of her backside to her Instagram story Thursday to promote husband Ryan Reynolds' new film, Free Guy.

In the picture the actress is in a bikini, standing on her toes with her arms raised to either side of her head. She wrote a clever caption above the photo: 'Go see @freeguymovie this weekend or you'll be bummed.'

Showing support: Blake Lively posted a picture of her backside to her Instagram story Thursday to promote husband Ryan Reynolds' new film, Free Guy

The mom-of-three's bum looked perky in the patterned two-piece swimsuit she was wearing.

In the photo she is surrounded by turquoise water, lounge chairs and umbrellas as she hangs out by a palm tree-framed pool.

She added a gif of her husband to the post for good measure.

Date night: Ryan's action-comedy film Free Guy premiered at the AMC Lincoln Square Theater in New York City on August 3 (pictured)

Reynolds' action-comedy film Free Guy premiered at the AMC Lincoln Square Theater in New York City earlier this month.

The 44-year-old actor could hardly contain his excitement as struck poses on the red carpet with his stunning wife.

The couple, each dressed to the nines, were not accompanied by their three daughters, James, six, Inez, four, and Betty, one.

About the film: In Free Guy, Reynolds plays a bank teller named Guy who realizes that he is a non-player character in Free Guy, a violent open world video game that is set to be shut down by its developers

The 33-year-old Gossip Girl star wore her lengthy golden blonde hair in a sleek ponytail and amplified her features with neutral toned makeup.

Ryan beamed for shutterbugs in a beige corduroy suit with a black and white plaid shirt layered beneath.

The Deadpool star completed the look with some brown suede dress shoes and a pair of grey marled socks.

Red carpet look: Ryan beamed for shutterbugs in a beige corduroy suit with a black and white plaid shirt layered beneath

In Free Guy, Reynolds plays a bank teller named Guy who realizes that he is a non-player character in Free Guy, a violent open world video game that is set to be shut down by its developers.

After becoming self-aware, he is determined to unite the other background characters and stop the game from going offline.

In a recent GMA interview, Reynolds said that he 'wouldn't characterize it as a video game movie at all,' but as a 'big budget summer fun romance smuggled into a video game setting.'

It is directed by Shawn Levy and also stars Jodie Comer, Lil Rel Howery, Utkarsh Ambudkar, Joe Keery, and Taika Waititi.

Free Guy hits theatres in the US on August 13.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brielle Biermann clapped back at a troll who came after her over her appearance in a 'natural' selfie in which she ditched the filler, weave, and acrylic nails.

The drama for the 24-year-old model - who has hit back at cosmetic surgery rumors before - began when she shared a self-taken snapshot while not all glammed up on to her Instagram Story.

She captioned the image to her 1.3million followers: 'Took my weave out… No lip injections and no [acrylic] nails lol who am I?'

Scroll down for video

Courting controversy: Brielle Biermann clapped back at a troll who came after her over her appearance in a 'natural' selfie in which she ditched the filler, weave, and acrylic nails

'But kindly... go f*** yourselves (haters)': Brielle proceeded to be flooded with messages from trolls over the post as she took the opportunity to call a few out

Brielle proceeded to be flooded with messages from trolls over the post as she took the opportunity to call a few out.

One in particular replied to her writing: 'a normal f***ing person.'

This message certainly seemed to annoy Brielle as she screenshotted it with a lengthy message about people criticizing her for her appearance.

'Took my weave out… No lip injections and no [acrylic] nails lol who am I?': The drama for the 24-year-old model - who has hit back at cosmetic surgery rumors before - began when she shared a self-taken snapshot while not all glammed up on to her Instagram Story

Va va voom: She can normally be seen all glammed up like in this Instagram post from her trip to Las Vegas last month

She took to her Instagram Story again to write: 'All my friends (except Dani) have fake nails, fake hair, fake etc. Who cares? It’s our lives. It doesn’t affect y’all AT ALL!

'But kindly … go f*** yourselves (haters) because I haven’t even touched my face besides a lil Botox for TMJ and lip fillers … WHICH ARE ALL GONE NOW!'

Brielle went on to say that no one should be criticized for attempting to better themselves.

She wrote: 'When is the stigma of putting people down for bettering themselves gonna end? If you could … Would you not?'

'When is the stigma of putting people down for bettering themselves gonna end? If you could … Would you not?': Brielle (seen last month) went on to say that no one should be criticized for attempting to better themselves

The reality star also made sure to acknowledge the positive messages she had received for the post.

Brielle said: 'Thank you for the kind comments. I've read all my DMs, love you guys!'

Being criticized over her looks isn't something new for Brielle as she has long courted rumors pertaining to cosmetic surgery.

The daughter of former Real Housewife of Atlanta Kim Zolciak-Biermann recently denied having any plastic surgery except for lip fillers, telling Andy Cohen that she only looks 'different,' because she's grown up.

Nothing new: Being criticized over her looks isn't something new for Brielle as she has long courted rumors pertaining to cosmetic surgery

In 2017 she also addressed the allegations, telling Entertainment Tonight that 'ignorant' people were falsely comparing her as an adult to her on early days of the Bravo show.

'You guys are probably comparing me to season one of Real Housewives of Atlanta and going to straight to now. You can see me every single season and you can see how I change. And I'm on Snapchat 24/7.

'Like, I feel like I'm a little too open on Snapchat and if I were to do some downtime how would that happen? People are just ignorant.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jessica Simpson's daughter Birdie Mae wore an assortment of clothing items in her mother's Instagram post.

The 2-year-old daughter of Simpson, 41, wore a yellow dress, tap shoes and pink gardening gloves with which she held a hockey stick. The toddler also had her hand over her heart for the recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance

'Never a dull moment in this house! Tap shoes, garden gloves and a hockey stick with a hand over her heart for the Pledge of Allegiance. That’s my girl #BIRDIEMAE,' the singer captioned the photo.

A fashionista just like her mother: Jessica Simpson's daughter Birdie Mae wears a mishmash of clothing in her mother's latest Instagram post

Not her only child: The Dukes of Hazard star has three children with husband Eric Johnson who she has been married to since 2014

The Dukes of Hazard star has three children with husband Eric Johnson who she has been married to since 2014.

Birdie Mae is her youngest. Her oldest child, Maxwell Johnson, is age nine and her middle child, Ace Johnson, age eight.

The Sweet Kisses singer was previously married to actor Nick Lachey from 2002 to 2006, but the couple never had children.

The old days: Johnson posted this picture of their wedding to commemorate the couple's seventh anniversary last month

Stunning: Part of the anniversary included this photo of Simpson in her wedding dress

Simpson wrote about her relationships with Lachey and John Mayer in her 2020 memoir Open Book.

While Simpson wrote the memoir and put out a few new songs to accompany it last year, the businesswoman is mainly focusing on family and her fashion line right now.

The Employee of the Month actress even modeled her own bikinis in a photo shoot for the line last month.

For now though, it seems that performing will continue to be on hiatus.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They welcomed their first child together last May.

Grimes, 33, and her boyfriend Elon Musk, 50, were keeping themselves busy while in Berlin, Germany this week with the singer sightseeing as the Telsa CEO worked.

The mother of one was seen with a friend taking in the sights of Bebelplatz Square as during her billionaire beau's business trip.

Vacation: Grimes, 33, and her boyfriend Elon Musk, 50, were keeping themselves busy while in Berlin, Germany this week with the singer sightseeing as the Telsa CEO worked

Always one to embrace an eclectic style, Grimes sported quite the unique ensemble with loose fitting pink pants covered in black writing and cartoon characters.

The baggy slacks were held together with an orange belt and the star tucked a bold printed top into the waistband.

She paired the look with white flatform combat boots and an oversized cream toned fur coat.

Checking things out: The mother of one was seen with a friend taking in the sights of Bebelplatz Square as during her billionaire beau's business trip

Funky: Always one to embrace an eclectic style, Grimes sported quite the unique ensemble with loose fitting pink pants covered in black writing and cartoon characters

Grimes tucked the bubblegum pink dyed hair into a knotted hair scarf and slung a facemask under her chin.

She had an animated chat with a friend outside of the legendary Berlin locale and then the two took a breather and sat on the pavement together.

The experimental musician, born Claire Elise Boucher, shares baby boy X Æ A-Xii, one, with Elon Musk.

Photogenic: Grimes shared a new social media post on Thursday posing in a picturesque field of greenery and flowers

Momma: The experimental musician, born Claire Elise Boucher, shares baby boy X Æ A-Xii, one, with Elon Musk

'Soft Core,' she captioned her Instagram.

Style: Elon's girlfriend sported some retro inspired white wire rimmed cat-eye sunglasses with a slinky loose white sundress

Grimes shared a new social media post on Thursday posing in a picturesque field of greenery and flowers.

Elon's girlfriend sported some retro inspired white wire rimmed cat-eye sunglasses with a slinky loose white sundress.

'Soft Core,' she captioned her Instagram.

Meanwhile, Elon was busy touring his newest Tesla factory located outside of Berlin.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chrissy Teigen has announced her comeback cookbook, after a tumultuous year that has seen her get cancelled over cyberbullying claims.

The model, 35, showed off the cover for her third cookbook, Cravings: All Together: Recipes To Love, which captured the model munching on a fresh taco.

In her announcement, Chrissy admitted she struggled writing a caption for a book she says 'quite literally saved' her.

Comeback cookbook! Chrissy Teigen has announced her comeback cookbook, after a tumultuous year that has seen her get cancelled over cyberbullying claims

'Bursting with joy right now, for my third cookbook is finally here!' Chrissy announced on Instagram. 'It is incredibly hard to put into words what this book means to me. How do you come up with a funny, enticing caption for a book that quite literally saved you.

'I didn't have a theme in mind when we made this book - all I knew was I wanted a bright new energy, but I also needed comfort. I wanted to make recipes that would be timeless, food that brings joy to your belly, your household, those around you.

'I wanted people to enjoy not just the outcome, but the process. This book is reflective of everything I wanted and we needed as a family to bring into our home, it is truly a piece of us, and I am so excited to share it with you.

'So get ready for John's thick ass blueberry pancakes - the ones we make every Sunday morning without fail, sticky orange glazed fried chicken sandwiches, luna's unicorn milkshakes, and salty white chocolate chunk cookies so addictive you might as well double the batch. Man.

Back for more! Teigen released her first cookbook, Cravings: Recipes for All of the Food You Want to Eat, in 2016

Open book: Teigen released her second book, Cravings: Hungry For More, in 2018

'I can't believe it is really finally here!!!! Two months from today. I rarely get nerves like this but it is quite an invigorating feeling! AH!!!!! HOW DO I END THIS CAPTION oh god I hope you love it because it's honestly my best f**king cookbook yet, is that okay to say? I said it!!!'

Cravings: All Together: Recipes To Love will be Chrissy's third cookbook, following her 2016 book Cravings: Recipes for All of the Food You Want to Eat and 2018's Cravings: Hungry For More.

The career high point comes amid a difficult year for Chrissy.

Chrissy has been the target of backlash since her abusive tweets originally made in 2011 resurfaced online, including one that urged a then 16-year-old Courtney Stodden to kill themselves.

Difficult year: Teigen, pictured with her husband John Legend, has been accused of cyberbullying this past year

Stodden recently claimed that Teigen has yet to personally apologize for her actions, but Chrissy told TMZ that she 'reached out to' Stodden via text.

During the same interview, Chrissy was asked about Addison Rae's backlash for introducing herself to Donald Trump at a UFC fight, which she replied: 'I have decided I'm not getting involved in anyone's s**t ever again.'

Lindsay Lohan was also the subject of an insensitive post by Teigen, where a tweet from January 2011 read: 'Lindsay adds a few more slits to her wrists when she sees emma stone.'

Strike a pose: Teigen looked fabulous in a recent post shared from Miami

Old tweets from 2013 have also resurfaced in which she described nine-year-old Oscar nominee Wallis as 'cocky' and called Teen Mom star Farrah Abraham, then 21, a 'wh***'.

Michael Costello accused Chrissy and her stylist, Monica Rose, of blacklisting him from the industry which spawned his own suicidal ideations as the pair went 'out of their way to threaten people and brands that if they were in any shape or form associated with me, they would not work with any of them.'

Cameroonian singer Dencia claimed that Chrissy had pushed her twice at the 2016 Grammy Awards after allegedly believing that the singer's assistant had recorded her on his phone.

Chrissy attempted to right a few of her wrongs with an apology shared to Medium in June — which was her first time speaking out since taking a social media hiatus after a host of bullying allegations came to light.

'Hi all. It has been a VERY humbling few weeks,' she wrote. 'I know I've been quiet, and lord knows you don't want to hear about me, but I want you to know I've been sitting in a hole of deserved global punishment, the ultimate 'sit here and think about what you've done.

She added: 'Not a day, not a single moment has passed where I haven't felt the crushing weight of regret for the things I've said in the past.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Jay Leno climbed out the nose of an airplane while it was flying at 147mph to look at the pilot in a stunt that seemed incredibly brave.

And on Thursday the former late night talk show host explained that he had 'no fear' during the zany move as the plane was flying so low that if he had fallen he would have just gone in the ocean, he told Entertainment Tonight.

'We were over water, so I would've just fallen in the water,' the king of comedy said. The small plane was 200 or 300 feet up in the air. 'It's not like a jet where you're going 500 miles per hour.'

He has guts: Jay Leno climbed out the nose of an airplane while it was flying at 147mph to look at the pilot in a stunt that seemed incredibly brave. And on Thursday the former late night talk show host explained that he had 'no fear' during the zany move as the plane was flying so low that if he had fallen he would have just gone in the ocean, he told Entertainment Tonight

Old school plane: Jay shared a photo of the plane, a Grumman HU-16 Albatross with the propellers located to the sides on the wings, leaving the nose free

And Leno also said that because the wind was blowing so hard it pretty much pinned him to the front preventing a fall.

'The force of the plane going forward was keeping me there,' he said.

He was not harnessed when he stuck his head out, though the majority of his body was enclosed within the plane. A white cord also ran across the hatch and pushed down into his shoulder, so he was somewhat protected.

As far as if the stunt was pre-meditated, Jay said no. 'You don't plan something like that. You can't plan it, or else someone will stop you if you planned it.'

He then got in a joke: 'The plane was 71 years old, so you had an old guy and an old plane. Well, what could go wrong there?' he laughed.

Still seems crazy: 'We were over water, so I would've just fallen in the water,' the king of comedy said. The small plane was 200 or 300 feet up in the air. 'It's not like a jet where you're going 500 miles per hour'

'I'm not some bright person, believe me. It just seemed like a fun thing to do and it got a laugh.'

It began when he noticed a door in the front of the plane.

'My friend said, "The front of the plane opens," so I opened the front and then came out and crawled out on the front of the plane,' Leno told ET. 'Then, of course, they have to try to buzz the mountain. It's just men behaving stupidly is basically what it is.'

Jay acknowledged that it was a silly move. 'It doesn't make any sense. It's so stupid,' he added. 'I was just trying to have some fun with my friends, and of course they had to video it with an iPhone. I wanted to get out on the front of the plane, so when he looked through the windshield he'd see me outside and not realize what was going on,' he said. 'That's what happened and it worked pretty good.

'It's stupid, I know. I'm glad my mom is not here. Oh God. It was fun. It was silly.'

And he was surprised it went viral: 'I was stunned at the amount of publicity it got. It seems to be everywhere.'

Albert Benjamin, one of the people flying the plane while Jay was riding with them, shared a video to Instagram on Sunday illustrating how Jay crawled through the empty storage area and opened up a small hatch in the ceiling to pop his head out.

Since the propellers were located on the wings, the nose had free space that allows a person to stick out.

The force was with him: And Leno also said that because the wind was blowing so hard it pretty much pinned him to the front preventing a fall. 'The force of the plane going forward was keeping me there,' he said

Video from the high-flying encounter shows the funnyman trying to get a laugh out of the pilots while zooming about at more than 100 mph.

On Wednesday, the comedian was featured on Spike Feresten's podcast Spike's Car Radio, where he talked about the crazy stunt.

'That’s me climbing out on the wing — on the front of an airplane,' Jay explained, before insisting that it's not a digital fake.

'I was with some friends of mine and they didn’t know the front of the plane opened, so I went up to the front and then climbed up onto the windshield,' he explained, as if the stunt was no big deal.

No seat belt required: He was not harnessed when he stuck his head out, though the majority of his body was enclosed within the plane. A white cord also ran across the hatch and pushed down into his shoulder, so he was somewhat protected

Behind the comedian were the rocky hills of Catalina Island, just off the coast of Los Angeles.

'That plane runs at about — it’ll do 200 [mph] — but it cruises about 125 [mph],' he explained, before adding that it was flying at 147 mph when he stuck his head out.

In the clip, his shock of white hair can slowly be seen emerging at the front of the airplane, before he sticks out from the shoulders up.

The beaming comic then waves to the pilots and gives a thumbs-up, before he starts to bang his open palms onto the top of the nose as if he's going to climb across it to the windshield.

Didn't expect that: In the clip, his shock of white hair can slowly be seen emerging at the front of the airplane, before he sticks out from the shoulders up

Stunning vistas: Behind the comedian were the rocky hills of Catalina Island, just off the coast of Los Angeles

Super fast: He waves to the pilots and gives a thumbs-up, before he starts to bang his open palms onto the top of the nose as if he's going to climb across it to the windshield

Relaxing: Another part of the anxiety-inducing flight video featured more soothing views of the low-flying plane soaring over a marina in Catalina, California

The seaplane has been used in the past by the United States Air Force, Navy and Coast Guard, due to its ability to land both on water and dry land.

The craft was originally designed for open ocean rescues, though the US military phased it out in the 1970s and early 1980s.

Now, they're primarily used as private airplanes and are mostly banned from commercial operations.

Another part of the anxiety-inducing flight video featured more soothing views of the low-flying plane soaring over a marina.

Elsewhere in his podcast interview, Leno stuck to his first love, cars, and chatted about the superior speeds and acceleration of new electric vehicles, including a beloved Tesla.

Retired: The seaplane has been used in the past by the United States Air Force, Navy and Coast Guard, due to its ability to land both on water and dry land. It was designed for open sea rescues, though it was phased out by the military in the '70s and '80s
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dylan Penn was spotted hanging out with Emile Hirsch after attending a screening of her new film, Flag Day.

The actress, 30, who stars in the film with her father Sean Penn, was spotted chatting with the actor, 36, at the Sunset Tower Hotel in Los Angeles on Wednesday evening.

The duo were spotted briefly together, chatting away as they left the iconic building.

Scroll down for video

Walk and talk! Dylan Penn was spotted hanging out with Emile Hirsch after attending a screening of her new film Flag Day on Wednesday

Penn and Hirsch were pictured speaking closely to one another as they climbed down the stairs, before the actress took the lead and moved several paces ahead of the Into the Wild actor.

Perhaps the pair were discussing Penn's new role in the upcoming drama Flag Day.

Penn stars opposite her father Sean, who plays John Vogel, a magnetizing figure who charms his daughter Jennifer (played as an adult by Dylan).

However, what starts as a family drama takes a turn into thriller territory after it's revealed that John is one of the most notorious counterfeiters in US history.

Having a talk: Dylan and Emile were pictured speaking closely to one another as they climbed down the stairs, before the actress took the lead and moved several paces ahead of the Into the Wild actor

As an adult, Jennifer has to struggle to find her own path in life while moving past the crimes of her father.

The father–daughter due were on hand at the Cannes Film Festival last month, where Flag Day premiered in competition.

Despite heavy anticipation for their new film, it was poorly received by critics when it premiered at the Cannes Film Festival, though more will weigh in before its official release in the US on August 20.

Glam: Penn looked stunning in a gorgeous silver dress with fringe on the sleeves and skirt

Hirsch has quite the busy filming schedule as of late as well, with roles in a number of films including The Legitimate Wiseguy, Dig, and State of Consciousness. He also has lent his voice to the newly released animated film, Trollhunters: Rise of the Titans.

In addition to his acting career, Hirsch's legal woes have also landed him in headlines.

In 2015 Hirsch was sentenced to 15 days in jail and 50 hours of community service following an assault on a female studio executive during the Sundance Film Festival in January.

New role? Perhaps the pair were discussing Dylan's new role in the upcoming drama Flag Day

Daniele Bernfeld, an executive for the Paramount Pictures subsidiary Insurge Pictures, told police that Hirsch put her in a chokehold from behind, dragged her across a table and body slammed her to the floor.

The details were revealed in investigative documents obtained through a public records request by the Associated Press.

Hirsch said he didn't remember exactly what happened, saying only that she came at him and he was defending himself.

Bernfeld was initially apprehensive about pursuing charges the night of the January 25, 2015 incident at Tao Nightclub in Park City due to the 'sensitive nature' of her work and Hirsch's high profile, reports showed.

She said the next day that she changed her mind because word of the incident, and her name, had already leaked out to the public and media.

'I am fundamentally not OK with what happened,' Bernfeld said the night of the incident, red marks visible on her neck. 'It was insanely painful and absolutely terrifying.'

Hirsch was questioned and handcuffed the night of the incident, but released and not formally charged until nearly three weeks later.

He was charged with aggravated assault and intoxication. The felony assault was punishable by up to five years in prison and a $5,000 fine.

That night, slurring his words and struggling to balance, Hirsch said he had had three or four drinks.

Several days after the incident, he entered rehab.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Camila Cabello and Shawn Mendes seem committed to relaxing while in Toronto, and nothing is more chilled out than a leisurely stroll.

The singers looked happy as they took their dog Tarzan on another walk on Thursday.

Cabello wore a floral print sundress and a black and orange fanny pack. Mendes wore a black t-shirt, black jeans, Converse and a silver necklace.

Staring at him lovingly: Camila Cabello looks at beau Shawn Mendes lovingly as the two walk their dog Tarzan

The Havana singer seemed to talk excitedly during the walk while the Stitches crooner appeared less animated.

The tandem is taking some much needed time off. Mendes' better half released the first single from her upcoming album Familia in July, and she has spent time promoting Cinderella recently, a modern take on the Charles Perrault fairy tale of the same name.

Her version of the famous story will focus on the title character working to become a businesswoman. The most memorable moment of the trailer, released earlier this month, showed her character turn down the prince's proposal.

The movie will also feature Frozen star Idina Menzel as Vivian, the evil stepmother, and Billy Porter as a genderless fairy godparent.

Enjoying time off while they can: The two stars have traveled all over the world together this summer, but the two will soon have to return to their busy lifestyles

Chit-chatting: The two stars seemed in step as they talked the entire time

The couple was seen earlier this week walking Tarzan after sitting down for lunch together, and Cabello posted a birthday tribute for Mendes as well.

In the caption of a shirtless photo of her 'amor', the actress wrote, 'Thankful for your existence every day.'

For his part, the Ruin singer has also stayed busy.

He released an album last year, and he will take part in the Global Citizen Live event, a charity concert in New York City this September alongside stars like The Weeknd and Billie Eilish.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

The first full trailer for the hotly-anticipated Impeachment: American Crime Story, that depicts the Bill Clinton impeachment scandal and his sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky, was released on Thursday.

It's the first time the full cast have been seen fully transformed in character, including Clive Owen as Bill Clinton, Edie Falco as Hillary Clinton, Billy Eichner as Matt Drudge, and Cobie Smulders as Ann Coulter.

One excerpt shows the re-enactment of an infamous hug between Lewinsky and Clinton at a White House staff rally after his re-election in 1996. The footage of the seemingly innocuous clinch with an intern would reappear two years later as the scandal about their affair grew.

In another scene, Owen, 56, appears to have donned prosthetics for his dramatic transformation as President Clinton, and is heard repeating the iconic line: 'I did not have sexual relations with that woman.'

At one point, The Sopranos star Falco, 58, is seen in an emotional fit of rage, hurling an object at her husband.

One excerpt shows the re-enactment of an infamous hug between Lewinsky and Clinton at a White House staff rally after his re-election in 1996. The footage of the seemingly innocuous clinch with an intern would reappear two years later as the scandal about their affair grew

Iconic: British actor Clive Owen (left) recreates the infamous moment Bill Clinton (right) addressed the nation claiming he did not have sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky in first full trailer for Impeachment: American Crime Story. Owen's costume fit Clinton down to his red tie, though he was covered with prostheses to adopt the embattled president's distinctive nose and face

As previously seen in the teaser, Beanie Feldstein plays Lewinsky, with Sarah Paulson as her confidante Linda Tripp, who famously exposed the affair.

Feldstein's Lewinsky is introduced in the trailer as a voiceover is heard explaining to a young group of White House interns the importance of their roles.

'As you no doubt heard, you get to work in the West Wing as of this morning. You're going to be working right beside the people who run the world. Please, be professional,' the voice says.

Tense viewing: Edie Falco's Hillary Clinton rages at Clive Owen as Bill Clinton over the Lewinsky affair

Big role: As previously seen in the teaser, Beanie Feldstein plays Lewinsky

Friend or foe? Sarah Paulson plays a sinister looking and sounds Linda Tripp, who exposed the affair. The role required extensive makeup and prosthetic effects for her face, and she also wore padding under her costume

Paulson as Tripp is then heard talking about the affair, saying dramatically: 'There's a woman I'm very close to... in the midst of an affair, with the President of the United States.

'How do I know it's true?' a man is heard asking Paulson as Tripp. She is then warned 'you will lose her as a friend' referring to Tripp's relationship with Lewinsky.

But a crazed-looking Paulson is seen saying, 'I have made my peace with that.'

Family affair: The Sopranos star Edie is seen for the first time in character with a young actress playing her daughter Chelsea Clinton

Prosthetics: Clive Owen transforms into Bill Clinton in the show with the help of makeup

An affair to remember: Beanie is seen in another dramatic moment from the FX show

Subtle transformation: Unlike her costars, Beanie Feldstein did wear noticeable prosthetics to play Monica Lewinsky. She achieved the former interns recognizable look with a wig and her business clothing

All-star cast: Cobie Smulders is seen as Ann Coulter in the first full trailer

Dramatic transformation: Another close-up shot of Owen as Clinton is seen in the trailer

'It all has to come out,' Paulson says, as she lays out her taped evidence of conversations with Lewinsky.

The drama then unfolds as Edie Falco is seen throwing things around the Oval Office as she plays Hillary reacting in fury to news of the affair.

Several historic moments are recreated for the series including when daughter Chelsea Clinton held the hands of both parents Bill and Hillary at the height of the controversy.

A previous clip from the show released yesterday featured an exchange of dialogue between the pair, as Feldstein's Lewinsky is heard saying, 'The president kissed me,' as Paulson responds, 'Tell me everything.'

Going: Falco as Hillary Clinton is seen flying into a fit of rage at Owen as Bill Clinton

Going: The Nurse Jackie star throws something aiming for Owen in the clip

Gone: Owen is seen ducking as he narrowly misses an object thrown at him by Falco

The infamous scandal saw the then US-President Bill Clinton accused of having a sexual relationship with a White House intern.

Lewinsky stated that she had nine sexual encounters in the Oval Office with Clinton between November 1995 and March 1997.

These involved fellatio and other sexual acts, but not sexual intercourse, according to her testimony.

Creepy: Paulson appears to be playing the character of Linda Tripp for scares in the show

Damning evidence: Tapes of recorded conversations between Trip and Lewinsky are shown

Putting her name on it: The trailer starts with a fresh-faced Beanie as Monica grabbing a Starbucks before heading to work at the White House

Reporting for duty: Billy Eichner is seen as Matt Drudge in the clip. He wore the Drudge Report founder's standard straw hat, but also appeared to go prosthesis-free

Tripp - who became a close confidante to Lewinsky - worked in the Pentagon during the Clinton administration.

The blue dress line in the dialogue refers to Tripp convincing Lewinsky to save the gifts that Clinton had given her during their relationship, and to not dry clean a blue dress that was said to be stained with Clinton's semen.

Clinton famously denied under oath that he ever had 'a sexual affair', 'sexual relations', or 'a sexual relationship' with Lewinsky.

Classic scenes: The show recreated the moment daughter Chelsea Clinton linked her parents arms at the height of the scandal

The original: Hillary, Chelsea, and Bill with their dog Buddy in 1999 amid the scandal

He stated, 'I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky' on a nationally televised White House news conference, after news of the affair broke in January 1998.

It is not yet clear who has directed the project, which started production in October last year, though it comes from creator Ryan Murphy.

The drama is based on Jeffrey Toobin's book A Vast Conspiracy: The Real Story of the Sex Scandal That Nearly Brought Down a President, that was released in 1999.

Unfolding: Tom Hanks' son Colin Hanks also stars in the drama (pictured, middle) though it is unclear who he is playing, or if it is a fictitious character

Fall out: Linda Tripp (Paulson) is seen watching President Bill Clinton deny the affair on TV

Bombshell: Owen is seen amid the unfolding drama of the shocking affair

'My life is ruined': Beanie is seen in another emotional scene

Ann Coulter, who detailed the scandal in her book High Crimes and Misdemeanors: The Case Against Bill Clinton, is also a presence in the narrative.

Lewinsky herself served as a hands-on producer for the series, and has since inked a production deal with 20th TV after impressing bosses with her work.

Impeachment: American Crime Story premieres Sep. 7 on FX.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sarah Paulson was spotted filming scenes for Impeachment: American Crime Story on Thursday.

The 46-year-old Emmy Award-winning actress donned a hospital gown for her role as whistleblower Linda Tripp on the Los Angeles set of the upcoming FX series.

Sarah wore a blonde fringe-cut bob wig as she portrayed the late civil servant who secretly recorded conversations with former White House intern Monica Lewinsky after she confided in Tripp about an affair with President Bill Clinton.

In character: Sarah Paulson was spotted filming scenes for Impeachment: American Crime Story on Thursday

Paulson carried a large green bottle with a straw and her iPhone as she walked toward the set, escorted by a crew members.

She was sporting turquoise plastic sandals that she later swapped out for a pair of fuzzy UGG slippers.

The American Horror Story veteran was seen holding her script and covering her face with a blue surgical mask as she stood outside a trailer.

Controversy: The Golden Globe winner received backlash after she appeared to be wearing a fat suit to portray Tripp (seen in 1998)

Preparing for the shoot: The American Horror Story veteran was seen holding her script and covering her face with a blue surgical mask as she stood outside a trailer

In addition to her wig, the star has been seen wearing facial prosthetics and heavy makeup as she transformed into the character of the late White House employee.

The Golden Globe winner received backlash after she appeared to be wearing a fat suit in the first photos that emerged from the set. Online detractors complained about the choice of casting and the lack of plus-size representation in Hollywood.

However, producer Ryan Murphy defended his choice of actress. Murphy told ET, 'Sarah, particularly, really had been dedicated to that role and she wanted to do it naturally and she gained weight to play Linda Tripp...

Committing to the role: In addition to her wig, the star has been seen wearing facial prosthetics and heavy makeup as she transformed into the character of the late White House employee

He continued, 'And then, you know, you put the wig on her and it's sort of an amazing thing she's doing physically. It's very transformative...

'It reminds me a lot of what Christian Bale did a couple years ago [in Vice] - that sort of dedication...'

In February, Sarah told DuJour magazine that the 'story' is 'really about these three women: Paula Jones, Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp.'

She said, 'There is one predominant thing that we forget: that these are human beings and multidimensional people.

'This series gives you an opportunity to understand some of the behavior. I have more in common with Linda than I care to admit.

'My impatience, my desire for everything to be just so. I can tap into that with Linda. I felt a connection with her,'

Meanwhile, an extended teaser for the show was released on Wednesday.

In it, actress Beanie Feldstein is seen as Lewinsky, as she walks along a corridor and faces off against Paulson's Tripp.

'The President kissed me': Beanie Feldstein's Monica Lewinsky faces off with Paulson's Tripp in Impeachment: American Crime Story teaser that dramatizes Bill Clinton scandal, released Wednesday

The dramatic clip features an exchange of dialogue between the pair, as Feldstein, 28, is first heard saying, 'The president kissed me,' as Paulson responds, 'Tell me everything.'

'I am in love with him,' Feldstein says next, with Paulson asking: 'When was the last time you two were together?'

Sarah, as Tripp, is also heard saying, 'The blue dress, it would be smart to keep that. Uncleaned. In your possession,' adding: 'He chose to start a relationship with an intern. He's gonna have to resign.'

Drama: Feldstein is seen as Lewinsky, as she walks along a corridor and faces off against Linda Tripp, who is played by Paulson

Feldstein's Lewinsky ends the clip saying, 'My life is over.'

The infamous scandal saw the then US-President Bill Clinton accused of having a sexual relationship with a White House intern.

Lewinsky stated that she had nine sexual encounters in the Oval Office with Clinton between November 1995 and March 1997.

Grilling: Paulson is heard asking, 'When was the last time you two were together?'

Tense: The dramatic clip features an exchange of dialogue between the pair, as Feldstein, 28, is first heard saying, 'The president kissed me,' as Paulson responds, 'Tell me everything'

Details: Paulson, as Tripp, is also heard saying, 'The blue dress, it would be smart to keep that. Uncleaned. In your possession,' adding: 'He chose to start a relationship with an intern. He's gonna have to resign'

Foreboding: Paulson appears to pull no punches with playing Tripp as she is heard being assertive in the latest teaser

Re-telling: The infamous scandal saw the then US-President Bill Clinton accused of having a sexual relationship with a White House intern

These involved fellatio and other sexual acts, but not sexual intercourse, according to her testimony.

Tripp - who became a close confidante to Lewinsky - worked in the Pentagon during the Clinton administration.

The blue dress line in the dialogue refers to Tripp convincing Lewinsky to save the gifts that Clinton had given her during their relationship, and to not dry clean a blue dress that was said to be stained with Clinton's semen.

Secrets: Lewinsky stated that she had nine sexual encounters in the Oval Office with Clinton between November 1995 and March 1997

Infamous: The drama is based on Jeffrey Toobin's book A Vast Conspiracy: The Real Story of the Sex Scandal That Nearly Brought Down a President, that was released in 1999

The real deal: Lewinsky herself served as a hands-on producer for the series, and has since inked a production deal with 20th TV after impressing bosses with her work

Clinton famously denied under oath that he ever had 'a sexual affair', 'sexual relations', or 'a sexual relationship' with Lewinsky.

He stated, 'I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky' on a nationally televised White House news conference, after news of the affair broke in January 1998.

It is not yet clear who has directed the project, which started production in October last year.

Power walk: Tripp - who became a close confidante to Lewinsky - worked in the Pentagon during the Clinton administration

Shocking scenes: It is not yet clear who has directed the project, which started production in October last year, though it comes from creator Ryan Murphy

British actor Clive Owen stars as Bill Clinton, Edie Falco as Hillary Clinton, Billy Eichner as Matt Drudge, and Cobie Smulders as Ann Coulter, among other stars.

The drama is based on Jeffrey Toobin's book A Vast Conspiracy: The Real Story of the Sex Scandal That Nearly Brought Down a President, that was released in 1999.

Lewinsky herself served as a hands-on producer for the series, and has since inked a production deal with 20th TV after impressing bosses with her work.

Timeline of Bill Clinton/ Monica Lewinsky sex scandal November 1995 - President Bill Clinton, 49, engages in an affair with White House intern Monica Lewinsky, 22 March 1997 - The affair ends, according to Lewinsky. She said they had engaged in sexual encounters on nine occasions September 1997 - White House employee Linda Tripp begins recording her conversations with Lewinsky after she confided in Tripp about the affair January 7, 1998 - Lewinsky signs an affidavit stating that she never had a sexual relationship with Bill Clinton. This was at the request of attorneys representing Paula Jones, who had accused Clinton of sexual harassment in 1994 January 17, 1998 - News of the scandal first breaks on the Drudge Report January 21, 1998 - The Drudge Report publishes allegations that Lewinsky had kept a 'garment with Clinton's dried semen'. The story is picked up by major news outlets January 26, 1998 - President Clinton denies the affair while standing with his wife Hillary at a White House press conference. He says the famous line: 'I did not have sexual relations with that woman' January 27, 1998 - Hillary Clinton appears on the TODAY Show where she defends her husband and calls the claims 'a vast right-wing conspiracy that has been conspiring against my husband since the day he announced his run for president' February 6, 1998 - President Clinton says in a press conference that he will not resign from office August 3, 1998 - A blood sample is taken from President Clinton for DNA testing against stains from Lewinsky's blue dress August 6, 1998 - Lewinsky begins to testify before the grand jury August 17, 1998 - Clinton testifies to the grand jury where he admits to 'inappropriate intimate contact'. He speaks to the nation in a televised address, finally admitting that he had a relationship with Lewinsky October 2, 1998 - Transcripts of Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp’s taped phone conversations are released December 11, 1998 - The House Judiciary committee votes to impeach, approving two articles of impeachment, including lying to a grand jury and obstruction of justice December 12, 1998 - Clinton says he won't resign and denies lying under oath December 19, 1998 - The House of Representatives votes to impeach President Clinton. Clinton vows to remain in office until 'the last hour of the last day of my term' January 7, 1999 - The Senate begins its trial of President Clinton February 12, 1999 - The Senate acquits President Clinton on both charges of perjury and obstruction of justice Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jim Edmonds is ready for his fourth marriage to his girlfriend Kortnie O'Connor after going public with their relationship last year.

Kortnie shared her happy news Thursday in an Instagram post highlighting her massive diamond engagement ring.

She revealed that the 51-year-old former professional baseball player, who recently finalized his divorce to The Real Housewives Of Orange County Star Meghan King, had proposed to her back in July.

Fourth time around: Former MLB star Jim Edmonds' girlfriend Kortnie O'Connor revealed on Thursday that she had accepted his marriage proposal. It will be the fourth wedding for the 51-year-old athlete

Kortnie glowed in the closeup black-and-white photo she shared to her main Instagram account, in which she rested her chin on her hand to give a great view of her new rock.

The large diamond appeared to be styled in a princess cut with a slim diamond-studded band.

'Dear Diary, A month ago, Jimmy asked me to marry him in the most intimate and personal way,' she began her caption. 'I said yes! Love, Kortnie.'

The baseball star and the realtor became Instagram official back in April 2020.

Kortnie and Jim first entered the public eye in January 2020 when Meghan identified her as a former friend who had had a threesome with her and Jim while they were still married.

Sparkler: Kortnie glowed in the closeup black-and-white photo she shared to her main Instagram account, in which she rested her chin on her hand to give a great view of her new rock

Moving on: King's new proposal comes after he finalized his contentious divorce with his third wife Meghan King, who starred on The Real Housewives Of Orange County during their marriage

'Years ago, when he and I got married, I knew Jim had this bad boy kind of past, and we were newlyweds and we were trying to have fun, and he wanted to have a threesome,' Meghan claimed on her podcast Intimate Knowledge.

'I thought about it and I thought, "OK, maybe, yeah sure." So we decided to have a threesome with a friend of mine. I felt very comfortable with her, it just felt like "Okay if I’m going do this, this can be with who and I’m comfortable with that."'

She continued, adding that she was upset Kortnie had vacationed with Jim in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, without informing her of their relationship, even though Meghan and Jim were in the process of divorcing at that time.

'I find out that when he goes to Cabo for a birthday party, to my understanding, he takes this girl with him,' she continued. 'The threesome girl. … This girl, who I thought was my friend. I cast aside my [discomfort] with threesomes. And then this girl.'

Strange bedfellows: In January 2020, Meghan claimed on her podcast Intimate Knowledge that she and Jim had had a threesome with Kortnie shortly after their 2014 wedding, which he didn't deny

In a statement to People, Jim later claimed that Meghan and Kortnie hadn't spoken in over three years, though he didn't deny the threesome.

Instead, he claimed Meghan initiated it and said they'd had 'more than a few' threesomes throughout their relationship.

Meghan responded to the outlet: 'We only had one threesome and only once during our marriage and that was with his current girlfriend'

This will be the fourth marriage for Edmonds, who wrapped up his contentious divorce with King in May.

He was first married to LeAnn Horton, with whom he shared two daughters, Hayley and Lauren.

The couple managed to put aside much of the bitterness of their split, and she later became friendly with Jim's third wife Meghan.

Departed: Jim was first married to LeAnn Horton (L), with whom he shared two daughters, Hayley and Lauren. She died in 2015 of colon cancer

Surprise friends: The couple managed to put aside much of the bitterness of their split, and she later became friendly with Jim's third wife Meghan (R), even appearing on RHOC with her

LeAnn attended Jim and Meghan's wedding, and she even made appearances with her successor on RHOC episodes.

She later died of colon cancer in 2015.

In 2008, the athlete walked down the aisle with Allison Jayne Raski, whom he shares two more children with, his son Landon and daughter Sutton.

They finalized their divorce shortly before he married King in 2014.

A source confirmed to Us Weekly that Jim had proposed to Kortnie back in July.

'They are living their life privately and are enjoying this exciting new chapter,' they shared.

The two were swamped by engagement rumors after she shared an Instagram Stories video of herself eating chocolate while wearing what appeared to be her massive ring.

Out of the spotlight: A source confirmed to Us Weekly that Jim had proposed to Kortnie back in July. 'They are living their life privately and are enjoying this exciting new chapter,' they shared

Back in October, Jim gushed about his love for Kortnie, calling her the 'most amazing, strong, courageous, loving, selfless, caring, daring person' he had ever known.

'I could never put into words what you mean to me and my family,' he continued. 'They say God puts people in lives for a reason. For the first time in my life, I truly believe this.

'It’s like you came along and turned the light on in my heart again,' he added. 'Something that I didn’t think was going to be possible again. I just wanted to take this opportunity to tell you how much I love you and thank you for being you!'

Reality star: Jim and his ex Meghan had dated for a year and a half before they tied the knot in 2014. She first appeared as a guest on RHOC in 2014, before being bumped up to the regular cast the following season

Jim and his ex Meghan had dated for a year and a half before they tied the knot in 2014.

She first appeared on The Real Housewives Of Orange County as a guest for its ninth season, which began airing in 2014, though she would be bumped up to a regular cast member for the tenth season.

The former couple share their four-year-old daughter Aspen and three-year-old twin sons Hayes and Hart.

Meghan and Jim split in 2019, amid rumors that he had carried on an affair with the family's former nanny Carly Wilson, though both he and Wilson have denied any kind of relationship.

Big family: The former couple share their four-year-old daughter Aspen and three-year-old twin sons Hayes and Hart. They split in 2019 amid cheating rumors linked to Jim

Back in May, Meghan gave her tentative support to Kortnie.

'I would feel that stability for my children is what I care about the most. So any kind of long-term committed relationship that Jim is in, I fully, fully support because that’s absolutely the best for my children,' she told Us Weekly.

The fact that she had been in a similar position at one time made it easier for her accept her children having a new maternal figure.

'I was a stepmom and I’ve always been the school of thought that the more people to love children the better,' she continued. 'And I don’t think that there’s a limited capacity for children to be able to be loved.

'It’s not like they could only be loved by mommy and daddy,' she continued. 'I don’t think that takes away my love for them if they’re going to love somebody else. So I think it’s great.'

Thumbs up: Back in May, Meghan gave her tentative support to Kortnie. 'I would feel that stability for my children is what I care about the most. So any kind of long-term committed relationship that Jim is in, I fully, fully support...' she told Us Weekly

Despite her kind words, she and Edmonds have battled over their children and custody since their separation.

A rep for him called it 'unconscionable and absolutely disgraceful' after King announced on social media that their son Hart had been diagnosed with cerebral palsy without first informing him.

They also sparred over Meghan allegedly going out of town when she was supposed to be parenting their children, while she has complained that his child support payments were inadequate.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Beyonce's former trainer Craig Adams has passed away after battling COVID-19, her mother Tina Knowles has confirmed.

Knowles, 67, revealed that Adams died Tuesday night from complications due to coronavirus that had caused him to have kidney failure. She did not reveal his vaccine status in her post.

Adams also worked as security for Beyonce when she was in Destiny's Child, and Knowles described him as being 'like a family member' to herself and the star.

Sad news: Beyonce's former trainer Craig Adams dies of COVID-19... as her mother Tina Knowles pays tribute saying he 'was like a family member' to the star

Tragedy: Knowles, 67, revealed that Adams died Tuesday night from complications due to coronavirus that had caused him to have kidney failure (pictured with Beyonce in 2012)

'I am heartbroken this morning. I found out this morning that this amazing human being Craig Adams from Houston passed away last night from Covid,' Knowles wrote on Wednesday.

'This horrible killer disease attacked his organs, his lungs first made him have kidney failure and as hard as he fought he succumbed to the disease last night,' she added.

'Craig was a fitness trainer and was healthy! This is only the latest of Many friends and family that were lost to Covid. Craig was Beyoncé's trainer and later security for Destiny's Child!'

She concluded: 'He was like a family member. Such a beautiful human being, kind, loving, and gentle. RIP Craig we love you!'

Among the many was COVID-19 can affect people, the disease can cause blood clots that might clog the kidneys.

Tributes for the Houston-based trainer flooded in under Knowles' post, with one user commenting: 'Oooh my gosh he used to train me!!! This is so sad. He was such a nice man! Oh I’m so sorry to hear about this loss.'

'So sorry to hear this Miss Tina! This virus is devastating,' Yvette Nicole Brown wrote.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rob Kardashian made a very rare sighting this week when he drove to half-sister Kylie Jenner's 24th birthday bash in Holmby Hills, California.

The reality TV star was seen driving a purple metallic Rolls-Royce as he wore a casual white T-shirt.

It has been over four years since he became a recluse following his split from Blac Chyna, his former fiancée and the mother of his only child, daughter Dream.

There he is! Rob Kardashian made a very rare sighting this week when he drove to half-sister Kylie Jenner's 24th birthday bash in Holmby Hills, California

No suit and tie! The reality TV star was seen driving a purple metallic Rolls-Royce as he wore a casual white T-shirt

Rob did not appear to be in the most cheerful mood as he sat behind the wheel of the $300,000 car.

Khloe let fans know on Tuesday that Rob was at Kylie's big party as she shared an image of his place card, adding her brother was always her date.

She is single now after another split from her baby daddy Tristan Thompson, a basketball star.

Also seen leaving the party was Travis Barker, who also drove a Rolls-Royce, and his girlfriend Kourtney Kardashian.

Mr Big Bucks still: Rob did not appear to be in the most cheerful mood as he sat behind the wheel of the $300,000 car

Family: Also seen leaving the party was Travis Barker, who also drove a Rolls-Royce, and his girlfriend Kourtney Kardashian

This comes a year after Rob seemed to be making a return to Keeping Up With The Kardashians.

In July 2020, Khloe Kardashian announced on SiriusXM Hits 1 The Morning Mash Up that Rob Kardashian was coming back to their family reality TV show.

'My brother's coming back around, like he's feeling more confident and comfortable, I think, you know, he just started a whole new season so here we go,' said the mother to True Thompson.

Rob was frequently on the show, often providing laughs with Kourtney's then partner Scott Disick. But during season seven he became a more minor character.

Party time: Kylie being held by Kourtney at the big party at the Holmby Hills home which is near the old Playboy mansion

Nice setting: The pool was lined by candles in hurricane lamps creating a magical mood

That did not stop him from appearing on other shows. Rob worked on the spinoff Khloe & Lamar in 2011 and on Dancing With The Stars that same year.

In 2016 he was the star of his own spinoff, Rob & Chyna, with then fiancée Chyna with whom he shares daughter Dream.

But then his world came crumbling down.

He found love in 2016 but it ended in 2017: It has been over four years since he became a recluse following his split from Blac Chyna, his former fiancée and the mother of his only child, daughter Dream

Oh baby! In 2016 they appeared in the reality TV spinoff Rob & Chyna which saw them bicker

Single lady: She has not wed since splitting from Rob; seen on her Instagram page this month

Kardashian had a messy split from the music video star that led to him getting into hot water with the law when he shared revenge photos of a nude Chyna on Instagram.

There also has been a long custody war with Chyna over Dream and added to the mix is Chyna's lawsuit against his family for her being fired from Rob & Chyna.

With all of the stress of juggling a bad split, a custody fight, being a single parent and finding himself at the center of a lawsuit, Rob stepped back from filming KUWTK.

He became a recluse and was not seen in family photos for years.

In January 2019, Kim Kardashian explained Rob's absence during an appearance on Watch What Happens Live, saying, 'He has his moods. Sometimes he's like, 'Look, I didn't sign up for this' and then he's like, 'I'm cool to do it.''

In March Rob dropped a hint that he was returning to the show when he said, 'My sisters forgot we were filming #KUWTK and thought it was bad girls club.'

The use of the word 'we' made fans think he was on set.

In June 2020 he was spotted at Khloe's birthday party flaunting a noticeably slimmer frame, making it clear he was camera ready.

HIS-tory: Rob is the only son of Kris Jenner and the late Robert Kardashian. Here he is seen in 1999 with his father as well as Kim and Kourtney

Fame came early: Khloe and Kim flank Rob as they hit a party in Las Vegas in 2011

Family members have said he is dedicated to a healthier lifestyle that includes partying less and exercising more while watching his diet.

This is vital to his well being as in December 2015 he was formally diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, which he has since said he no longer has.

But Rob hardly appeared in the final season of Keeping Up With The Kardashians and his family offered no explanation.

In June of this year Khloe said Rob has been 'really affected' by the way his former partners have treated him.

The Arthur George designer - who, in addition to Chyna, has previously dated Adrienne Bailon, Rita Ora and Malika Haqq - has retreated from the spotlight in recent years because his love life has taken a toll on him

Speaking on the second part of E!'s Keeping Up With the Kardashians: The Final Curtain reunion special, Khloe said: 'It's not so much about physical appearance.

Thinner in June 2020: Here he is seen with sister Khloe and his ex Malika Haqq

New bod: Rob unveiled his body transformation, when he attended his sister Khloe's 36th birthday bash in 2020 (pictured with half-sister Kendall Jenner)

'It's about how he felt internally about some of the women in his life, and how they treated him or how he felt they might have used him to get to certain areas or levels.

'I think that really affected him, because my brother is such a lover, and has the most incredible heart and personality. I think he's just getting stronger. I think you have to get heartbroken and learn from your mistakes, and I think he's just stronger and feeling better to be around, and be more vulnerable or exposed.'

Khloe noted that Rob is 'feeling really good about himself right now, and he's working really hard on himself' but admitted he hadn't felt ready to participate in the reunion because it meant he would have to 'address the parts that made him want to take a break.'

Meanwhile, Rob continues to shared cute photos of his daughter Dream, aged four. Dream was born in November 2016 with Rob and Chyna confirming their split the following month after just under a year of dating.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Filming began for the upcoming Florence Pugh movie The Wonder in Ireland and Netflix gave fans a first look at the actress in character.

The streaming service released a photo of the Midsommar star, 22, standing near a graveyard and looking back at the camera. In the photo, she wears a blue dress with a patterned shawl draped over her shoulders.

The Wonder is based on the 2016 Emma Donoghue novel of the same name which follows an 11-year-old girl who is perfectly healthy though she has not eaten for months. Pugh, playing an English nurse, goes to the small village to investigate the situation.

Another period piece: Filming began for the upcoming Florence Pugh movie, The Wonder, in Ireland, and Netflix gave fans a first look at the actress in character

The film is a period piece, taking place in 1862, which plays right into the star's wheelhouse. She previously played Amy March in Little Women, a role that garnered her critical acclaim and an Academy Award nomination.

Her new film will also feature Tom Burke of Mank fame and First Man actor Ciarán Hinds among many more talented actors.

The Fighting with My Family star's career has skyrocketed in the past couple of years.

Mystery in a small Irish village: Pugh, pictured here before a private viewing of Studio 7 by Cartier last month, will play a nurse who investigates how an 11-year-old girl appears perfectly healthy despite not seeming to have eaten for months

Shooting for the moon: The actress, pictured here in July, has seen her career skyrocket in recent years, and she has taken on roles as varied as Yelena Belova in Black Widow to Amy March in Little Women

The BAFTA nominee co-starred in Marvel's Black Widow which came out last month, and her character will play a major role in the cinematic universe moving award.

Pugh also made a movie earlier this year called Don't Worry Darling which is about a 1950s housewife who discovers a disturbing truth. The actress plays opposite Harry Styles in the role.

Despite the critics praise for her acting work, many people have been far more critical of the England native's love life over the past couple years.

More critics personally than professionally: The star has been dating actor Zach Braff, 46, of Scrubs fame since 2019, and some fans point out their age gap regularly

'What a gift to the world it was that you were born': Zach Braff posted this photo to Instagram on January 3 to wish his loving girlfriend a happy 25th birthday

The star has been dating actor Zach Braff, 46, of Scrubs fame since 2019. The pair now live together in Los Angeles.

Many fans were quick to point out their 21-year age gap on social media, but Pugh has been even quicker to defend the couple.

In a July interview with The Sunday Times, the actress said, 'I think it bugs people that it's not who they expected. But it's my life and I'm not doing anything to please people or to make it a better headline or story. I want to also be a person!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Netflix has announced the core cast of the live-action version of the series Avatar: The Last Airbender.

In September 2018 Netflix revealed that the animated show would be coming to screens as a live-action TV show.

Now, nearly three years later, the cast has been announced as fans continue to await a premiere date.

Finally: Netflix has announced the core cast of the live-action version of the series Avatar: The Last Airbender

The streaming service added a simple post to Instagram Thursday with four photos of the newly cast actors.

'Yip yip! Meet the cast of Avatar: The Last Airbender live-action series!' read the caption.

Although anime fans will have to wait longer for more information they can enjoy this new tidbit of an update, and get to know the show's new actors.

New generation: Each of the new cast members shared the news on their personal Instagram pages

Gordon Cormier will play Aang. Kiawentiio will portray Katara. Ian Ousley will be Sokka, and Dallas Liu will star as Zuko.

Each of the new cast members shared the news on their personal Instagram pages. Ian Lousley wrote, 'I can NOT believe it but I've been cast as Sokka!!'

He added, 'I'm gonna be checked out for the rest of the day. just CHILLIN and sipping my cactus juice.'

Fresh start: Youngest cast member, 11-year-old Gordon shared, 'It's going to be a crazy ride!'

Welcome note: Dallas Liu reposted Netflix's image of the cast lineup in his stories and wrote, 'Welcome to the party :)'

Kiawentiio posted, 'I know you all have been waiting, thank you for all the love.'

Youngest cast member, 11-year-old Gordon shared, 'It's going to be a crazy ride!'

Dallas Liu reposted Netflix's image of the cast lineup in his stories and wrote, 'Welcome to the party :)'

A year ago two of the show's producers pulled out of the project, citing creative differences. Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko decided to part ways with the Netflix series after putting in two years of work.

DiMartino wrote in a blog post, 'Whatever version ends up on-screen, it will not be what Bryan and I had envisioned or intended to make.'

Albert Kim will take over as showrunner.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaley Cuoco was seen bloodied up and bruised on the New York City set of her film Meet Cute on Wednesday.

And now there are images of the moment that lead to her character's grisly appearance.

Very dramatic photos show the 35-year-old star's stunt double being ran over by a dark grey Ford Focus.

Scroll down for video

Interesting: Kaley Cuoco was seen bloodied up and bruised on the New York City set of her film Meet Cute on Wednesday

Oh no: And now there are images of the moment that lead to her character's grisly appearance

In the wild scene, the woman could be seen flying across the hood of the car into the windshield and doing a summersault onto the roof.

At one point Kaley even chatted with the stunt double as she laid out on the front of the car as they discussed the scene.

The crew made sure to get every shot possible as Kaley could be seen sprawled across the windshield.

Ouch: Very dramatic photos show the 35-year-old star's stunt double being ran over by a dark grey Ford Focus

Whoa: In the wild scene, the woman could be seen flying across the hood of the car into the windshield and doing a summersault onto the roof

Ouch: She could be seen being hit with coffee cup in hand

Setting the scene: At one point Kaley even chatted with the stunt double as she laid out on the front of the car as they discussed the scene

No doubt her character tumbled off the car as the actress was then shown laying face down on the ground as a witness tended to her.

The scene was complete as Kaley stumbled along while running down the street seemingly following the car that had hit her.

No doubt the star and her stunt double were proud of their work in front of the camera as they were later seen hugging.

In the details: The crew made sure to get every shot possible as Kaley could be seen sprawled across the windshield

Helping hand: No doubt her character tumbled off the car as the actress was then shown laying face down on the ground as a witness tended to her

Also on the same day, the Big Bang theory was seen goofing around with co-star Pete Davidson goofed around Wednesday while filming their upcoming romantic comedy.

Kaley s and her 27-year-old co-star were dressed casually while shooting outdoors on the street in the Brooklyn area.

The stunner got into character and looked roughed up while filming an action scene with the help of a stunt double.

Payback: The scene was complete as Kaley stumbled along while running down the street seemingly following the car that had hit her

Pals: No doubt the star and her stunt double were proud of their work in front of the camera as they were later seen hugging

The Big Bang Theory star had an abrasion on her cheek and unkempt hair as she filmed a scene wearing a purple T-shirt cinched at her waist along with a blue denim jacket and grey sweatpants.

Pete, meanwhile, wore a striped sweater and green pants.

Kaley and Pete later shared a laugh in-between scenes and she was seen cracking up amid photographers.

They were also spotted walking together with Kaley using a hand fan to keep herself cool.

Movie star: It was definitely quite the day of filming

On set: Pete Davidson filmed with Kaley in the Brooklyn area

Roughed up: The 35-year-old actress looked roughed up while filming

Leading lady: The Big Bang Theory star stars in the romantic comedy along with Pete

Funny guy: The Saturday Night Live star smiled between scenes

Pete smoked a cigarette and drank a Coca-Cola between scenes.

Meet Cute is a play on the film and television term for a scene in which two people who later will become a couple meet for the first time usually under a 'cute' circumstance.

The 'meet cute' scene has been a staple of romantic comedies in Hollywood for decades.

Casual style: Kaley wore a purple T-shirt cinched at her waist along with a blue denim jacket and grey sweatpants

Good times: Pete and Kaley enjoyed a laugh in between scenes

Staying cool: Kaley kept cool with a small hand fan

Shades on: The actress wore sunglasses while walking with Pete

According to Deadline, Meet Cute 'is a wildly inventive deconstruction of the romantic comedy built around the question: What would you do if you could travel to your loved ones’ past, heal their traumas, fix their problems, and change them into the perfect partner?'

Meet Cute is being directed by Alex Lehmann from a script by Noga Pnueli.

Alex previously directed the Netflix dramedy Paddleton that he co-wrote with Mark Duplass.

Rom com: According to Deadline, Meet Cute 'is a wildly inventive deconstruction of the romantic comedy built around the question: What would you do if you could travel to your loved ones’ past, heal their traumas, fix their problems, and change them into the perfect partner?'

Into it: Kaley got into character as she looked unkempt

Bruised up: The actress dances on the set with bruises

Touch up: A make-up artist touched up the actress

Kaley stars in the HBO Max series The Flight Attendant in the title role after her production company Yes, Norman Productions optioned the rights to the novel.

The Flight Attendant premiered in November 2020 and was renewed for a second season in December 2020.

Kaley has received nominations at the Primetime Emmy Awards, the Golden Globe Awards, the Screen Actors Guild Awards, and the Critics' Choice Award for her work on the HBO Max series.

Cute smile: Kaley flashed her cute smile for the cameras

Good times: The actress took a wide stance while laughing

Brooklyn set: The cast and crew filmed in Brooklyn and masked up amid the pandemic

Smoke break: Pete smoked a cigarette between scenes

Pete in April 2021 was cast as Joey Ramone in the upcoming Netflix biography I Slept With Joey Ramone.

The Saturday Night Live star recently played Blackguard in The Suicide Squad.

Pete also has the thriller Bodies, Bodies, Bodies currently in post-production.

Stunt double: Kaley and Pete looked on as a stunt double worked with them

Strong resemblance: The stunt double looked just like Kaley

Fooling around: Pete fooled around with photographers while on set
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He cemented his place in film history when he donned the Caped Crusader's cape and cowl for Tim Burton's iconic 1989 film Batman.

So it was a major surprise to Michael Keaton that it felt totally 'normal' when he finally put the suit back on for the upcoming Flash spin-off, he admitted Wednesday in an interview with the YouTube series Jake's Takes.

The 69-year-old actor will be one of two Batman's in The Flash, as Ben Affleck will also reprise the role after most recently appearing in Zack Snyder's Justice League director's cut.

Unexpected: Michael Keaton, 69, admitted that it was 'shockingly normal' to put his Batman costume on again in the upcoming Flash spin-off film during a Jake's Takes interview posed Wednesday

The host, Jake Hamilton, asked Keaton 'what sort of memories' went through his mind as he put the suit on, which he last appeared in for 1992's sequel Batman Returns, which was also helmed by Burton.

'It was shockingly normal. It was weird,' Keaton admitted.

'I went "Oh, oh yeah, that's right." But also as you then start to play the scenes it was like a lot of memories, a lot of really interesting sense memories —' before he said it was a kind of 'muscle memory' after a suggestion from the host.

Hamilton also quizzed the Trial Of The Chicago 7 actor if he'd reprised his classic line 'I'm Batman' in the Flash movie.

Iconic: Keaton starred in 1989's Batman and 1992's Batman Returns for director Tim Burton; still from Batman featuring Jack Nicholson as The Joker

Familiar: 'As you then start to play the scenes it was like a lot of memories, a lot of really interesting sense memories —' Keaton began, before comparing the feeling to 'muscle memory'

'I can't hear you,' Keaton replied, jokingly pretending there was a poor connection for the virtual interview.

Elsewhere, he said that he hadn't spoken with Burton about reprising the character, though they might have discussion in the future.

'But just because we haven't because we've got other stuff to talk about,' he said.

In The Flash, Ezra Miller will step out from the shadow of the other Justice League members, though he'll still have plenty of superhero help with both Batmans and Supergirl (played by Sasha Calle) joining him.

Keaton also mentioned that fans most often reference his roles in the Batman films, or his more-recent role in 2017's Spider-Man: Homecoming, but his 1996 comedy Multiplicity is an oddly popular entry in his filmography among his European fans.

Double trouble: Keaton and Ben Affleck will both play Batman in The Flash, which stars Ezra Miller as the title character and is helmed by IT director Andy Muschietti; still from Justice League

Also on Wednesday, Keaton admitted that it was 'a little bit emotional' to return to playing Batman during an interview with Collider.

He added that he was blown away by the way director Andy Muschietti had orchestrated his grand reveal in the upcoming movie.

'Just a rush of memories,' he said. 'Without giving anything away, which I can't, basically the first shot, not of the entire movie but let's say the introduction [of Batman], is so good that when we walked on and started talking about a couple of shots and the angles, I went, "Woah, this is big. This is great." I don't even mean for me. Just the imagery, it's great. And reminiscent, to some degree, of Tim Burton.'

Lips sealed: When the host asked Keaton if he says his iconic line 'I'm Batman,' he joked that he couldn't hear because of a bad connection

The Beetlejuice star was announced to be playing Batman again back in April, following months of speculation that he might suit up again.

In June, Muschietti hinted at the dark tone of his upcoming movie when he shared a closeup photo of the bat logo chest piece on Keaton's suit, which was splattered with drops of blood.

The actor's 1989 film also featured a character-defining portrayal of The Joker by Oscar winner Jack Nicholson, while Kim Basinger played the journalist Vicki Vale.

Batman Returns dialed up the star power with Michelle Pfieffer starring as Batman's frenemy Catwoman and Danny DeVito playing a garish version of The Penguin.

Dark: In June, Muschietti hinted at the dark tone of his upcoming movie when he shared a closeup photo of the bat logo chest piece on Keaton's suit, which was splattered with blood

Christopher Walken was also featured as a third villain, the conniving industrialist Max Shreck.

Keaton and Burton both opted to sit out the third entry in the Batman films, with Val Kilmer taking over the costume and Joel Schumacher sitting in the director's chair for 1995's Batman Forever, which also starred Tommy Lee Jones, Jim Carrey and Nicole Kidman.

Schumacher returned by Kilmer was replaced by George Clooney as Batman in the follow-up, the critically derided Batman & Robin (1997).

Christian Bale would later play the Caped Crusader in Christopher Nolan's acclaimed trilogy of Batman films, and Ben Affleck has been the latest star to wear the costume.

Robert Pattinson will be playing a younger version of Batman early on in his career for the upcoming film The Batman, which appears to be structured more as a detective story than previous entries.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kelly Clarkson had reason to celebrate on Wednesday after learning that a judge has upheld the prenuptial agreement in her bitter divorce battle with ex-husband Brandon Blackstock.

TMZ reports that Clarkson was onset of The Voice when she found out the news and 'let out a scream' of joy, with fellow coaches Blake Shelton and Ariana Grande joining in on the celebrations.

Sources tell the outlet that while Clarkson was filming the singing competition, she received an email from her lawyers sharing the good news that her prenup had been kept in place, meaning she will keep the bulk of her assets and income.

Last month, Clarkson - said to be worth $45M - had been temporarily ordered to pay Blackstock nearly $200k-per-month in spousal and child support. The documents also revealed details into Clarkson's finances, showing that she personally earns $1,583,617 a month.

Reason to celebrate! Kelly Clarkson is said to have found out that her prenup with ex-husband Brand Blackstock will be upheld, while she was filming The Voice on Wednesday

TMZ now report that Clarkson will keep the lion's share of their assets including the Montana ranch where her ex-husband is currently residing.

Blackstock had been contesting the prenup and wanted to split their properties 50/50, in addition to the income that she earned throughout their marriage - but a judge has reportedly stopped his request.

Sources add that Clarkson's friend and fellow coach Shelton recently cut ties with music manager Blackstock, who had managed the country singer for a number of years.

A judge is said to have agreed with Clarkson's attorney - famed divorce lawyer Laura Wasser - that the signed prenup had to be taken into account.

It's over: Per the report, Clarkson has been awarded primary custody of their minor - children River, seven, and Remington, five (pictured above, as well as his elder kids Seth and Savannah)

Clarkson now has the right to sell the Montana ranch as she is the one who purchased it, according to the report.

The ex couple's divorce has been 'bifurcated' meaning the end of the marriage has officially been declared.

Per the report, Clarkson has been awarded primary custody of their minor children - River, seven, and Remington, five.

Earlier this week, it was reported that Clarkson would pay 70% of her children's school fees and expenses but had refused to pay for the Montana ranch.

The judge had ordered that Blackstock carry the financial burden of his Montana ranch, that costs around $81,000 a month to run in expenses, though now it seems likely that Clarkson will sell it.

Cause for celebration: Blake Shelton and Ariana Grande are said to have celebrated Kelly's legal win backstage on The Voice according to a report (John Legend also pictured)

Blackstock is currently living at the ranch, and is using it as his primary residence. It was also revealed that Blackstock was earning around $10k a month, while Clarkson was bringing home around $1.5M a month.

Court documents obtained by TMZ confirm Kelly will continue to pay Brandon $150,000 per month whilst the divorce case continues in court as well as $45,000 in child support.

The permanent specifics of any spousal support is still unclear.

The singer has sold a staggering 25 million albums and 45 million singles worldwide in her career, and currently has her own hit talk-show.

Kiss off: Earlier this month Clarkson asked for the courts to legally declare her single, over one year after she initially filed for divorce in June 2020 (Pictured, 2018)

Clarkson first began dating Blackstock - a country music manager - back in 2011 and married him in 2013.

Blackstock also shares his 13-year-old son Seth and 17-year-old daughter Savannah with his ex-wife Melissa Ashworth.

The Piece By Piece hitmaker had sparked speculation last year that she and Blackstock could have been set to have a third child, as she confessed she had 'baby fever' after chatting to celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay.

During their chat, in which Gordon's 13-month-old son Oscar appeared, Clarkson said: 'Oh my gosh! Do not do this to me. I so want another child, and my husband is like, 'No! We have four!'

'You get baby fever when you see them and you're like, 'Oh, I miss the chubby little legs and the little face.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dakota Johnson is no stranger to dressing in lingerie for steamy sex scenes in movies as she came to fame with the Fifty Shades Of Grey films.

And now the daughter of Melanie Griffith and Don Johnson is back to heating up the lens for the psychological thriller The Nowhere Inn.

On Thursday images of the beauty, 31, in black lace lingerie were shared as she was seen getting close to singer St Vincent.

Back in her undies: Dakota Johnson is no stranger to dressing in lingerie for steamy sex scenes in movies as she came to fame with the Fifty Shades Of Grey films. And now she is back to heating up the lens for the psychological thriller The Nowhere Inn

Famous kid: The daughter of Melanie Griffith and Don Johnson was in black lace lingerie while on a bed with white sheets

Dakota has on black lace bra and panties with a garter belt and thigh high stockings as well as stiletto heels as she is kneeling and laying on a bed with white sheets. Her dark hair is worn down and she has on vampy ruby red lipstick.

St Vincent, who used to date Twilight star Kristen Stewart, had on a bra and ripped leggings.

In the scene, Dakota and St Vincent are fooling around in bed as they ask a documentary filmmaker, played by Carrie Brownstein, to film them as they have fun.

St Vincent called Dakota 'a really great sport for what was a very strange ask,' in an interview about the project's origins with Variety.

'I think it was originally, like, "Dakota will you play my girlfriend?"' she said. 'It wasn’t like, "Will you put on lingerie and come hang out?"' added costar Carrie.

Her costar: St Vincent, who used to date Twilight star Kristen Stewart, had on a similar lingerie set. The movie is about a documentary the pop singer is making

The film focuses on pop star St Vincent, whose real name is Annie Clark, as she tries to make a documentary about her music and experiences with fame before it all goes haywire.

It all starts out fine but then something 'went terribly wrong.'

St Vincent talks to the camera: 'It was supposed to be a music documentary, concert footage....interviews....I wanted people to know who I really am.'

As things get stranger, she adds: 'One of the reasons why I wanted to make a documentary in the first place is because I would finally be in control of the narrative.'

She continues: 'A small part of me was starting to second guess myself.

A little twisted: St Vincent talks to the camera: 'It was supposed to be a music documentary, concert footage....interviews....I wanted people to know who I really am'

'All I can say is somewhere along the way, things went terribly wrong.'

Toko Yasuda also appears in the movie.

The official synopsis reads: 'From real-life friends Annie Clark (aka Grammy Award-winning musician St. Vincent) and Carrie Brownstein (Portlandia) comes the metafictional account of two creative forces banding together to make a documentary about St. Vincent’s music, touring life, and public persona.

What goes wrong? 'All I can say is somewhere along the way, things went terribly wrong,' she is also heard saying

'But they quickly discover unpredictable forces lurking within subject and filmmaker that threaten to derail the friendship, the project, and the duo’s creative lives.'

The film, directed by Bill Benz, is scheduled to be released in the US on September 17, 2021.

St Vincent is coming off the release of her 1970s-inspired album Daddy’s Home.

Johnson will next star in Persuasion. The actress is set to star in the upcoming Netflix and MRC Film production, which is based on the novel of the same name by Jane Austen.

A fall treat: The film, directed by Bill Benz, is scheduled to be released in the US on September 17, 2021

Persuasion will be directed by theatre director Carrie Cracknell - who recently directed Jake Gyllenhaal and Tom Sturridge in 'Sea Wall/A Life on Broadway' – in what will be her feature film directorial debut.

Ron Bass and Alice Victoria are writing the screenplay, and Andrew Lazar and Christina Weiss Lurie are producing, while executive producers are Elizabeth Cantillon via her untitled MRC Film Romance label, Michael Constable and David Fliegel.

According to Netflix, the film's logline is: 'Living with her snobby family on the brink of bankruptcy, Anne Elliot is an unconforming woman with modern sensibilities. When Frederick Wentworth - the dashing one she once sent away - crashes back into her life, Anne must choose between putting the past behind her or listening to her heart when it comes to second chances.'

She is used to getting steamy on screen: Seen here in Fifty Shades of Grey

Meanwhile, Dakota recently revealed she will be in therapy for 'the rest of her life' after taking 'online psychology courses' in lockdown.

She said: 'I've been so lucky to be surrounded by people who have encouraged me to go deeper into myself. Even during quarantine, I got really into doing online psychology courses because ... I wasn't going to get into college, but I did these amazing courses. I'll probably be in therapy for the rest of my life. You never finish learning about being a human.'

The actress previously admitted she had a 'panic attack' before she sang for her role in 'Our Friend' and admits it left her feeling so 'terrified' that she ran off the set as she tried to cope.

Her family bond: Seen with sister Stella del Carmen and mom Melanie Griffith during the Holy Week in 2013 in Malaga, Spain

She said: 'Singing in front of people is actually so terrifying for me. And we had to shoot the scene where you don't even really see me. The camera's in the back of ... you can't even really tell what's going on, and I was meant to be performing in community theatre. And they hit playback of my voice, my vocal recording, and called 'Action'.

'And it was like I had a panic attack that manifested in all the ways that it does, that it can, so, like, I just took off running.

'Running, like around the theatre, around backstage. I was running around, and then just started laughing hysterically, and everyone on the crew's like, 'What's she doing?' Running around, laughing and then started crying. It was like extreme flight mode.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She coined the term Hot Girl Summer, but Megan Thee Stallion looked as if she was ready for Hot Girl Winter with her icily glamorous cover for Essence's September/October issue.

The 26-year-old superstar rapper looked cooly glamorous with thick platinum blonde hair and a lustrous white satin robe on the cover of the Global Black Fashion issue, which dropped on Thursday.

Megan opened up in the accompanying interview about completing her highly anticipated 'aggressive' sophomore album and how she balances her fame with a desire for solitude.

Glamorous: Megan Thee Stallion, 26, appeared on the September/October cover of Essence in a stunning white feathered robe with platinum blonde curls as she opened up about finishing her new album

Megan (given name: Megan Pete) channeled the style of Depression-era film stars like Jean Harlow with her low-cut white robe, which was enlivened with white ostrich features on the sleeves.

She wore her blonde locks in voluminous curls cascading over her her shoulders while showcasing her impeccably made-up visage.

On Instagram, the WAP rapper shared more images from the new issue.

'Tina Snow lookin real hot in luxury for the ultimate fashion spread!' she wrote. 'I'm on the cover of @essence for the coveted September/October global Black fashion issue. I opened my soul to the hot girls at ESSENCE for my debut cover story. So check it out hotties hitting newsstands on August 24th.'

Megan sizzled in a skimpy knit off-the-shoulder dress with a sky-high slit going up to her hips and showcasing her curves.

She wore her blonde hair styled in an in intricate updo for the photo, with individual strands dangling to frame her face.

Another steamy image featured her crouching on a bed in a silky white ruched dress while wrapped up in a sheer peach-colored robe that was lined with fur.

The songstress added some sparkle to her look with a glittering diamond necklace culminating in tear drop–shaped pearls, along with dangling diamond and pearl earrings.

Megan put on a busty display in another white off-the-shoulder dress that hugged her outstanding figure and featured surprising cargo pockets.

She played up the allusions to classic film stars with a black-and-white snap of herself in a short white ruched halter dress that rode up to reveal her underwear.

She spiced the look up with a frilly white coat draped over her shoulders, and she elevated her 5ft10in stature with classic white heels.

The Savage rapper remained tight-lipped about the material that will appear on her upcoming album in the accompanying profile, though she was willing to describe it as an attempt to get back to her roots.

'I feel like [my new album] will be aggressive,' she shared. 'I feel like this project is definitely something very well thought out. This project is me talking my s***, getting back comfortable with myself, getting back to the Megan that was on the come-up.'

With this album, and with each subsequent project, she seems to be trying to outdo herself.

'Every time I make a move, I’m like, "Okay, how can we be better than Megan last month?"' she said. '"How can we be better than Megan last year?"'

Megan, who accused rapper Tory Lanez of shooting her in the foot last year, also admitted that she's now guarded about who's allowed in her inner circle.

'There are probably approximately four people around me on a daily basis,' she explained. 'I don’t see a lot of people, I don’t talk to a lot of people, because I feel like it’s not good for me. I figured out that my personal space is what keeps me balanced and it’s what keeps me centered.'

The hitmaker, who's set to graduate from the HBCU Texas Southern University in the fall, also delved into her early days freestyling when she was still an up-and-coming rapper in Houston, Texas, where she settled with her mother after being born in San Antonio.

'Being in Houston, in Texas in general, I feel like getting in a circle and freestyling is just what we do,' she said. 'It doesn’t matter where you at, who you with, somebody is going to do a rap battle. I would see boys together and they would be rapping, so in my head, this is what you do. I wanted to make sure I was always sharp and I could do it.'

Elegance: Megan showed off elegant ensembles channeling classic Hollywood stars of the '30s and '40s. She spoke about balancing her studies at Texas Southern University while making her early mixtapes; seen July 26 in Miami, Florida

Although she lives the life of a world-famous entertainer now, Megan's early career was far from glamorous as she tried to squeeze in her musical interests between college courses.

'I would be in my dorm room finding beats to rap over on YouTube,' she said of preparing her 2016 mixtape Rich Rachet.

Mixing studies with music meant she had to wait till small pockets of free time to work on her verses.

'I would go outside on my break to just get them out,' she recounted. 'When I got to go into the studio, I’d lay down eight songs at a time.'

Megan Thee Stallion's September/October issue of Essence will be on newsstands starting August 23.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Savannah Chrisley and Nic Kerdiles have rekindled their romance nearly a year after ending their engagement.

The 24-year-old Chrisley Knows Best star confirmed to E! News that she is back together with the 27-year-old former professional hockey player.

'Nic is still in my life,' Savannah told the media outlet on August 9. 'We're still trying to figure things out.'

Back on: Savannah Chrisley and Nic Kerdiles have rekindled their romance nearly a year after ending their engagement

Chrisley went on to explain that the couple, who first met on Instagram, plan to keep their relationship out of the spotlight as they reconcile.

She said, 'We just decided to keep things off of social media, keep things a little more private, because when the world gets involved, I kind of put my life out there for everyone to see and have an opinion about, and I've kind of come to a place in life to where I've decided to keep my relationships to myself because I feel like I deserve a little bit of privacy when it comes to that.'

'We're kind of just taking it day by day,' Savanah concluded.

Private lives: Savannah went on to explain that the couple, who first met on Instagram, plan to keep their relationship out of the spotlight as they reconcile

Following their breakup, the television personality channeled her pain into a new project. In December 2020, Savannah debuted her vegan cosmetics line Sassy by Savannah Chrisley. She told E! News 'It's been so successful, it's definitely been a dream come true.'

'We actually have a collection launching called The Break-Up collection which was inspired obviously by my personal life. I kind of took the hardship that I was going through and I was like, you know what? I'm going to be the Taylor Swift of makeup, and I'm excited for that collection to launch because just the names of the eyeshadow colors and the lip kits are words that you would think of going through a break-up.'

The Break-Up Collection includes shades named Me, Myself & I, Onto the Next, Blocked and Rebound.

Drawing inspiration: Following their breakup, the television personality channeled her pain into a new project

Despite putting an end to her engagement last September, Growing Up Chrisley star said that Nic remains 'part of my family' and the door is open to a potential reconciliation in the future if it is 'meant to be'.

'Our situation is very unique,' Savannah told People magazine in November 2020. 'For us, it was a very adult relationship and you need to navigate it that way. Even when it ends.'

Adding: 'He was a part of my family and he still is. It's just we're both on different pages right now and we weren't connecting.'

Not ruling it out: Despite putting an end to her engagement last September, Growing Up Chrisley star said that Nic remains 'part of my family' and the door is open to a potential reconciliation in the future if it is 'meant to be'

The blonde reality star took to Instagram in September 2020 to announce that she and former ice hockey player Nic Kerdiles were breaking up after growing fan speculation.

After meeting on Instagram, Nic and Savannah began dating in the fall of 2017. The couple got engaged on December 24, 2018 after a year of being together.

'Neither of us were capable of giving the other what they needed at the time. And that's okay,' she revealed to People. 'You just have to realize that and we chose to take that step back. And no decision in life is ever perfect.'

Leaving it up to fate: She said, 'If we end up back together, that was what was meant to be. And if we don't, then there's going to be other people that come into our lives.'

She continued: 'If we end up back together, that was what was meant to be. And if we don't, then there's going to be other people that come into our lives.'

Savannah said that in order for things to work out there would need 'to be a lot of change on both sides'.

Looking back she said that perhaps the couple allowed public opinion to worm its way into their personal lives 'just a little too much.'

Heavy heart: In September 2020, the blonde reality star took to Instagram to announce that she and Nic were breaking up after growing fan speculation

In her Instagram first announcing their split, Savannah addressed rampant fan speculation that the pair had hit a rough patch.

'Nic and I have decided to call it quits,' she wrote at the time. 'There's no hatred between the two of us...and in all honesty...that makes saying goodbye even harder.'

The reality star explained that the two did not have bad blood and were trying to make this as amiable as possible.

'We have nothing but love, respect, and admiration for one another but it's time for us to move forward individually. These past 3 years have been some of the best years of my life...but I have to trust that God has a far greater purpose for my life...I believe that He will take this hardship and make something beautiful out of it.'

She finished by asking her 2M followers to 'please be kind with this news that I am sharing...'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@One of his best known friendships on the big screen was with a volleyball named Wilson in 2000's Cast Away.

So no doubt Tom Hanks can make companionship with a dog and robot compelling in his next film project.

The 65-year-old actor was featured in first look image released on Thursday for his upcoming Apple TV+ movie titled Finch.

Scroll down for video

Exciting: Tom Hanks was featured in first look image released on Thursday for his upcoming Apple TV+ movie titled Finch as he walked alongside a robot his character created while chasing after his beloved dog Goodyear

In it he looked sweaty and worried as he walked alongside a robot his character created while chasing after his beloved dog Goodyear.

Along with the new image, the streaming service announced that Finch will debut on Apple TV+ on Friday, November 5.

The moving film is centered around robotics engineer Finch, a robot played by Caleb Landry Jones, and dog Goodyear as they go on an adventure in Finch's quest to ensure that his beloved canine companion will be cared for after he's gone in a post-apocalyptic world.

Interesting: The 65-year-old actor's character is a robotics engineer named Finch who has been living in an underground bunker for a decade and created a world of his own, he is seen in January 2020

Coming soon: Along with the new image, the streaming service announced that Finch will debut on Apple TV+ on Friday, November 5

New gig: The robot is played by Caleb Landry Jones (seen at the Cannes Film Festival last month) as he goes on an adventure in Finch's quest to ensure that his beloved canine companion will be cared for after he's gone in a post-apocalyptic world

Finch, who has been living in an underground bunker for a decade, created a world of his own including the aforementioned robot.

The trio then embark on a journey to the desolate American West as Finch strives to show the robot the joy and wonder of what it means to be alive.

The robot ends up naming himself Jeff as their adventure is filled with several twists and turns as they try to navigate their way through the dangers of the new world.

Man with the plan: Two-time Primetime Emmy winner Miguel Sapochnik (seen in February 2017) - who is best for his work on Game Of Thrones and Repo Men - directed the film

Two-time Primetime Emmy winner Miguel Sapochnik - who is best for his work on Game Of Thrones and Repo Men - directed the film.

Ivor Powell wrote the script with Craig Luck, who is making his feature-film writing debut.

The film will be Hanks' second film release with Apple TV+ as his film Greyhound premiered on the platform last year after the theatrical release was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kelly Ripa posted a video in her Instagram Stories on Wednesday of her husband Mark Consuelos snuggling up to their new dog, Lena.

The latest addition to the Consuelos family is a Maltese/Shih Tzu mix the couple adopted in March.

The TV show host, 50, wrote, 'Lena loves (using a heart emoji) @instasuelos' across the visual of her husband cozying up to the furry pet in a short sleeve polo shirt that displayed his brawny arms.

Dog dad: On Wednesday Kelly Ripa posted a video in her Instagram Stories of her husband Mark Consuelos snuggling up to their new dog, Lena

Mark had a big smile on his face as they appeared to be relaxing on an outdoor patio.

Lena originally appeared on the morning show Live with Kelly and Ryan's segment Happy Pets before the family decided to adopt it.

They already had one adopted canine, Chewie. 'I didn't want Chewie to feel replaced in any way,' Kelly said to co-host Ryan Seacrest on the show.

The former All My Children star gave her previous adoptee a shout out last summer on National Dog Day.

Dog mom: The former All My Children star gave her previous adoptee a shout out last summer on National Dog Day

Furry friends: They already had one adopted canine, Chewie. 'I didn't want Chewie to feel replaced in any way,' Kelly said to co-host Ryan Seacrest on the show

The family chose to make the adoption official after the Consuelos matriarch observed a sweet moment between the pups.

'Chewie was outside [Lena's] crate, sitting next to her with their noses together,' she recalled.

The dog's name was originally Angelina, but the family of five decided to give her a similar sounding moniker and settled on Lena.

Working woman: The blonde TV personality is working on a 'tell all' book; seen in July in NYC

Kelly and Mark married in 1996 and have three children: Michael, 24; Lola, 20; and Joaquin, 18.

The blonde TV personality is working on a 'tell all' book. The collection of essays will be titled Live Wire and is set to be released sometime in 2022.

Mark and son Michael currently share the role of Hiram Lodge on Riverdale. The show returned with a brand new season Wednesday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Padma Lakshmi and her look-alike daughter Krishna posed for a cute mother-daughter selfie while vacationing in Paris this week.

The 50-year-old Top Chef star shared a sweet image to her Instagram page on Thursday in which she was seen with Krishna, 11, as the two visited the Place de la Bastille.

'Paris is lovely, even in August… #littlehands,' Padma wrote in the caption of the snap.

Twinning: Padma Lakshmi and her lookalike daughter Krishna posed for a cute mother-daughter selfie while vacationing in Paris

Lakshmi and her only child both had on matching black tops and pulled their black face masks under the necks as they smiled while standing in front of the historic square.

The 10-time Emmy Award nominee accessorized by layering several gold necklaces and sported gold-framed pink sunglasses on top of her head.

Padma also included several other photos from the pair's trip to France in her post. In the next image, Krishna was seen sitting at an outdoor café as she enjoyed a Mediterranean salad with falafel balls.

Yum! Padma also included several other photos from the pair's trip to France in her post. In the next image, Krishna was seen sitting at an outdoor café as she enjoyed a Mediterranean salad with falafel balls

Taking after her mother: The celebrity chef has said that her mini-me daughter is following in her footsteps, telling People magazine, 'Krishna is a great cook'

The Cosmopolitan cover star shared a video clip in which she and her daughter dug their spoons into a yogurt parfait topped with whipped cream.

In the last snap, Krishna leaned her arm against a chair at a café and gazed off into the distance.

The celebrity chef has said that her mini-me daughter is following in her footsteps. In May, she told People magazine, 'Krishna is a great cook, and loves experimenting with ingredients.'

Delicious: The Cosmopolitan cover star shared a video clip in which she and her daughter dug their spoons into a yogurt parfait topped with whipped cream

She continued, 'It's been great to see her gain confidence and simply have fun in the kitchen.'

Padma shares Krishna with with venture capitalist Adam Dell, 51, whose brother Michael Dell founded the famous computer company that bears his surname.

As she explained in her memoir Love, Loss And What We Ate, she was initially unsure who her baby's father was when she discovered she was pregnant.

The options were Adam and the late IMG CEO Teddy Forstmann, whom she dated concurrently after her 2007 divorce from Salman Rushdie.

Exes: Padma shares Krishna with with venture capitalist Adam Dell, whose brother Michael Dell founded the famous computer company that bears his surname. The pair dated on and off for years before calling it quits in January. Seen in 2017

A paternity test proved Adam to have sired Krishna and a contentious custody battle followed but the two are now on friendly terms.

Dell and Lakshmi continued to date off and on for several years before calling it quits in January.

A source told Page Six, 'Adam and Padma broke up shortly after the new year; it was very amicable. They are intent on staying the best of friends and remain like family.'

The insider went on to say that Dell and Lakshmi 'are committed to co-parenting their daughter, Krishna, who has always been their first priority.'

Padma has most recently been linked to writer Terrance Hayes, who she was spotted kissing in June.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Despite being one of the most sought after supermodels in the world, Bella Hadid says she's still the classic 'middle child.'

The 24-year-old beauty revealed that she felt like 'everybody hated' her during quarantine on her family farm in Pennsylvania during the new episode of the Vogue series, Life in Looks.

Bella also admitted that she's still embarrassed about one particularly racy ensemble from early in her career because it was the 'opposite' of her own personal style.

Style star: Bella Hadid revealed that she felt like 'everybody hated' her during quarantine on her family farm in Pennsylvania during the new episode of the Vogue series, Life in Looks

In the video, Bella is seated at a desk with a lookbook of her style highlights which she fanned through to break down 15 of her fashion looks from 2015 until today.

While no one would ever guess it from her red carpet appearances, Bella admitted to being 'very nervous' as she began her career.

At her first Met Gala appearance in 2015 Bella recalled basically running down the carpet and not spending more than 'four minutes' there because of her nerves. Plus, she added, everyone was waiting for Rihanna.

One of her more iconic looks, a slinky red silk Alexandre Vauthier gown that she wore at Cannes, left her feeling very uncomfortable, the star recalled.

Reflections: In the video, Bella is seated at a desk with a lookbook of her style highlights which she fanned through to break down 15 of her fashion looks from 2015 until today

Way back: While no one would ever guess it from her red carpet appearances, Bella admitted to being 'very nervous' as she began her career

'I kind of get embarrassed about this moment still even though the dress is gorgeous. It just, again, doesn't feel so much like me and I think this was the star of the Bella persona that everyone sees is me,' she revealed.

'I kind of get embarrassed about this moment still even though the dress is gorgeous. It just, again, doesn't feel so much like me and I think this was the star of the Bella persona that everyone sees is me,' she revealed.

Bella said that the high slit, sexy vibe and glamourous makeup made her feel a bit like a fish out of water.

'That's my alter ego. That's Belinda,' Bella laughed. 'I'm just so the opposite of her. She's very va-va-voom. You know, bless her. Love her. She was very nervous.'

'That's my alter ego. That's Belinda,' Bella laughed. 'I'm just so the opposite of her. She's very va-va-voom. You know, bless her. Love her. She was very nervous.'

Newbie: At her first Met Gala appearance in 2015 Bella recalled basically running down the carpet and not spending more than 'four minutes' there because of her nerves

One of the snaps in the book came from a 2020 issue of Vogue that was shot on the Hadid's family farm during the pandemic.

The shot was of Bella and sister Gigi and a cow who has since sadly passed away.

'Being in quarantine with my family - I felt like I was a 16-year-old middle child again,' Bella said.

Family time: One of the snaps in the book came from a 2020 issue of Vogue that was shot on the Hadid's family farm during the pandemic

Sad times: The shot was of Bella and sister Gigi and a cow who has since sadly passed away

'Being in quarantine with my family - I felt like I was a 16-year-old middle child again,' Bella said.

'Any middle children know how it feels to be a middle child. Everybody hates me, no one likes me, I'm the black sheep.'

She continued: 'I'm naturally blonde, I wanted to be the opposite of everyone else in my family. And it was like my brother [Anwar] and my sister [Gigi] buddy-buddying up. And, I just felt like the ostracized one. But, it's okay, I know they love me.'

Hadid laughed about how her mom, Yolanda, put she and her siblings to work in the garden during the pandemic.

'Any middle children know how it feels to be a middle child. Everybody hates me, no one likes me, I'm the black sheep.'

'I'm naturally blonde, I wanted to be the opposite of everyone else in my family. And it was like my brother [Anwar] and my sister [Gigi] buddy-buddying up. And, I just felt like the ostracized one. But, it's okay, I know they love me.'

Looking back at her growth from 2015 to 2021, Bella seemed to marvel at how happy she is these days.

'People used to make fun of me and say that I never smiled,' she said looking at a runway look. 'And it was just because I was in a really bad place physically and mentally. So I look really sad in this picture but I was actually very happy.'

Hadid revealed that she's worked through her dark place and is much happier and grateful to be who she is today.

'People used to make fun of me and say that I never smiled,' she said looking at a runway look. 'And it was just because I was in a really bad place physically and mentally. So I look really sad in this picture but I was actually very happy.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

They've been enjoying a sun-soaked getaway to Ibiza most of us would dream of for much of this summer.

And Kate Moss and her lookalike daughter Lila Grace looked to be making the most of their extended trip to the party destination as they returned from a boat trip around the island on Saturday.

The modelling agency boss, 47, showed off her incredible and youthful physique in a plunging black swimsuit as she strolled along the pier with her 18-year-old daughter who looked stylish in a peach sundress.

Sun: Kate Moss and her lookalike daughter Lila Grace looked to be making the most of their extended trip to Ibiza as they returned from a boat trip around the island on Saturday after attending Kate's protégé Jordan Barrett's wedding

Kate looked beach chic in her flattering swimwear which had a belted design and was teamed with nude sandals, a gold pendant, huge sunglasses and a wicker bag, before changing into a sheer white patterned dress.

Meanwhile Lila looked radiant in a strappy peach and orange lace trim dress which she wore with black sandals as she stepped out with her mother.

The pair both sported a holiday tan and showed off their lithe legs and toned figures for the day out which came just days after they attended Kate's protégé Jordan Barrett's wedding on the island.

Wow: Kate looked beach chic in her flattering swimwear which had a belted design and was teamed with nude sandals, a gold pendant, huge sunglasses and a wicker bag

Family: The modelling agency boss, 47, showed off her incredible and youthful physique in a plunging black swimsuit as she strolled along the pier with her 18-year-old daughter who looked stylish in a peach sundress

Holiday: Meanwhile Lila looked radiant in a strappy peach and orange lace trim dress which she wore with black sandals as she stepped out with her mother

Chic: After getting off the boat and heading back to dry land Kate donned a sheer white patterned dress

When Jordan announced his engagement last month, most people assumed that he'd found himself a lucky lady.

But on Wednesday, the Australian model, 24, shocked fans by revealing he is planning on marrying fellow male model Fernando Casablancas, 23, following an intimate ceremony in Ibiza.

The ceremony was attended by no more than 15 of Jordan's closet friends including models Kate, Georgia May Jagger and American playwright Jeremy O. Harris.

Out and about: The pair both sported a holiday tan and showed off their lithe legs and toned figures for the day out which came just days after they attended Kate's protégé Jordan Barrett's wedding on the island

Like mother like daughter: Lila appears to be following in her mother's modelling footsteps as she has been involved in several campaigns recently

'It was very spontaneous, but his wedding planner Serena Cook was able to pull some strings to make sure it was very special since his Aussie family couldn't attend,' a source told Daily Mail Australia.

'Champagne and cocktail drinks were flowing, it was very relaxed. Kate (Moss) brought out the rings, and really made sure it was special for him,' they added.

Photos from the festivities show that guests enjoyed Casamigos tequila and RUMOR Rosé.

Sun-kissed: Kate looked radiant as she stepped out in Ibiza on Saturday with her daughter and accessorised with a wicker bag

Supermodel: Kate dressed perfectly for the Ibiza heat in a long white dress which she wore over her black swimsuit

Fun day out: Lila appeared slightly overwhelmed by the heat wave in Ibiza as she held her hair off her back

Radiant: Kate opted for go makeup free for he outing to show off her natural beauty and top up her bronzed tan

Essentials: Kate carried her phone and a blue face mask with her as she hopped into the waiting white Range Rover

Jordan looked suave dressed in a black sleeveless silk top, which he wore unbuttoned paired with a matching pants.

His beau Fernando meanwhile opted for a black mesh sleeveless top with matching pants.

The handsome model completed his look wearing a gold head chain.

Outside of his modelling career, Fernando is known as the younger brother of The Strokes rocker Julian Casablancas.

Beauty: The model looked classy as ever as she effortlessly slipped on a white lacy dress outside her white range Rover

Details: Kate completed her look with a pair of small gold hoop earrings and held a blue face mask in her hand just in case

Ocean: Lila was seen arriving back in the port of Ibiza after a boat day together with her mother Kate

Cash: Kate later stopped by an ATM to get some money out before hopping in the white car to head home

Footage from the special day shows the newlyweds sharing their first dance before they both decided to cool off by jumping into a nearby pool.

The couple are understood to have kept festivities going by hosting a private screening of 1977 horror classic The Island of Dr. Moreau.

Barrett announced his engagement on Instagram on July 20, writing: 'I believe in love not the traditional kind, so I guess I just commit new chapter of my life…. Also... did I also just get engaged on this date. Yes.'

Casual: Kate was joined by a man as she headed to the ATM who looked summery in a pair of navy short and a white shirt

Glowing: Kate looked stunning in a black swimsuit as she was pictured with her daughter Lila heading back to the port

Quick change: She stopped by the side of the car to pull on her long patterned white dress after her day out on the ocean

Fashionista: Kate launched her own modelling agency in 2016 in her quest to find fashion's next rising star and was certainly putting on a stylish display as she stepped out

Break: Lila looked incredible in the peach slip as she stood and spoke to the man that was with them

Fashionable: The long white dress had a thigh split and was patterned with flowers and a paisley print

Details: Kate had on a pair of nude sandals for her day out in the sunshine which complimented her summery look perfectly

Accessories: Lila completed her look with a few gold necklaces and held a beige wicker handbag full of all the essentials

Meanwhile Lila appears to be following in her mother's modelling footsteps.

She recently posed with her friend Ella, who is the granddaughter of Keith Richards, in collaboration with Disney, raising awareness for MediCinema which creates cinemas in NHS hospitals to improve patient's wellbeing.

Posing in Mickey Mouse T-shirts, the campaign features various celebrities and is called Micke & Friends: The Power of Friendship.

The likes of Laura Whitmore, Reggie and Cobbie Yates, Rochelle Humes, Nicola Adams, Leigh-Anne Pinnock, Clara Amfo and Olly Murs feature.

Swimming: Underneath her peach dress Lila appeared to be wearing a white bikini while Kate opted for a black costume

Trip: Kate and Lila have been in Ibiza for the last few months enjoying an extended summer break together
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ellie Goulding has revealed she suffered 'debilitating' panic attacks, addiction to exercise and feelings of not being good enough at the height of her fame.

The singer-songwriter, 34, said during her 20s her 'lowest days were ridiculously low' and she often felt 'complete euphoria and utter terror' within the same week.

Ellie - who had her first child Arthur in April with husband Caspar Jopling - discusses her mental health candidly in her new book Fitter. Calmer. Stronger. released on September 2.

Candid: Ellie Goulding has revealed she suffered 'debilitating' panic attacks, addiction to exercise and feelings of not being good enough at the height of her fame

In an extract from her book, reported by The Sun, she wrote: 'My low days used to be ridiculously low. I just couldn't find a way out of them. I often felt as if I was failing because when I felt down I wasn't being productive.

'My voice, my music and writing will always be my mysterious, unpredictable, fiery friend for life.

'But even if I write something I love, I can't always rely on it to make me feel good. I often write my best songs when I'm feeling miserable.'

Ellie struggled with being thrust into the spotlight at just 24 after leaving university to make music.

Sad: The singer-songwriter, 34, said during her 20s her 'lowest days were ridiculously low' and she often felt 'complete euphoria and utter terror' within the same week (pictured in 2021)

She said it was like being 'strapped to a space shuttle' with TV appearances, awards ceremonies and travelling to 'three different countries in one day' - which was a 'dream come true' but left her suffering 'debilitating panic attacks' in her 20s.

She said that the attacks 'began to build slowly' and that she experienced one on a photoshoot and just ahead of a live TV show which she admits she has never watched back, convinced she would be able to see the 'terror in her eyes'.

In the book Ellie recalls how she ended up in hospital after one panic attack after a close friend's father passed away.

Discussion: Ellie - who had her first child Arthur in April with husband Caspar Jopling (pictured at their wedding) - discusses her mental health candidly in her new book Fitter. Calmer. Stronger. released on September 2

Fame: Ellie struggled with being thrust into the spotlight at just 24 after leaving university to make music (pictured at the Brit Awards in 2020)

Despite being treated by doctors she began to normalise the attacks saying they became 'routine' - sometimes feeling like a 'quiet, sickly feeling' or a 'frightening physical manifestation.'

Ellie then decided to get therapy, including cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) after delaying speaking to a professional due to 'shame and confusion'.

She said the help was 'life changing' and as she began to recover from her panic attacks, fitness became her 'sanctuary'.

But what started out as 30 minutes of exercise a day turned into her 'prison', with her using it as a way to control things and 'distract herself from how she felt'.

It also lead to her eating poorly as she had the mindset she could just burn off any extra calories.

All good: In the book she pens how she is now in a much happier place after facing up to her demons and using exercise as a way to ground herself and deal with anxiety

In therapy Ellie learned that factors from her childhood - including her parents divorce and her mum struggling for money while living in a council house - may have contributed to her struggles later in life.

She also revealed that she 'clashed massively with her stepfather' and that 'there was a lot of tension, stress and anxiety' in the home.

In the book she pens how she is now in a much happier place after facing up to her demons and using exercise as a way to ground herself and deal with anxiety.

For confidential help and support call Samaritans for free on 116 123 or visit www.samaritans.org.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Fury saw her five children for the first time in a week on Friday as they visited her in hospital while she looks after newborn daughter Athena who remains in intensive care.

The wife of boxer Tyson, 31, shared a sweet snap of her brood Venezuela, 10, Prince John James, eight, Prince Tyson II, four, Valencia, three, and Prince Adonis Amaziah, 16 months, with her mother who's been looking after them.

The couple revealed that Athena was born on Sunday and taken straight to the ICU afterwards but didn't give any further details.

Family: Paris Fury saw her five children for the first time in a week on Friday as they visited her in hospital as she looks after newborn daughter Athena who remains in intensive care

Sharing a picture of them all, she wrote: 'Just seen my other five for the first time in a week. They are blessed with the best Granny in the world who has watched them all since I came into hospital. I love you mam.

'I can't wait to be home with them all together soon please God.'

She also shared an update on her daughter's progress, telling followers: 'She's doing really well and had a good 48hrs. Just getting there slowly', as she cuddled her little one.

Baby: She also shared an update on her daughter's progress, telling followers: 'She's doing really well and had a good 48hrs. Just getting there slowly', as she cuddled her little one

Adorable: She then showed fans a cute pink romper she had been sent for Athena with the words: 'Fighter just like my daddy' written on it

She then showed fans a cute pink romper she had been sent for Athena with the words: 'Fighter just like my daddy' written on it.

It comes after earlier on Friday it was revealed that Athena was dead for three minutes before being resuscitated by 'miracle workers' at Liverpool children's hospital.

The newborn is currently in intensive care, and while the baby is said to be 'stable', Tyson's father John revealed that things had been touch and go earlier tin the week.

'It's been a bit of a white knuckle ride, we've had a lot to deal with,' John told BT Sport.

Shocking: It comes after earlier on Friday it was revealed that Athena was dead for three minutes before being resuscitated by 'miracle workers' at Liverpool children's hospital

'But we've come out on the other side due to professionalism of Alder Hey Hospital in Liverpool, they're the best children's hospital in the country if not the world.

'They've been really magnificent, they've really saved her life because she was dead for three minutes and they brought her back, it's onwards and upwards from today.'

Earlier that day, Tyson shared an update on his newborn daughter Athena's condition, saying she has had a 'stable day' without using a breathing ventilator.

The boxer, 33, took to Instagram on Thursday to say that she was 'doing well' but is still in intensive care 'for now'.

Devoted parents: The boxer, 33, took to Instagram on Thursday to say that Athena was 'doing well' but is still in intensive care 'for now' (pictured together in May)

Alongside a picture of her in hospital he wrote: 'Update for everyone. Baby Athena is doing well & has had a stable day off ventilator, thanks to everyone for the prayers, still in ICU for now.

'Thanks to all the DRs & nurses. God bless you all.'

Meanwhile, Tyson later shared a snap of his sweet birthday card 'signed' by his newborn daughter as he marked his 33rd birthday.

The special card featured tiny footprints belonging to his baby in pink and yellow, alongside the heartwarming message which read: 'To daddy, happy birthday, I love you with all my heart Athena xxx.'

Beside on set of footprints were the words: 'Athena four days old.'

The couple revealed that Athena was born on Sunday and taken straight to the ICU afterwards but didn't give any further details.

In February Paris revealed she was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition.

Precious: Meanwhile, Tyson later shared a snap of his sweet birthday card 'signed' by his newborn daughter as he marked his 33rd birthday

It come a day after Paris shared a sweet video of her baby in hospital, after the tot was re-admitted to intensive care.

The mother-of-six took to her Instagram stories on Wednesday morning to film her little girl, where she revealed that she has a 'big day today'.

It came as Tyson raised over £30,000 for children's charity Alder Hey Family House Trust who run the Ronald McDonald House in Liverpool.

Sad: It come a day after Paris shared a sweet video of her baby in hospital, after the tot was re-admitted to intensive care

The sweet clip sees little Athena lying in her cot with what appears to be a breathing aid attached while her mother films her.

Captioning her video, Paris penned: 'My beautiful baby girl this morning. More awake now and sucking her dummy.'

She added: 'She has a big day today, please God it goes well', alluding to a possible medical procedure for the tot.

Newest addition: The mother-of-six, 31, took to her Instagram stories on Wednesday morning to film her little girl, where she revealed that she has a 'big day today'

It follows Tyson successfully raising over £30,000 for the children's charity Alder Hey Family House Trust, whom he credits for supporting him and his family during this difficult time.

Taking to Twitter on Tuesday, Tyson thanked his followers for their fundraising efforts and told how they had raised £27,000 in just 5 hours.

He wrote: 'When the power of social media is utilised for good it's beautiful to witness. We've raised over £27k in 5 hours @RMHCUK

'Thank you all. Please continue to support this cause, raise awareness for an independent charity that depends on donations.'

However, at the time of writing, the amount had actually soared, with the total currently standing at £32,154.

Getting there: Captioning her video, Paris penned: 'My beautiful baby girl this morning. More awake now and sucking her dummy'

It comes after Tyson revealed that his newborn daughter was back in intensive care, just hours after she came off the ventilator following her first ICU admission.

The boxer, whose daughter was born on Sunday, took to Instagram on Tuesday to share a snap of his baby girl where he announced the news.

Alongside the photo of a sleeping Athena in which she's hooked up to various wires, the father-of-six, penned: 'Baby Athena is back on icu, please keep her in your prayers'

Amazing! It comes as her boxer husband Tyson raised over £30,000 for children's charity Alder Hey Family House Trust who run the Ronald McDonald House in Liverpool

In February Paris revealed that her daughter was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition.

Speaking on Loose Women after announcing her pregnancy, she said: 'I usually have a condition that makes the babies come a bit earlier so it will probably be the beginning of August, which is better for me, the last few weeks are terrible!'

Tyson's wife Paris previously shared the first snap of their baby daughter on Monday following the tot's first admission to intensive care which saw have a ventilator to help with her breathing.

Poor baby: It comes after Tyson, 32, revealed that his newborn daughter was back in intensive care, just hours after she came off the ventilator following her first ICU admission

Taking to her Instagram stories, the mother-of-six, 31, uploaded the adorable snap of her baby girl wrapped up in a blanket shortly after she came off the ventilator.

Captioning the image, Paris gave an update on Athena's health, writing: 'Thank God she's doing well and thank you for all your messages, thoughts and prayers.

The sweet image saw little Athena asleep in a white baby grow, while wrapped up warm in a blanket featuring a bubby swinging on a swing adorned with pink flowers.

Condition: In February Paris revealed that her daughter was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition

Candid: Speaking on Loose Women after announcing her pregnancy, she said: 'I usually have a condition that makes the babies come a bit earlier so it will probably be the beginning of August, which is better for me, the last few weeks are terrible!'

It follows Tyson previously revealing that his newborn baby daughter is 'off the ventilator'.

The boxer's wife Paris gave birth to Athena on Sunday, and on Monday morning, Tyson took to Instagram to update his fans on the health of their sixth child, writing: 'The baby is in a stable position and doing well - hopefully she comes out of ICU today.'

Hours later, the world-famous athlete shared a clip of himself cradling his newborn, telling his Instagram followers: 'Hi guys, the baby's doing fantastic, a lot, lot better.

Little one: Tyson's wife Paris previously shared the first snap of their baby daughter on Monday following the tot's first admission to intensive care which saw have a ventilator to help with her breathing

Update: Captioning the image, Paris gave an update on Athena's health, writing: 'Thank God she's doing well and thank you for all your messages, thoughts and prayers'

'She's off the ventilator, she's doing really good, look, she's lovely.'

Tyson revealed earlier in the day that he is raising money for the Ronald McDonald House charity, which provides 'home from home' accommodation for families with children in Liverpool's Alder Hey Children's Hospital.

Standing next to his father in an Instagram video, he explained he wants to raise money for the charity due to 'the fantastic job they do on a daily basis'.

Incredible news: Tyson previously revealed his newborn baby daughter Athena is 'off the ventilator' in a new Instagram clip shared on Monday

Intensive care: Tyson's update comes hours after the world-famous boxer revealed his newborn baby daughter Athena (pictured) was in intensive care

Tyson has remained at Alder Hey hospital since the arrival of his sixth child and explained in a clip shared on Monday that he will be auctioning two signed WBC belts and offering a meet and greet to a randomly selected GoFundMe donor.

Standing next to his father John in the hospital's carpark, Tyson told his followers in a short clip: 'Hi this is Tyson Fury aka the Gypsy King. I'm just here with my dad at the children's hospital.

'They do a fantastic job on a daily basis. We've got two WBC belts here that I'm going to sign personally and we're going to put them up for charity to raise some money for the hospital.'

Fundraising: Tyson revealed he's raising money for the Ronald McDonald House charity which provides accommodation for families with children in hospital on Monday

He concluded: 'Whoever wins - I'll pick a winner at random - I will do a personal meet and greet to whoever wins these belts and I'll personally sign them to you.'

It comes hours after Tyson revealed his newborn baby daughter is in intensive care.

The day before, Tyson wrote: 'Please can everyone pray for my baby girl who was born this morning. Athena Fury born 8/8/21.'

Tyson said: 'Hi this is Tyson Fury aka the Gypsy King. I'm just here with my dad at the children's hospital'

He added: 'They do a fantastic job on a daily basis. We've got two WBC belts here that I'm going to sign personally and we're going to put them up for charity to raise some money'

Health update: Tyson revealed his newborn baby Athena is in intensive care but 'stable' as he continued to ask people to keep her in their prayers on Instagram on Monday

The birth of their baby girl comes after Paris endured a lengthy two-day labour.

The new mother-of-six took to Instagram to re-share a video on Saturday that her husband took of them both eating what appeared to be spicy food - in an attempt to speed on the birth of Athena.

Her caption read: 'He is dangerous with a camera think he's bored now we nearly at the end of day 2 in here and still no little girly'.

New baby: Paris, 31, gave birth to their sixth child together on Sunday - a girl named Athena (Pictured days before giving birth)

Congratulations: Tyson announced the news on Instagram, where he asked his followers to pray for their little girl

Lengthy labour: The arrival of their baby girl comes after Paris endured a lengthy two-day labour

Tyson could be heard in the background saying: 'Just thought I'd take this opportunity to share with you our little date in the labour ward'.

Paris also posted a photo of herself on her Stories from Friday when she arrived in hospital.

The expectant mother posed in a black Calvin Klein T-Shirt alongside an array of what looked like a Louis Vuitton duffle bag and small suitcase, as well as a Harrods shopper behind her.

She captioned the pre-birth pic: 'Landed here yesterday morning'.

Paris then posted a video of her husband in the labour ward watching a game of boxing whilst they waited for the arrival of their little one.

The couple announced they were expecting their sixth child together in February.

Tyson shared the happy news on boxing correspondent Gareth A Davies' YouTube series.

Tyson revealed the news while gushing about his family values, telling Davies: 'Paris is pregnant again and the Lord has blessed us definitely with another child and I'm very thankful.

'Got a beautiful wife, beautiful kids, they're all healthy. That's the most important thing, you know, your health and your family.

Big family: They are already parents to Venezuela, 11, Prince John James, eight, Prince Tyson II, four, Valencia, three, and Prince Adonis Amaziah, 12 months

'Nothing else really matters. Your job, your money, your wealth, your career, none of that really matters because you can get another job, you can start snooker or you can go make more money.

'It doesn't really matter but the one thing you can't get back is your family. You can't get back time lost and that's the crazy thing about it all.'

The proud dad, who is the highest-paid fighter of 2020 with £46million in earnings, also spoke about how he and Paris are raising their children to understand the value of money.

'For me it's very important to stay close to my grassroots as I've got a lot of kids coming up, I've got five kids, very important for them to know the value of money,' he explained.

Parents: Tyson first announced the pregnancy boxing correspondent Gareth A Davies' YouTube series (pictured with Paris in March 2020)

'It's very important for them to know how to earn money. So, if they see me splashing out all the time and living a move stars' lifestyle they grow up thinking that's the only way they can live.

'To earn from a normal job, £200-300-a-week, however much they're going to get, they might think that's no good if they've been spoiled rotten by multimillionaire parents.

'So I don't do that. My kids don't go to private school, I don't have any private education, they just go to normal school, everyone does normal stuff.'

Paris, who shares a sprawling family home with Tyson and their children in Morecambe, has been forging ahead with her own career over the past year, landing a role as a panellist on Loose Women last year.

Romance: The couple met at a wedding when Paris was 15 and Tyson was 17, but didn't start dating until after being re-introduced a year later after Paris' 16th birthday

In March the couple revealed they were having a girl after having a celebration at their abode.

Paris took to Instagram to share the news as she uploaded an image of the sportsman and their children covered in pink confetti.

Captioning the heart-warming image, Paris wrote: 'It's a girl... We are due another little princess, god willing come summer we will have 3 girls and 3 boys. So blessed.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rachel Finni set pulses racing on Friday evening as she stepped out in a little black dress for a girls' night out.

The Love Island star, 29, looked stunning in the sexy cut out ensemble as she left The Ned in London.

The beauty had her long raven tresses styled in curls which tumbled over her shoulders.

Wow! Rachel Finni, 29, looked sensational on Friday evening as she stepped out in a little black dress for a girls' night

Rachel looked chic as she kept warm by effortlessly wrapping a black blazer around her shoulders.

Elevating her height, she showed off her slender pins by donning black heeled mules with gold chain detailing.

The luxury travel specialist carried her belongings in a khaki handbag which she held in her left hand.

Gorgeous: The Love Island star looked stunning in the sexy cut out ensemble with her hair in soft waves as she left The Ned in London

Looking good: Joined by a friend for the glamorous night, she wore black heeled mules and shrugged a black blazer over her shoulders

She was enjoying her night with a friend, who looked equally as glamorous as Rachel in a stunning white two-piece ensemble and chunky gold heels.

Rachel made sure to document her night on social media and posed up a storm for a mirror selfie.

The figure hugging dress accentuated her curves in the social media snaps, with Rachel captioning one: 'Hi I'm Rachel and I'm awkward.'

Gorgeous: Rachel made sure to document her night on social media and posed up a storm for a mirror selfie

Chic: The figure hugging dress accentuated her curves in the social media snaps, with Rachel captioning one: 'Hi I'm Rachel and I'm awkward'

She wore ultra-glam make up complete with fake eyelashes and pink eyeshadow, and complemented her brown eyes with winged eyeliner.

The stunner's outing comes as the drama continues to be ramped up in the Love Island Villa.

Friday night's episode saw Jake Cornish finally tell Liberty Poole he loved her after she confronted him over his true feelings for her.

Sensational: She wore ultra-glam make up with fake eyelashes and pink eyeshadow, and winged eyeliner which complemented her brown eyes

In recent days, Liberty has questioned Jake's genuineness over their romance, with her doubts heightened in the latest challenge in which they were voted the couple with the most one-sided relationship.

And after a candid make-or-break conversation, Jake finally said those three little words four weeks after Liberty first uttered them, but viewers at home were not convinced and accused him of saying 'what she wants to hear'.

Elsewhere, other islanders began to question their relationship, with Faye telling beau Teddy that she believed the water engineer was a 'showman'.

Declaration: Friday night's Love Island episode saw Jake Cornish finally tell Liberty Poole he loved her after she confronted him over his true feelings for her

She told him that he only did the whole 'girlfriend thing' because 'he's a showman', before telling Teddy: 'I promise that they won’t work on the outside’.

Later on, Kaz, Chloe and Millie also shared their doubts over Jake, with Chloe remarking that he's 'very aware he's on a TV programme' and that his 'intentions are not what Lib deserves.'

While Millie suggested his actions were 'calculated', and Kaz admitted that she's 'starting to see' what others may see.

Following the declarations of love, Sunday night's teaser clip sees all the girls hold an intervention with Liberty as they urge her to think about her romance with Jake.

The tense scene sees Liberty ask the girls if they think she was an 'idiot' for believing Jake's words to her, before the screen cuts away.

Tough: In recent days, Liberty has questioned Jake's genuineness over their romance, with her doubts heightened in the latest challenge in which they were voted the couple with the most one-sided relationship
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They announced their engagement last year.

And actress Nicola Peltz and her fiancé Brooklyn Beckham, 22, looked every inch the loved-up couple as they stepped out for coffee in New York City on Friday.

The eldest son of Victoria and David Beckham placed an affectionate arm around the 26-year-old beauty, who made a statement in Gianni Versace's iconic £8,654 ($12,000 USD) Crystal Cross beaded black leather biker jacket from 1993.

Going hell for leather! Nicola Peltz, 26, sported Gianni Versace's iconic £8,650 biker jacket as she stepped out for coffee with fiancé Brooklyn Beckham, 22, in New York City on Friday

Nicola teamed the one-of-a-kind garment with a black tank top, skinny-leg blue jeans and chunky black platform boots.

The Bates Motel star also wore a protective black face mask and black cap, and carried her belongings in a black Hermès Birkin bag, worth £18,750 ($26,000 USD).

Nicola kept her jewellery to a minimum, placing focus on her sparkling engagement ring, reportedly worth £350,000, and styled her semi-wet blonde tresses out.

Life of luxury: The actress teamed the one-of-a-kind garment with a black tank top, skinny-leg blue jeans and chunky black platform boots. Brooklyn carried Nicola's black Hermès Birkin bag, worth £18,750 ($26,000 USD), as they made their way to a waiting car

Ever the gentleman, a smitten Brooklyn wrapped one arm around Nicola's petite frame as he led them to a waiting car following their coffee run.

The budding photographer also used his black cowboy hat in an attempt to perhaps shield camera lenses away from Nicola's face.

Brooklyn matched his fiancée in an all-black ensemble, consisting of a T-shirt that revealed his array of arm tattoos, jeans, lace-up boots and a cap, worn backwards.

Also on Friday, Nicola and Brooklyn both took to their Instagram Stories to share the same loved-up snap of the couple cozying up to one another while in a studio.

Lovebirds: Also on Friday, Nicola and Brooklyn both took to their Instagram Stories to share this loved-up snap of the couple cozying up to one another while in a studio.

Nicola's striking facial features were enhanced with glamorous makeup, and proud beau Brooklyn nestled in close, clearly enjoying quality time together.

'My girl,' Brooklyn captioned the sizzling snap, alongside a love heart emoji.

Brooklyn - who is the eldest of David and Victoria Beckham's four children - popped the question last June.

Exactly 12 months after he got down on bended knee, he shared a gushing Instagram post, telling his followers how Nicola made him 'a better person'.

Smitten: Brooklyn - who is the eldest of David and Victoria Beckham's four children - popped the question last June

Brooklyn wrote: 'This exact day 1 year ago I asked this gorgeous woman to marry me.

'She makes me a better person everyday and is my best friend. I can't imagine my life without you because you continuously make me laugh and smile x happy 1 year baby.'

Last year, Brooklyn confirmed the news he'd proposed to Nicola with a sweet Instagram post.

Sharing a stunning snap of the couple, he wrote: 'Two weeks ago I asked my soulmate to marry me and she said yes xx I am the luckiest man in the world. I promise to be the best husband and the best daddy one day. I love you baby xx.'

Engaged: Last year, Brooklyn confirmed the news he'd proposed to Nicola with a gushing Instagram post in which he called himself the 'luckiest man in the world'

In October it was claimed that the pair planned to exchange vows in two celebrations on both sides of the Atlantic.

It's thought that Brooklyn will have his brothers Romeo, 18, and Cruz, 16, as his best men for the ceremony, with proud mum Victoria designing Nicola's wedding gown.

According to The Sun, Brooklyn's sister Harper, 10, will be chief bridesmaid, while Brooklyn's father David will act as the master of ceremonies.

The two ceremonies - held in Nicola's hometown of Florida and the Beckhams' estate in the Cotswolds - will ensure that both Brooklyn and Nicola's loved ones can be in attendance.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has recently forgiven him for kissing another girl in Casa Amor.

And Millie Court, 24, and Liam Reardon, 21, looked as loved up as ever in Friday night's episode as they both declared their true feelings for one another in an intimate chat.

After the dancing challenge, the couple were entwined in a cuddle on the deck when Liam confessed: 'I feel like I've fallen.'

Moving forward: Millie Court, 24, and Liam Reardon, 21, looked as loved up as ever in Friday night's episode as they admitted they'd fallen in love with each other

Millie then responds, surprised: 'You feel like you've fallen? No, really?' and goes on to admit feels the same way.

'I feel like that as well. Everyday is just stronger and stronger. I look at you and I, you know, feel a certain way.'

Admitting it may be too soon to say those important three words she says: 'And I want to say certain things but I also - you know what I mean?'

Elated: After the dancing challenge, the couple were entwined in a cuddle on the deck when Liam confessed: 'I feel like I've fallen'

How cute! Millie then responds, surprised: 'You feel like you've fallen? No, really?' and goes on to admit feels the same way

The Welsh hunk agreed, revealing that: 'I want say, it's on the tip of my tongue. But I feel like I shouldn't say certain things yet.'

To which Millie replied: 'Yeah me too.'

Liam continued: 'So that's why I'm just telling you where I am now. Without saying it yet.'

Millie seemed melancholy about life on the outside and said: 'But it's mad, you live so faraway,' referring to Liam living in Wales - over 250 miles away from her home in Essex.

But Liam assured her: 'I'll make it work.'

In the Beach Hut, Liam admitted: 'I think when you know you know and I definitely, definitely know.'

Love: Admitting it may be too soon to say those important three words she says: 'And I want to say certain things but I also - you know what I mean?'

Sweet: The Welsh hunk agreed, revealing that: 'I want say, it's on the tip of my tongue. But I feel like I shouldn't say certain things yet'

The show then cut to the pair having a very loved up smooch.

Millie and Liam's romance was rocked in Casa Amor after the Welshman's head was turned by Lillie Haynes, 22, who he passionately kissed during the 'lads' holiday.'

Millie went from elation to heartbreak when Liam returned from Casa Amor. While she was thrilled he came back to the main villa on his own to continue in a couple with her, she was later left devastated to hear he had got to know Lillie Haynes.

In a dramatic moment that aired on-screen, Lillie revealed she was shocked Liam hadn't coupled up with her as she was under the impression he wanted to, after kissing her and sharing a bed with her during his Casa Amor stay.

Millie then chose to break things off with Liam, after sitting down with Lillie to hear her side of the story and coming to the conclusion that he had lied about his time away from her.

But in recent days, Millie has forgiven Liam for betraying her and recently got frisky beneath the duvet in the shared bedroom.

Back to reality: Millie seemed melancholy about life on the outside and said: 'But it's mad, you live so faraway,' referring to Liam living in Wales - over 250 miles away from her home in Essex

At the last recoupling, she took him back, but held off from getting too close to him until now, with the pair getting amorous under the sheets.

Millie decided to give Liam a 'second chance' and previously said of her decision: 'I've liked him from the start, even thought he mugged me off into the next century, but I knew when he came back from Casa Amor there was still something there.

'But I'm excited to give him a second chance, and hopefully your actions and words are loud enough.'

Liam had pulled out all the stops to win Millie back, sending her romantic texts, leaving love notes in her bed and delivering a romantic speech on stage in front of their fellow islanders.

Love is in the air: In the Beach Hut, Liam admitted: 'I think when you know you know and I definitely, definitely know'

Elsewhere on Friday night's episode, Jake Cornish finally told Liberty Poole he loved her after she confronted him over his true feelings for her.

In recent days, Liberty has questioned Jake's genuineness over their romance, with her doubts heightened in the latest challenge in which they were voted the couple with the most one-sided relationship.

And after a candid make-or-break conversation, Jake finally said those three little words four weeks after Liberty first uttered them, but viewers at home were not convinced and accused him of saying 'what she wants to hear'.

Declaration: Friday night's episode also saw Jake Cornish finally tell Liberty Poole he loved her after she confronted him over his true feelings for her

Sitting him down on the roof terrace, Liberty was determined to hear Jake's real feelings for her once and for all and questioned him on why he hadn't said 'I love you' despite her saying it a month previously.

She also confronted him on how much he actually liked her and how much was him playing up to the cameras, while she claimed she didn't want to feel like a 'mug' if their relationship was one-sided.

Arguing his point, Jake said that he didn't want to 'throw out' the words 'I love you' and said that making her his girlfriend meant more than him saying it.

Other islanders began to question their relationship, with Faye telling beau Teddy that she believed the water engineer was a 'showman'.

She told him that he only did the whole 'girlfriend thing' because 'he's a showman', before telling Teddy: 'I promise that they won’t work on the outside’.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rita Ora showcased her incredible physique in a white bikini for an Instagram post showing a sneak peak of her latest music video on Friday.

The 30-year-old singer set pulses racing in a clip from her collaboration with Sigala called You For Me, as she donned a black bustier and sexy red lipstick in another sultry shot.

Shooting by a pool in Los Angeles, her blonde hair was styled in a Hollywood glam look, as it was parted to the side and in big soft waves.

Wow! Rita Ora, 30, looked in high spirits as she danced in a white bikini and had her make up done in an Instagram post showing a sneak peak of her latest music video on Friday

Happy: Rita seemed delighted with the sun soaked video, captioning the social media post: 'I absolutely loved filming the video for #YouForMe in LA!! I loved working with these women'

Rita seemed delighted with the sun soaked video, captioning the social media post: 'I absolutely loveddddd filming the video for #YouForMe in LA!! I loved working with these women.'

She continued: 'Thank you to the most amazing dancers and director, I hope you guys love seeing how we made it!! Watch the behind the scenes by swiping up on my story.'

Looking stunning, she was later seen in the pool in a red swimming cap with synchronised swimmers in a circle around her.

Sexy: The 30-year-old singer set pulses racing in a clip from her collaboration with Sigala called You For Me, as she donned a black bustier and sexy red lipstick in another sultry shot

Stunning: Shooting by a pool in Los Angeles, her blonde hair was styled in a Hollywood glam style look, as it was parted to the side and in big soft waves

In keeping with the red theme, she looked joyful in a scarlet bikini, which she matched with a slick of red lipstick and cat eye sunglasses.

Taking the Hollywood glam vibe further - she can be seen laying back on a diving board wearing a white bikini, red lipstick and vintage style black sunglasses.

Larking about in the video, she smiled and cheekily pointed the camera as she sang along to the lyrics.

Giving a further glimpse into the making of the video, you can see her discussing logistics with a member of crew underneath a parasol.

Gorgeous: Looking stunning, she was later seen in the pool in a red swimming cap with synchronised swimmers in a circle around her

Lady in red: In keeping with the red theme, she looked joyful in a scarlet bikini, which she matched with a slick of red lipstick and cat eye sunglasses

The post comes after about 1.33 million people tuned in for the first episode of season 10 of The Voice Australia across the five major cities - Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth.

This figure swelled to 1.91 million nationally, when regional viewers were included.

The singing competition almost doubled the metro audience of Nine's The Block (747,000 viewers) and also blitzed 10's Australian Survivor (609,000).

Fans: The sun drenched video, which saw her dancing in the pool, was shared with her 16 million followers

Having a blast: Larking about in the video, she smiled and cheekily pointed the camera as she sang along to the lyrics

The Voice is hosted by Sonia Kruger this year, and its coaching panel comprises Rita Ora, Guy Sebastian, Jessica Mauboy and Keith Urban.

Rita recently gushed about her fans' reaction to her debut on The Voice Australia while working her best angles in a series of smouldering selfies.

The songstress wrote: 'Thank you all so much for the love. I'm so glad you're all loving @thevoiceau there is so much talent i can't wait for you to see!'

She added: 'Love my Australian Rita Bots so much !!!! Can't wait to go back.'

Beautiful: Taking the Hollywood glam vibe further - she can be seen laying back on a diving board wearing a white bikini, red lipstick and vintage style black sunglasses

Running the job: Giving a further glimpse into the making of the video, you can see her discussing logistics with a member of crew underneath a parasol
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They have been spending their recent months in the Big Apple with their baby son.

And Kit Harington showcased his muscular frame in a black tee and shorts on Friday as he and wife Rose Leslie were seen on separate outings in New York.

The former Game Of Thrones star, 34, looked casually stylish in his relaxed outfit while Rosie, 34, slipped into loose-fitting trousers and a striped top.

Handsome chap: Kit Harington showcased his muscular frame in a black tee and shorts on Friday as he and wife Rose Leslie were seen on separate outings in New York

Kit's snug navy shorts highlighted his defined legs and he completed the look with white trainers and sunglasses.

Elsewhere, Rosie teamed her laid-back outfit with a canvas tote and open-toe sandals.

Her wavy auburn tresses were swept over in a side-part and she opted for minimal make-up.

The outing comes after Kit spoke about surviving alcoholism and depression in a candid interview with The Sunday Times last week.

Staying comfortable: The former Game Of Thrones star, 34, looked casually stylish in his relaxed outfit while Rosie, 34, slipped into loose-fitting trousers and a striped top

Smart: Kit's snug navy shorts highlighted his defined legs and he completed the look with white trainers and sunglasses

The actor said he 'went through some pretty horrible stuff' in the years since the fantasy drama series, Game Of Thrones, ended in 2019.

Kit, who has been sober for two-and-a-half years following a stint in rehab, revealed that while he is now 'very happy' and 'content', he once battled suicidal thoughts.

'I went through some pretty horrible stuff,' Christopher, who goes by the moniker Kit, said.

'Things that have happened to me since Thrones ended, and that were happening during Thrones, were of a pretty traumatic nature and they did include alcohol,' he revealed.

Kit went on to describe his experience of hitting rock bottom, that resulted in a stint in rehab at the Privé-Swiss retreat in Connecticut, costing £95,000 a month.

On the go: He was seen out-and-about in the Big Apple

Caffeine boost: Elsewhere, Rosie teamed her laid-back outfit with a canvas tote and open-toe sandals as she was seen entering a vehicle with a coffee cup in her hand

First-time parents: Kit and his actress wife Rose confirmed the arrival of their baby boy in February but have not revealed his name (pictured in April 2019)

When asked by the publication whether he ever contemplated suicide, Kit reportedly hesitated before saying: 'The answer is yes. Yes of course. I went through periods of real depression where I wanted to do all sorts of things.'

Kit said he hopes his comments will help others suffering, and admitted to being very 'secretive' about his addictions.

'I will say about my addictions that I kept them very, very quiet and I was incredibly secretive and incredibly locked up with them,' he confessed.

Kit and his actress wife Rose confirmed the arrival of their baby boy in February but have not revealed his name.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Angelina Jolie was seen out on a shopping trip with her son Pax in Beverly Hills on Friday afternoon.

The 46-year-old actress and her son, aged 17, strolled close to one another while pounding the pavement, before making their way around an eyewear store.

The performer is a mother to a total of six children, all of whom she co-parents with her former husband, Brad Pitt.

Sharing the experience: Angelina Jolie was seen stepping out on a shopping trip with her son Pax in Beverly Hills on Friday afternoon

Jolie was dressed in a sleek gray long-sleeve t-shirt during her outing with her son.

The actress also sported a pair of black pleated pants that paired well with her top.

She carried a light brown bag on her right arm and wore a near-matching set of high-heeled shoes during the outing.

Her lovely brunette locks cascaded onto her shoulders and the nape of her neck as she shopped around for sunglasses.

Dressed to impress: The actress wore a sleek gray long-sleeve t-shirt and a pair of pleated black pants during the shopping trip

Jolie and Pax wore matching black facial coverings to keep themselves protected from COVID-19 during their time outside.

The Salt star adopted her first child, Maddox, currently aged 18, in 2002 when he was just a year old.

At the time, she was married to Billy Bob Thornton but the pair ultimately separated in 2003, and she brought up her son by herself.

She went on to bring a daughter named Zahara, aged 16, into her life in 2005.

Working it out: Jolie shares Pax, as well as her other children, with her former husband Brad Pitt, with whom she is currently involved in a custody battle; they are seen with several of their kids in 2009

Jolie began dating Brad Pitt that year after the two met on the set of Mr. & Mrs. Smith, although they did not make their relationship public until 2006.

That year, the Lara Croft: Tomb Raider star announced that she was pregnant with the couple's first child, and she later gave birth to a girl named Shiloh, aged 15, that May.

In 2007, the actress adopted Pax, whom she first encountered during a trip to an orphanage in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.

The following year, Jolie and Pitt, 57, welcomed a pair of twins named Knox and Vivienne, both aged 13.

Starting a family: Pitt and Jolie met on the set of Mr. & Mrs. Smith and began dating in 2006, after which they welcomed and conceived several children; they are seen in 2011

The couple eventually became engaged in 2012 and tied the knot in 2014, but their marriage suddenly came to an end two years after it started.

The two began a lengthy custody battle upon their separation, and a tentative agreement concerning their children's welfare was reached in 2018.

Their legal proceedings eventually became acrimonious, with Jolie alleging that the judge in charge of the case had an agreement with Pitt's lawyer.

This past May, the Fight Club star was granted joint custody of the children, much to the consternation of his former partner.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Rugby Union ace Ugo Monye is confirmed as the 15th and final contestant for the upcoming series of Strictly Come Dancing, completing the star-studded line-up which includes Tom Fletcher, Coronation Street's Katie McGlynn, Tilly Ramsay and EastEnders' Nina Wadia.

The broadcaster and sports pundit, 38, will be competing in the 19th series of the iconic dancing competition which returns this autumn on Saturday and Sunday evenings.

Ugo is preparing to put his dancing skills to the test on the glamorous ballroom floor in front of judges Craig Revel Horwood, Motsi Mabuse, Shirley Ballas and Bruno Tonioli's replacement Anton Du Beke.

Last but not least! Rugby ace Ugo Monye is confirmed as the 15th and final contestant for the upcoming series of Strictly Come Dancing, completing the line-up which includes Tom Fletcher, Coronation Street's Katie McGlynn , Tilly Ramsay and EastEnders' Nina Wadia

Commenting on his opportunity to star in Strictly, he said in an official statement: 'What a dream come true! Strictly is the biggest entertainment show on TV and I can’t wait to show everyone I’ve got more than just dad dancing moves.

'My two beautiful daughters never had a chance to see me on the rugby pitch, so to know they can watch me waltzing and twirling every week is really special to me. I love an outfit at the best of times, so bring on the sequins!'

Beginning his rugby career at Harlequins in 2002, Ugo went on to make 241 appearances for the club where he scored 89 tries, won a Premiership and made his England debut in 2008.

Since retiring from rugby in 2015, Ugo has become a respected face and voice in the world of sports presenting, hosting rugby coverage for BT Sport and ITV as well as the BBC 5 Live Rugby Union Weekly podcast.

Debut: The broadcaster and sports pundit, 38, will be competing in the 19th series of the iconic dancing competition which returns this autumn on Saturday and Sunday evenings (pictured in 2010)

In July 2021, it was announced that Ugo would be one of the new team Captains on BBC One's A Question of Sport. He was recently named the first ever Chairman of England Rugby’s new Diversity and Inclusion committee.

The athlete is the father to daughters Ruby, 18 months, and Phoenix, four, whom he shares with his wife Lucy Monye.

Ugo will be vying for the Glitterball Trophy against 14 contestants including McFly's Tom, 36, Peep Show actor Robert Webb, 48, and presenter AJ Odudu, 33, who were revealed as the first three participants on last Wednesday's edition of The One Show.

Tom has big shoes to fill on Strictly. His McFly bandmate Harry Judd won the show in 2011, and Tom's wife Giovanna Fletcher is the reigning champion of I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here!

Man of many talents: Since retiring from rugby in 2015, Ugo has become a respected face and voice in the world of sports presenting, hosting rugby coverage for BT Sport and ITV as well as the BBC 5 Live Rugby Union Weekly podcast

Sweet: 'My two beautiful daughters never had a chance to see me on the rugby pitch, so to know they can watch me waltzing and twirling every week,' the athlete said, who is is the father to Ruby, 18 months, and Phoenix, four, with wife Lucy Monye

Robert is sure to feel the pressure too, after he squeezed into a shiny leotard to take the title of Let's Dance For Comic Relief in 2009, performing What A Feeling from '80s film Flashdance, beating the likes of Keith Lemon and Paddy McGuinness to the title.

2021 has been a busy year for AJ who has featured on 14 TV shows, including Cooking With The Stars and Celebrity Karaoke Club. She has also appeared as a panellist on Strictly Come Dancing: It Takes Two in the past.

Tom was the first celebrity announced on the BBC programme and said: 'I'm so pleased the news is out it's been so hard keeping it secret.'

Adding he has known he would be taking part since last Christmas, he said he is: 'Equal parts excited and terrified. I feel naked without a guitar I'm so used to having a guitar on stage.'

Competition: Ugo will be vying for the Glitterball Trophy against 14 contestants including McFly's Tom, 36 (pictured left)

The pop star also revealed that McFly bandmate Harry has already been giving him plenty of advice.

He said: 'I can't shut Harry up about Strictly. He's been giving me loads of advice already. I watched him every week. It was party watching him doing that and seeing what an amazing experience he had. Since then I've had a secret desire to do it.'

In a separate statement, Tom added: 'I think the fact that I'm actually going to be dancing on Strictly this year has only just started to sink in while I'm writing this! I'm incredibly excited, of course, but also totally terrified!

'My kids were excited too until I started showing them my best dad-dancing in the kitchen. I'm not sure how far they'll get me in the competition but I can't wait to add some new moves to my embarrassing dad-dancing repertoire.'

During The One Show when Tom was confirmed as a contestant, presenter Alex Jones read out a playful message from Harry that said: 'I'm so pleased [Tom] is doing Strictly it's win win for me.

Big shoes to fill! Tom's McFly bandmate Harry Judd won Strictly n 2011 (L) while Robert is sure to feel the pressure too, after he squeezed into a shiny leotard to take the title of Let's Dance For Comic Relief in 2009, performing What A Feeling from '80s film Flashdance (R)

Music and dancing: Tom is one quarter of boy band McFly (pictured in July with Dougie Poynter and Danny Jones) and he is married to Giovanna Fletcher who is the reigning champion of I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here!

Excited: Tom was the first celebrity announced on the BBC programme and he said: 'I'm so pleased the news is out it's been so hard keeping it secret'

'If he wins it's great because he's my mate and I'll be happy for him, but if he doesn't, even better 'cause I can remind him who did.'

Robert was the next star announced, along with a hilarious clip of his 2009 Comic Relief performance.

The actor echoed the sentiments of Tom, admitting: 'It's very exciting but with a slight undertone of quivering terror.'

Robert had life-saving heart surgery last year after it was discovered he was suffering from a heart murmur caused by a mitral valve prolapse.

Anticipation: In a separate statement, Tom added: 'I think the fact that I'm actually going to be dancing on Strictly this year has only just started to sink in while I'm writing this! I'm incredibly excited, of course, but also totally terrified!'

'Undertone of terror': Robert was the next star announced, along with a hilarious clip of his 2009 Comic Relief performance

Dream team: He is best known for starring in the Channel 4 comedy Peep Show alongside David Mitchell (right)

He said the health scare made him want to take on more challenges as he told host Alex: 'You get to a point in life where you think it's not a time to be cool. These experiences don't come along often in life. If you can do series 19 of Strictly, do!'

In a statement he added: 'My goal is to try and survive from week to week without causing serious injury to myself or innocent bystanders. I know it's going to be a challenge. To do well in this competition is a test of character, although mainly it's a test of dancing.'

AJ was the third contestant announced on the show and she told how she kept her participation in the series a secret from her mother Florence, who was watching at home.

AJ said: 'The secret's out at last, surprise mum! She didn't know, she's at home at mine fuming I've dragged her all the way to London and she was like, "You said we were hanging out and now you're going out."

Overjoyed: AJ was the third contestant announced on The One Show and told how she kept her participation in the series a secret from her mother Florence, who was watching at home

Another mountain to climb: The presenter has previously faced her fears on SAS: Who Dares Wins (pictured) and she reckons the Strictly dancefloor will present its own unique set of challenges

'She's going to be watching now, absolutely beside herself. I can't tell you how much we love the show. I've got seven siblings and you know how parents say they don't have a favourite child, this is favourite child vibes right here. I'm not incredibly competitive, I just want to do my very best.'

The presenter has previously faced her fears on SAS: Who Dares Wins and she reckons the Strictly dancefloor will present its own unique set of challenges.

She said: 'It's not climbing a literal mountain but I think it's going to be really challenging. I can't wait for the sequins, the wigs, the glitz and the glamour.'

On Thursday, Great British Bake Off winner John Whaite, 33, was confirmed for the dancing competition and he will form one-half of the show's first all-male partnership.

Breaking boundaries: On Thursday, Great British Bake Off winner John Whaite , 33, was confirmed for Strictly and he will form one-half of the show's first all-male partnership

Yay! After the announcement, he took to Instagram to tearfully celebrate the news: ‘Oh my god, you guys, there’s so many nice messages already and I’ve only just come off-air and I’m actually crying real tears because of how nice you’re all being'

After much controversy during the show's 17 year run over the prospect of a same-sex pairing, Strictly is finally addressing the call for change with John delightedly praising the 'great step forward in representation and inclusion'.

He said in a statement: 'What's exciting for me, is that I'm going to be one half of the first all-male partnership, which is a great step forward in representation and inclusion.'

He went on: 'I'm so grateful, excited, and nervous to be joining the Strictly family...

'I've been wearing sequins and jazzy attire since I was three years old and can't wait to hurl myself, full throttle, around the most glamorous dancefloor on earth...

Back then: John won the third series of The Great British Bake Off, in 2012, at the age of 23 (pictured in 2016)

'Whoever it is I'm paired with, I hope they are up for a challenge as I want our routines to include lots of spectacular lifts!'

John later took to Instagram to thank fans for their support, as he broke down in tears while talking into the camera.

He said: ‘Oh my god, you guys, there’s so many nice messages already and I’ve only just come off-air and I’m actually crying real tears because of how nice you’re all being....

'I’m so excited to be on Strictly, it’s a dream come true and it’s even more of a dream to be doing the first all-male partnership and I hope that there are kids watching who look up and think, “It’s okay to be who you are”.

Natural performer: Presenter Rhys Stephenson, 27, who is best known as the face of children's television channel CBBC, will join the celebrities in this year's line-up

‘So thanks for all the messages, I’m going back to bed, lots of love!’

John won the third series of The Great British Bake Off, in 2012, at the age of 23. John has also presented various TV shows and currently has a weekly cooking segment on Steph's Packed Lunch.

Presenter Rhys Stephenson, 27, who is best known as the face of children's television channel CBBC, will join the celebrities in this year's line-up.

The TV star revealed his signing on Newsround on Friday where he said he is 'buzzing' to be a part of Strictly and 'can't wait' to start rehearsals.

She means business: Meanwhile Dragons' Den's Sara Davies , 37, will try to dazzle on the dancefloor as she was revealed as the sixth Strictly Come Dancing star on Monday - joking that she can't wait to see the impact of training on her 'mum tum'

He commented: 'I have dreamt about being on this show, and I know for a fact that it is going to exceed every expectation.

'I cannot wait to experience it all: the costumes, the orchestra, even Craig's glare. I am ready.'

As well as presenting CBBC live, Rhys has also presented some of the biggest shows across the CBBC slate, including Blue Peter and Saturday Mash-Up! He has also appeared on The Dengineers and Newsround.

Meanwhile Dragons' Den's Sara Davies, 37, will try to dazzle on the dancefloor as she was revealed as the sixth Strictly Come Dancing star on Monday - joking that she can't wait to see the impact of training on her 'mum tum'.

Speaking about the show on Good Morning Britain on Monday, Sara said: 'My Mam and Dad are going to be so excited. I'm really nervous because so far the producers keep asking me if I can dance.

Plenty to smile about: Speaking about the show on Good Morning Britain on Monday, Sara said: 'My Mam and Dad are going to be so excited. I'm really nervous because so far the producers keep asking me if I can dance

From the boardroom to the ballroom! Sara was the youngest ever dragon on the panel of entrepreneurs on BBC show (pictured) Dragons' Den, when she joined in 2019.

'Truth be told – I haven't got a clue! I've not danced since I did ballet lessons when I was little. The business world has taught me that tenacity, drive and determination deliver results, I hope that I can bring that to the dancefloor.

'And I'm excited to see the impact of all those hours of training on my mum tum.'

Sara was the youngest ever dragon on the panel of entrepreneurs on BBC show Dragons' Den, when she joined in 2019.

Meanwhile Former Coronation Street actress Katie, 27, and journalist Dan Walker, 44, were announced as additional stars for the 2021 line-up on Tuesday in a surprise double announcement.

Katie confessed during Tuesday's BBC Breakfast: 'It's been so hard keeping it a secret, but I can finally say that I'm getting ready to shake my shimmy and become part of the Strictly family!

Revealed: Actress Katie, 27, (left) and journalist Dan Walker, 44, (right) were announced as additional stars for the 2021 line-up on Tuesday in a surprise double announcement

'I'm really not a dancer, but I'm so excited to learn a new skill on this crazy journey and cannot wait to slip into some sequins along the way.

'Although I do get to have so much fun as an actress, a lot of my roles have involved quite serious and challenging storylines, so I'm fully ready to let my hair down and do something different, even if it is completely outside of my comfort zone.

'I can't promise that I'll be the best, but I'm going to give it 110 per cent on the dance floor! As long as I don't fall over I'll be happy.'

Katie is best known for her role as Sinead Tinker in Coronation Street, for which she was BAFTA nominated and won a National Television Award for Best Serial Drama Performance in 2020.

The actress was also a regular in Waterloo Road and she appeared in BBC One dramas The Syndicate and Moving On. She currently stars in Hollyoaks as mysterious newcomer Becky Quentin.

While Dan, who recently quit Football Focus after 12 years at the helm, appeared via video on BBC Breakfast for the big reveal as he was on holiday after presenting the Olympics in Tokyo.

Bring it on: Katie admitted on the daytime programme that she's 'really not a dancer' but is so excited to learn a 'new skill'

Thespian: The star is best known for her role as Sinead Tinker in Corrie, for which she was BAFTA nominated and won a National Television Award for Best Serial Drama Performance in 2020 (pictured on the soap in 2019)

He said: 'I only told my kids last weekend so they're not very happy with me either, hardly anyone has been in the circle. I'm very sorry I was told it would make great telly if I didn't tell you Louise! [Minchin, his co-presenter]'

Dan continued: 'My 20 years of contemporary dance training are helpful! I'm one of those people I've danced at three weddings and two school discos.

'I'm enjoying the experience when it starts of actually learning to dance. I'll be honest I'm not making room on any shelves in my house for the Glitterball.'

And turning his attention to his mystery pro-partner and getting on the dancefloor, Dan said: 'I will accept anyone if they will accept me!

'I'm 6ft 6 so the question often asked is can anyone that tall look half decent on the television when trying to dance, just anyone who is tall enough, and doesn't mind the odd stray elbow in the back.'

Also, Matilda 'Tilly' Ramsay- who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - is set to make her dancing debut on the BBC show.

Exciting news: Dan appeared via video on BBC Breakfast - much to the surprise of Katie - for the big reveal because he was on holiday after presenting the Olympics in Tokyo

She was unveiled as the ninth contestant during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and her famous father also made a cameo on the daytime programme as he recorded a clip to show to her.

In the video, Gordon, 54, cheekily warned Tilly, 19, not to date any of the dancers, while Tilly admitted she was 'terrified' of the challenge that lies ahead.

Tilly revealed she'll be fitting in her appearance on the show around her studies, as she starts university in September, but said she's 'excited for the challenge' of making it all work.

Speaking on the show, Tilly said: 'It's slightly terrifying. Obviously my mum and dad knew. I've tried dancing when I was younger, ballet and stuff, but I wasn't very good so I moved to football camp.

'Remembering choreography terrifies me. I'm looking forward to the glitz and the glamour, and learning something new - that's always fun.'

Put on her dancing shoes: Also, Matilda 'Tilly', 19 - who is the daughter of chef Gordon Ramsay - is set to make her dancing debut on the BBC show

Famous face: She was unveiled as the ninth contestant during Wednesday's episode of This Morning and her famous father also made a cameo on the daytime programme as he recorded a clip to show to her

This Morning hosts Eammon Holmes and Ruth Langsford then surprised Tilly with a video message from her parents, in which dad Gordon said: 'Wishing you all the very best. Proud of you girl.'

Tilly's mum Tana then quipped, 'Glad it's her and not you [Gordon]. Tilly you're incredibly brave. Good luck,' before Gordon jumped in to warn: 'And don't date those dancers!'

Tilly often shares dancing videos with her dad on TikTok and said she believes Gordon secretly wants to take part in Strictly, but he would be 'too scared' to go through with it.

She said: 'I think he does, but I think he'd be too scared to. Trust me when I say he's not the best dancer. Sorry, dad!'

Tilly commented in an additional statement: 'I’m so excited and grateful to be joining the Strictly family! I’m always up for fun new challenges and this will be my biggest adventure yet!

'I’m going to put my heart and soul into this and can’t wait to get my dancing shoes on and show my dad how it’s really done! Bring on the glitz, glamour and sequins!'

Sweet: This Morning hosts Eammon Holmes and Ruth Langsford then surprised Tilly with a video message from her parents, in which dad Gordon said: 'Wishing you all the very best' and told her not to date any of the dancers

After the announcement, Gordon took to Instagram to gush: ' So proud of this one @tillyramsay youngest dancer ever ! good luck darling❤️ @bbcstrictly'.

Chef, social media influencer and TV presenter Tilly has amassed over 9.5 million followers on TikTok. She presented Matilda and the Ramsay Bunch on CBBC, which saw her cooking and having adventures along with her family, for which she received three Children’s BAFTA nominations.

In 2017 she published her first cookery book, inspired by the show, titled: Matilda & The Ramsay Bunch: Tilly's Kitchen Takeover.

Tilly and Gordon also host a regular cooking item on This Morning named Big Chef Little Chef.

Greg Wise will be swapping acting for dancing on the upcoming series of Strictly as he was confirmed as the tenth participant on Wednesday.

The Sense And Sensibility actor, 55, revealed he finally decided to sign-up to the show to honour the five year anniversary of his sister Clare's death from cancer.

Like father like daughter: Tilly often shares dancing videos with her dad on TikTok and said she believes Gordon secretly wants to take part in Strictly, but he would be 'too scared' to go through with it (pictured together in a throwback)

Duo: Tilly and Gordon also host a regular cooking item on This Morning named Big Chef Little Chef, and they previously appeared together on the junior edition of MasterChef in America (pictured)

Speaking about his motivation, Greg - who is married to actress Emma Thompson - explained on This Morning: 'Clare was a huge disco diva and we sent her out of this life in a disco ball coffin to banging 80s music.'

He continued: 'She's prodding me massively to do it. Clare will enjoy watching her little brother do it. She'll be sitting on my left or right shoulder depending on how well I'm doing.'

Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013 and started a witty and heartfelt blog detailing her battle with the disease.

She was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015, the disease was discovered by doctors in her bones and she was told it was incurable. There were tumours in her arms, ribs, spine and skull.

Greg cancelled a family holiday in Greece and moved into his sister Clare’s London flat in the final three months of her life, in order to be her full-time carer. She tragically passed away in 2016 aged 51.

On the night she died, the actor wiped her face, told her he loved her and gave her permission to go when she wanted. She died one minute later, holding his hand.

Ready for action: Greg Wise, 55, will be swapping acting for dancing on the upcoming series as he was confirmed as the tenth participant on Wednesday

Greg is known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown, Cranford, Walking On Sunshine and his breakout role in Sense And Sensibility.

Meanwhile former EastEnders actress Nina, 52, admitted on Lorraine that the only way she stands a chance of winning Strictly is if she 'blindfolds the judges', as it was announced on Thursday that she will join the show in autumn.

Speaking to stand-in host Christine Lampard on the daytime show, the mother-of-two admitted: 'I am so scared! I like dancing like no one's watching, so we just need to blindfold the judges and I'm going to win!

'I think I should do this before I'm too old and can't walk anymore. I just want to grab life by the horns and just enjoy it.'

Nina added that she was concerned about getting dolled up with all the typical Strictly glamour as she confessed: 'I always been a little bit of a tomboy so this is going to be a little bit of a struggle with me, the sequins and tanning - which makes me laugh because I'm Indian!'

Tragic: The Sense And Sensibility actor, 55, revealed he finally decided to sign-up to the show to honour the five year anniversary of his sister Clare's death from cancer (pictured in 2013)

Cute couple: Greg appeared on This Morning to talk about Strictly and said that his wife Emma Thompson was 'stupidly excited' that he would be appearing on the show (pictured in 2020)

Discussing her fellow contestants she revealed she's already guessed a winner, saying: 'I love Robert Webb and I think he's amazing.

'I'd want to vote for him and when I saw him do his flash dance for Comic Relief I thought no one can top that!'

Nina concluded: 'It's been a bit of a tough ride for a couple of years so I think its time we can go into fantasy land. I don't even mind if people laugh at me, I just want people to laugh!'

She is best known for playing Zainab Masood in EastEnders, where she won Best Onscreen Partnership and Best Comedy at the British Soap Awards, before leaving the soap in 2013.

The actress also had starring roles in Goodness Gracious Me and the Open All Hours spin-off Still Open All Hours.

Fellow EastEnders actress Rose Ayling-Ellis, 30, will make history as the first deaf contestant to take part in Strictly after she was confirmed as a contestant on Thursday night, just hours after her former co-star Nina.

One to watch: Greg is an actor known for his various film, television and theatre roles, including The Crown (pictured) Cranford and his breakout role in Sense And Sensibility

Sense of humour: Meanwhile former EastEnders actress Nina, 52, admitted on Lorraine that the only way she stands a chance of winning Strictly is if she 'blindfolds the judges', as it was announced on Thursday that she will join the show in autumn

The actress, 30, who plays Frankie Lewis, said she hopes by taking part in Strictly, that she will 'break down barriers' for the deaf community.

'To be the first deaf contestant on Strictly Come Dancing is sooooo exciting.. and a little bit scary,' Rose said in a statement.

'It is the hardest secret I have ever had to keep so it feels amazing to finally have this out in the open.

'I hope I will do the deaf community proud and break down more barriers. But I am also very excited to learn an incredible new skill and even better I get to learn whilst wearing beautiful dresses made especially for me.'

Will Bayley, JJ Chalmers and Lauren Steadman have also starred in the show in previous years while raising awareness for disabilities.

Rose is the first ever deaf actor to play a deaf character on EastEnders. She has previously appeared in various stage productions, and her other TV credits include Summer Of Rockets and Casualty. Rose uses British Sign Language (BSL) to communicate.

Quip: Speaking to stand-in host Christine Lampard on the daytime show, the mother-of-two admitted: 'I am so scared! I like dancing like no one's watching, so we just need to blindfold the judges and I'm going to win!'

One to watch: The actress is best known for playing Zainab Masood in EastEnders , where she won Best Onscreen Partnership and Best Comedy at the British Soap Awards, before leaving the soap in 2013

Rounding off the cast for the 2021 series, Olympic swimmer Adam Peaty MBE, 26, and Loose Women panellist Judi Love, 41, were both unveiled on Friday as the 13th and 14th contestants.

Adam was announced first as he appeared on BBC Radio 1's Newsbeat and admitted he's 'bricking it', despite being used to performing under intense pressure.

The athlete just returned from the Tokyo 2020 games, where he made history by becoming the first British swimmer to defend an Olympic title, after claiming gold at the Rio 2016 Olympics and Tokyo 2020 in the Men's 100m Breaststroke.

Now the swimmer is taking on a new challenge and is hoping his competitive nature will serve him well on the dancefloor.

Adam said in a statement: 'I think this will come as a surprise to a lot of people, but I'm so excited to finally share the news that I'll be joining Strictly this year.

'I'm really looking forward to doing something totally different and challenging myself away from the pool. I'm hoping my competitive nature is going to compensate for my dancing abilities!'

Star-studded: Fellow EastEnders actress Rose Ayling-Ellis , 30, will make history as the first deaf contestant to take part in Strictly after she was confirmed as a contestant on Thursday night, just hours after her former co-star Nina

Twinkle toes: The actress, 30, who plays Frankie Lewis (pictured on EastEnders), said she hopes by taking part in Strictly, that she will 'break down barriers' for the deaf community

Speaking on Newsbeat Adam, he added: 'I've swam for seven years and I've gone through the constant cycle of championship, back to back to training, go back to the drawing board, another championship… but I've never been truly uncomfortable.

'This is going to be very interesting, I'm going to be very uncomfortable!'

He continued: 'The best way about this way and this path is that if I take too much time out of physical training, I get fat, I get big, I have too much muscle on, whereas Strictly is going to keep me fit, it's a change of stimulus.

'I'm going to do something I've never done before, and hopefully have a lot of fun. He added that 'very few' people knew about his signing, including his mum.

Meanwhile Judi was revealed as the next contestant live on Loose Women. During the announcement on the show, she said: 'I don't have any moves yet. I'm so nervous it's so out of comfort zone, but what an opportunity to learn a new skill.

Dancing shoes: Rounding off the cast for the 2021 series, Olympic swimmer Adam Peaty MBE, 26, and Loose Women panellist Judi Love, 41, were both unveiled on Friday as the 13th and 14th contestants

Champion: The athlete is taking on a new challenge and is hoping his competitive nature will serve him well on the dancefloor

'I've known a few weeks. My friends were asking who it was but I couldn't say anything. I'm overwhelmed with excitement.'

Commenting on who she would like her professional partner to be, she remarked: 'I don't know his name but the one with long hair I'd like to be paired with. This is something very new for you I am thrilled.'

Judi then rang her mum Kelly live on-air who congratulated her. The comedian said in an additional statement: 'I think I am still in shock that I will be part of this amazing show.

'I’ve watched it for many years and admired the phenomenal abilities of these dancers and celebrities that have taken part and dedicated themselves to learning a new craft.

'I’m truly looking forward to pushing myself in something that I could have only dreamed of doing and now it’s actually coming true! I can’t lie I’m soooo nervous but excited at the same time!'

Judi began her career in stand-up comedy in 2011 and joined Loose Women as a panellist in 2020. She also starred on Celebrity MasterChef last year and made it through to the finals.

Dancing shoes: Meanwhile Judi was revealed as the next contestant live on Loose Women

New contestant: During the announcement on the show, she said: 'I don't have any moves yet. I'm so nervous it's so out of comfort zone, but what an opportunity to learn a new skill'

In demand: Judi began her career in stand-up comedy in 2011 and joined Loose Women as a panellist in 2020. She also starred on Celebrity MasterChef last year and made it through to the finals
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Khloe Kardashian shared several new pinup images while in purple gym clothes to her Instagram page on Friday morning.

But there was something different about the 37-year-old TV star in this batch of images: her normally stick straight highlighted locks were now in loose, puffy curls.

The mother to True Thompson, three, explained this is her natural hair texture which she has been taming for years to play the part of a glamour queen.

Haute stuff in the gym: Khloe Kardashian shared several new pinup images while in purple gym clothes to her Instagram page on Friday morning

The way she was: But there was something different about the 37-year-old TV star in this batch of images: her normally stick straight highlighted locks were now in loose curls. Seen with her curls as a kid with sister Kim

Her basketball star ex Tristan Thompson left heart emojis after her post. Sister Kendall Jenner added, 'I love your natural hair.'

With straight hair Khloe more closely resembles her older sisters Kim, 40, and Kourtney, 42, Kardashian.

'I've been getting Straightening treatments on my hair for years,' explained the Calabasas, California native who became famous in 2007 with Keeping Up With The Kardashians. She was only 23-years-old at the time.

The fitness author added an emoji of a woman face palming.

Khloe then shared she 'stopped' getting straightening treatments on her hair 'because of Covid.'

Curls vs no curls: The siren has said that she has been straightening her hair since she was a teenager. On the left, her natural hair, on the right, her ironed mane

The TV star has been on lockdown on and off after contracting the virus in early 2020.

'I actually kind a like my curls,' said the ex wife of Lamar Odom as she added a purple heart emoji.

And the Revenge Body host also shared a black-and-white image of herself as a child in her fancy dress with her natural curls on display as she added a bow to her hair.

Trying to fit in: The mother to True Thompson explained this is her natural hair texture which she has been taming for years to fill the mold of a glamour queen

Her truth: 'I've been getting Straightening treatments on my hair for years,' explained the ex of basketball star Tristan Thompson. And the Revenge Body host also shared a black-and-white image of herself as a child in her fancy dress with her natural curls on display as she added a bow to her hair

Khloe has been trolled for years for not having the same looks as her sisters Kim and Kourtney. Not only is her hair curly while theirs is not, but she is also about 6 inches taller than either one.

Kourtney is 5ft1in and Kim is 5ft3in while Khloe is an impressive supermodel height of 5ft10in which is the same height as Kendall Jenner.

Khloe has also been accused of having a father that is not the late attorney Robert Kardashian. Some have said her real dad is OJ Simpson or Alex Rodnan.

Honest Koko: The fitness author added an emoji of a woman face palming. Khloe then shared she 'stopped' getting straightening treatments on her hair 'because of Covid'

A new approach: The TV star has been on lockdown on and off after contracting the virus in early 2020. 'I actually kind a like my curls,' said the ex wife of Lamar Odom as she added a purple heart emoji

A fan: Her basketball star ex Tristan Thompson left heart emojis after her post. Seen in April

He really hearts his ex: There were three heart-eyed smiley faces and two red hearts

But the Good American designer put an end to those rumours when she revealed the results of the family's 23andMe tests. It confirmed that sisters Kourtney, Kim and Khloe all had the same father.

Kendall and Kylie's dad is Caitlyn Jenner.

This post comes after Khloe said she regrets obsessing about the 'expectations' of other people.

The star admits she was guilty of trying too hard to impress other people - rather than pleasing herself - during her younger years.

Different look than the others: Khloe has been trolled for years for not having the same looks as her sisters Kim and Kourtney

Got it: Not only is her hair curly while theirs is not, but she is also about 6 inches taller than either one. Kourtney is 5ft1in and Kim is 5ft3in while Khloe is an impressive supermodel height of 5ft10in which is the same height as Kendall Jenner

NOPE: Khloe has also been accused of having a father that is not the late attorney Robert Kardashian. Some have said her real dad is OJ Simpson or Alex Rodnan. But she has said no

Asked what advice she would give to her younger self, Khloe wrote on Twitter: 'I have so much advice to give to my past self but 1thing would be live for yourself. Try not to live up to every1 else's expectations especially when they don't live that way. Focus on making yourself happy. The rest is too much pressure &probably won't matter in the grand scheme.'

Khloe previously admitted to feeling self-conscious about her appearance.

The Keeping Up With the Kardashians star recalled being told repeatedly that she couldn't change the way she looked.

The straight trend: From left, Kris, Kylie, Khloe, Kim, Kourtney and Kendall all with straight hair

She shared: 'I was always told that I could never be a certain size or that I could never look a certain way and that really got to me.

'I started to believe what everybody else told me. But then one day something inside of me didn't want to be defined by somebody else's perception or vision of me.'

Khloe confessed to being particularly insecure about her arms.

The TV star - who is now a big gym enthusiast - explained: 'My arms used to be my biggest insecurity on my body. They would never tone up and they were mushy and fat with absolutely no structure.

'Now I have defined arms and it's almost like my trophy that I'm allowed to show off. It sounds silly but I've worked so hard on being able to feel comfortable wearing a T-shirt or tank
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's set to make his grand return as John James 'Mr. Big' Preston is the much-awaited Sex And The City reboot, titled And Just Like That, which started shooting last month.

And away from his character's often tumultuous relationship with lead character Carrie Bradshaw (Sarah Jessica Parker), actor Chris Noth lives an idyllic home life with his family in Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles.

The film star, 66, lives with Canadian actress wife Tara Wilson, 39, and their two sons Orion, 13, and 18-month-old Keats and often shares glimpses of their lives on Instagram.

Lovely: Away from Mr Big's tumultuous relationship with Sex And The City character Carrie Bradshaw (Sarah Jessica Parker), actor Chris Noth lives an idyllic home life with his family in Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles (pictured with wife Tara Wilson)

Chris met wife Tara, who is 27 years his junior, in 2002, when she was working at The Cutting Room - a New York City bar that the actor co-owns.

The couple went on to have their first son Orion Christopher Wilson in 2008, they went on to marry on the Hawaiian island of Maui in 2012.

The duo went on to have second son Keats in February 2020.

And it's clear family means everything to Chris as he often shares snaps of himself spending quality time with his boys.

His boys: The film star, 66, lives with Canadian actress wife Tara Wilson, 39, and their two sons Orion, 13, and 18-month-old Keats (pictured) and often shares glimpses of their lives on Instagram

Couple: Chris met wife Tara, who is 27 years his junior, in 2002, when she was working at The Cutting Room - a New York City bar that the actor co-owns

Family: The couple went on to have their first son Orion Christopher Wilson in 2008, they went on to marry on the Hawaiian island of Maui in 2012

His Instagram is littered with sweet photos of his little ones, whether it be at their family home, their summer abode in The Berkshires, Massachusetts or on holiday.

A recent images sees little Keats meeting a fireman at the local fire station.

While another sees Chris and Orion sharing a cuddle outside The White House.

Chris also appears to love doing several sporty activities with his eldest, with images of them at baseball and basketball games as well as them enjoying a spot of paintballing.

So cute: The duo went on to have second son Keats in February 2020

That's my boy: And it's clear family means everything to Chris as he often shares snaps of himself spending quality time with his boys

Devoted dad: His Instagram is littered with sweet photos of his little ones, whether it be at their family home, their summer abode in The Berkshires, Massachusetts or on holiday

His world: The TV and film star is devoted to his family and shares glimpse of their lives together

Among the photos is one of pregnant Tara as the actor revealed they were expecting their second child.

He wrote at the time: 'Orion is getting a brother- I better get my a** in shape.'

It comes as the Law & Order star thrilled fans by sharing a snap of himself onscreen wife Sarah Jessica Parker snuggling in bed as they filmed a Sex and the City scene together on Thursday.

'Just like the old days!' captioned the 66-year-old actor, who could be seen smirking sweetly at his 56-year-old costar in the behind-the-scenes snap.

Hello there: A recent images sees little Keats meeting a fireman at the local fire station

Tourists: While another sees Chris and Orion sharing a cuddle outside The White House

Bonding: Chris also appears to love doing several sporty activities with his eldest, with images of them at baseball and basketball games as well as them enjoying a spot of paintballing

Ready for action: The father and son also enjoyed a fun paintballing session together

Baby love: Among the photos is one of pregnant Tara as the actor revealed they were expecting their second child

Sarah, with her eyes closed, grinned in Chris' direction as their bodies remained concealed beneath a cozy white comforter.

Taking to the comment section, Parker joked that their character's Big and Carrie must have 'overslept. Again. X,' alluding the lovers' famously passionate - and often reckless - romance.

Sarah and Chris have been teasing their fans on social media in recent days as they continue to shoot scenes for And Just Like That..., which is set to premiere in late 2021 on HBO Max.

Last Saturday, the Emmy Award-winning actress uploaded a sweet shot of Noth cradling her face in his hands, with the caption: 'These 2. I bet they stay out late tonight.'

Good old days! It comes as the Law & Order star thrilled fans by sharing a snap of himself onscreen wife Sarah Jessica Parker snuggling in bed as they filmed a Sex and the City scene together on Thursday

Whoops! Taking to the comment section, Parker joked that their character's Big and Carrie must have 'overslept. Again. X,' alluding the lovers' famously passionate - and often reckless - romance

Meanwhile, the Law And Order alum shared a candid photo of himself and Sarah that showed her with one arm wrapped around his shoulders.

'Together again!' he exclaimed in the post's caption, which was seen by his 324,000 followers at some point last Saturday.

Wanting to take fans along for the ride on the production of the forthcoming SATC reboot, Parker captured several videos in her glam room as she got ready for another day in front of the camera on Tuesday.

She happened to be preparing to film one of many scenes featuring Noth as her husband M. Big, which was set in the beloved TV couple's NYC abode.

Teasing: Sarah and Chris have been teasing their fans on social media in recent days, with SJP uploading a sweet shot of Noth cradling her face in his hands, with the caption: 'These 2. I bet they stay out late tonight' on Saturday

Familiar: The pose from Saturday's on-set snap looked similar to many tender moments shared between Carrie and Mr. Big throughout the duration of SATC and its respective theatrical films; Sarah and Chris pictured in 2010's Sex and The City 2

On Monday the cast of And Just Like That... was been spotted filming a funeral scene sparking wild speculation about which Sex and the City character will meet their demise.

It was recently reported that a major cast member will be killed off in the revival series and a TikTok video shows extras dressed in black milling around the Wolf Building in New York City.

Fans of the series went into meltdown after the clip was released as they attempt to work out which character will be meeting their maker.

'It will RUIN the show': Sex And The City fans went into meltdown after the reboot cast were seen filming funeral scenes - following claims that a MAJOR character will be killed off

Samantha Jones (Kim Cattrall) and Mr Big (Noth) are among the frontrunners to be killed off while Steve Brady (David Eigenberg) and Magda (Lynn Cohen) have also been tipped to meet a grisly end by fans.

A source close to the show recently teased that 'it is going to be a big death' – suggesting that it could be Mr. Big – the husband of Carrie Bradshaw (Parker).

Other show insiders have suggested that Samantha could die as Kim is not involved in And Just Like That..., turning down the chance to reprise her most famous role.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For confidential support in the US - call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255

For confidential support in the UK - call Samaritans for free on 116 123 or visit www.samaritans.org

Eminem's ex-wife Kim Scott was discovered 'bleeding excessively' in her bathroom after her suicide attempt, a police report reveals.

Kim, 46, was hospitalized after attempting to take her life on July 30.

She was said to be sitting on her bathroom floor with an 'unidentified object' in her hands and had a 'large amount of smeared blood' due to 'deep lacerations on legs' the report said, obtained by PageSix.

The report also claims Kim allegedly 'attempted to strike the responding officer' and that she had 'difficulty speaking, was slurring her speech and later fluctuated in various levels of consciousness.'

There was a 'small cardboard shipping box' with 'haphazard messages' written out to members of Kim's family, the report claims.

Claim: Eminem 's ex-wife Kim Scott was discovered 'bleeding excessively' in her bathroom after her suicide attempt, a police report reveals (pictured at the second wedding in 2006)

It included a 'do not resuscitate' request' that was self-made.

The report stated that one of Kim's friends had received an 'out of character' text message which prompted them to check up on her. The friend is said to have discovered Kim 'in a prone position surrounded by blood.'

Police and emergency workers are said to have responded to a call of a suicidal person at Kim's Michigan home, with Kim restrained by deputies due to being so 'combative and violent' that medics were unable to assess her.

Kim and Eminem, real name Marshall Mathers III, 48, share biological daughter Hailie Jade, 25. Eminem also adopted Kim's daughter Whitney, 18, from a previous relationship, and Kim's late twin sister Dawn's daughter Alaina, 27.

TMZ reported this week that when help arrived, Kim was cut, with 'several small lacerations on the back of her leg.'

It was claimed Kim was taken to hospital to undergo a medical and psychological evaluation, but is now at home recovering.

Kim and Eminem married in 1999, only to proceed with a nasty divorce two years later during their famously stormy romance.

They remarried in January 2006 but had broken up again by April. Their relationship and Eminem's rise to global fame inspired his hit movie, 8 Mile.

Eminem and Kim's volatile relationship is one of rap music folklore - the controversial rapper has frequently taken verbal shots at his on-off lover during his recording career - rapping about killing her, her drug use and infidelity.

Past: Kim and Eminem married in 1999, only to proceed with a nasty divorce two years later. They remarried in January 2006 but had broken up again by April. Their relationship and Eminem's rise to global fame inspired his hit movie, 8 Mile (pictured 2004)

Sighting: Kim was last seen in public in August 2018 in Macomb, Michigan (pictured)

Their daughter: Kim and Eminem, real name Marshall Mathers III, 48, share biological daughter Hailie Jade, 25 (pictured)

HOW EMINEM REFERENCED HIS FEUD WITH KIM IN HIS RAPS Eminem didn't hold back when divulging details about his turbulent relationship - rapping in explicit detail about his troubles with Kim 1998: '97 Bonnie & Clyde The song details Eminem taking daughter Hailey for a ride with Kim in the trunk of his car before dumping her in a lake Lyrics: Da-da made a nice bed for mommy at the bottom of the lake / Here, you want to help da-da tie a rope around this rock? (yeah!) 2000: Kim While it came out two years later, Kim was written before '97 Bonnie & Clyde and details how he would murder her Lyrics: You were supposed to love me!! / Now bleed b***h, bleed! Bleed b***h, bleed! Bleed! 2002: Hailie's Song The song is a tribute to the daughter they share, but Eminem references his ex throughout Lyrics: Now look, I love my daughter more than life in itself / But I got a wife that's determined to make my life livin' hell 2002: Say Goodbye To Hollywood Eminem references his tough time in the spotlight and hints that he considered taking his own life, before referencing his feud with Kim Lyrics: I thought I was tough enough to stick it out with Kim / But I wasn’t tough enough to juggle two things at once 2002: 'Till I Collapse Eminem references Kim being charged with felony cocaine possession and two driving violations on Monday stemming from a traffic stop Lyrics: My thoughts are sporadic, I act like I'm an addict / I rap like I'm addicted to smack like I'm Kim Mathers 2003: Sing for the moment Eminem used the lyrics to hit back at claims he promotes violence, yet references his fight with bouncer John Guerrera who he saw kissing Kim Lyrics: I'm a criminal, how the f**k can I raise a little girl? I couldn't, I wouldn't be fit to / You're full of s**t too Guerrera; that was a fist that hit you 2004: Like Toy Soldiers While most of the lyrics describe Eminem's attempts to defuse violence in the hip-hop community, he randomly references Kim's infidelity Lyrics: So ticky-tock, listen as the sound ticks on the clock / Listen to the sound of Kim as she licks on the c*ck 2004: Mockingbird The song is another that addresses Eminem's relationship with Kim but seems heartfelt and expresses regret over their split Lyrics: We did not plan it to be this way your mother and me /But things have got so bad between us I don't see us ever being together ever again 2004: Puke Eminem references his many relationships over the years and discusses the tattoo he got for Kim Lyrics: I can't believe I went and did this stupid s**t again / My next girlfriend, now her name's gotta be Kim 2005: When I'm Gone Eminem laments primarily state of his relationship with his daughter, Hailie, and his regret over her witnessing her parents fighting Lyrics: I'm pushin' Hailie on a swing, she keeps screamin', she don't want me to sing / You're makin' mommy cry, why, why is mommy cryin 2010: Going Through Changes Eminem has avoid rapping about Kim for years and now seems to be feeling reflective as he discusses his lingering feelings for her Lyrics: I still love your mother, that’ll never change, think about her every day / We just could never get it together hey, wish there was a better way 2017: Bad Husband Eminem now apologises to Kim and even refers to himself as a 'scumbag' for hitting her during their turbulent relationship Lyrics: I’m sorry, Kim, more than you could ever comprehend / Leaving you was fucking harder than sawing off a f**king body limb Advertisement

In 1989, when she was 13 and running away from home, Kim and sister Dawn met a then 15-year-old Eminem and the sisters promptly moved into his mom's trailer park with him as his foster sisters.

Six years later, Hailie, who, along with her mother, is the subject of many of the singer's greatest hits - was born.

In 1997 track Bonnie & Clyde from The Slim Shady LP, Eminem rapped about taking his daughter on a ride-along to dump his wife's body in a lake.

Battle: It was claimed Kim was taken to hospital to undergo a medical and psychological evaluation, but is now at home recovering (pictured 2007)

In track 'Kim' which appears on 2000 album The Marshall Mathers LP, and written while the pair were having marital problems two years previously, the star rapped about killing Kim and putting her in the trunk of his car.

In 2000, after the track's release Kim took Eminem to court to try to stop him from rapping about her anymore, and sought $10million in compensation for 'the intentional infliction of emotional distress'.

She also sought to prevent her then-estranged husband from having even partial custody of Hailie - then four.

The pair later reached a settlement in the case and agreed to joint legal custody of Hailie.

However just two years later, the Grammy winner took a shot at Kim's drugs arrest on track 'Till I Collapse' from album The Eminem Show.

Close: Hailie maintains a close bond with her father Eminem (pictured in an Instagram tribute)

He said: 'My thoughts are sporadic, I act like I’m an addict. I rap like I’m addicted to smack like I’m Kim Mathers.'

His feelings mellowed in 2010 with Recovery album track 'I'm Going Through Changes' with the star rapping to their children: 'I still love your mother, that’ll never change, think about her every day

'We just could never get it together hey, wish there was a better way. For me to say it, but I swear on everything. I’d do anything for her on any day.'

The remorse continued onto 2017's critically acclaimed album Revival, where Eminem finally apologised to Kim on track 'Bad Husband'.

He said: 'But I’m sorry, Kim. More than you could ever comprehend. Leaving you was f*****g harder than sawing off a f*****g body limb

Stormy: Eminem and Kim's volatile relationship is one of rap music folklore - the controversial rapper has frequently taken verbal shots at his on-off lover during his recording career - rapping about killing her, her drug use and infidelity (pictured 2000)

Kim has previously spoken of how she and the Stan hitmaker repaired their bond and became'best friends', saying in 2015 'He's been real supportive,' she says. 'We're really close. We're just trying to raise our kids together and make it as normal for them as possible.'

In 2016, Kim admitted that her single-car crash on an empty road near her home in October the previous year was in fact an attempt to end her own life.

'It was intentional,' Kim told Detroit's Channel 995 radio show Mojo in the Morning.

I'm sorry: The remorse continued onto 2017's critically acclaimed album Revival, where Eminem finally apologised to Kim on track 'Bad Husband' (pictured 2020)

'I never expected to make it out alive,' she said, adding that she had 'been clean for 10 years.'

An emotional Kim added people think 'just because we have money, that it makes us happy.'

'Yeah, I can pay bills. Yeah, I can get my kids whatever they ask for and it's great to see them happy. But you lose friends, you lose family, you have no one you can trust you can speak to,' she said.

Witnesses saw Kim drive her black Escalade into a ditch, where it smashed into a pole and flipped upside down with her trapped inside.

'I sat at the end of a road where I knew that no one else but myself would get hurt.

'Yes I drank, yes I took pills and I hit the gas and aimed for a pole.'

Just months later in January 2016, Kim's twin sister Dawn Scott was found dead in the Motor City Trailer Park after a heroin overdose. She was said to be estranged from Kim at the time of her death.

For confidential support in the UK - call Samaritans for free on 116 123 or visit www.samaritans.org

For confidential support in the US - call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When Princess Eugenie’s husband Jack Brooksbank was spotted on a boat with bikini-clad models in Capri last month — while she looked after their baby at home — her mother, the Duchess of York, leapt to his defence to insist he was ‘just doing his job’.

While that was true — Jack is a brand ambassador for Casamigos tequila, which was sponsoring a charity bash on the Mediterranean island — he is now preparing to take on a more serious role.

I hear the 35-year-old son of top chartered accountant George Brooksbank is to become a director of his father’s business, Pangaea Land And Property Limited.

When Princess Eugenie’s husband Jack Brooksbank was spotted on a boat with bikini-clad models in Capri last month — while she looked after their baby at home — her mother, the Duchess of York, leapt to his defence to insist he was ‘just doing his job

Jack is a brand ambassador for Casamigos tequila, which was sponsoring a charity bash on the Mediterranean island

George, 72, who was gravely ill with Covid last year, quietly stepped down in June. The firm is co-run by William Legge, 10th Earl of Dartmouth, whose grandmother was the romantic novelist Dame Barbara Cartland.

‘Now that his father has retired, it’s time for Jack to take over and to take on a more serious role to support his family,’ says my insider.

The couple and six-month-old son August live at Prince Harry and Meghan’s former home, Frogmore Cottage in Windsor, and have always enjoyed a busy social life with friends including singer Ellie Goulding and Hollywood star Demi Moore.

But many were surprised to see Jack cavorting with a bevy of glamorous women this summer — one of whom, at one point, was topless.

‘Jack is a man of such integrity,’ Fergie said after the pictures emerged. ‘I call him James Bond, actually. He’s a great father, a fabulous husband and he’s never at front of house; he always likes to be at the back.’

Eugenie described him recently as the ‘ultimate father to our boy’.

The smart set's talking about... billionaire Reuben's first grandchild

Property heir David Reuben Jr, who is due to inherit a chunk of his father’s fortune (estimated at £21 billion jointly with his business partner brother), once declared that ‘material possessions are of zero importance’.

So his next role will, no doubt, be his most rewarding yet, as I can reveal the 41-year-old — formerly one of Britain’s most eligible bachelors — is to become a father. His wife, Colombian actress Carolina Guerra Reuben, 34, is due to give birth later this year.

Property heir David Reuben's wife, Carolina Guerra Reuben, 34, is due to give birth to their first child later this year

‘I guess the cat’s out of the bag!’ says David. ‘Carolina and I are so excited to be having a child. She is doing amazingly, and we feel very fortunate to be surrounded by so much love during this time.’

He and Carolina, who starred in the TV series Da Vinci’s Demons, married three years ago at Burning Man Festival — a hippyish art jamboree in Nevada for which she wore a barely-there metallic dress.

The well-connected couple, who count financier Nat Rothschild and pop star Justin Bieber among pals, live in Los Angeles, where David is a music executive.

The news also means his father, David Snr — whose property empire with brother Simon includes Mayfair’s Burlington Arcade and Westminster’s Millbank Tower — will become a first-time grandfather.

A perfect match for Thandiwe

Stylish Hollywood star Thandiwe Newton is taking fashion coordination to a whole new level.

While upgrading furniture with a friend at her North London home, the 48-year-old was suddenly struck with sartorial inspiration.

Stylish Hollywood star Thandiwe Newton is taking fashion coordination to a whole new level - with a bikini made from left over fabric from a reupholstered chaise lounge

‘My wingwoman and I got very excited when there was leftover fabric from my reupholstered chaise lounge,’ explains Thandiwe (who has reverted to the original Zimbabwean spelling of her first name). ‘So we made bikinis, teamed with Wolverine-style kitchen utensils.’

The mum-of-three delighted fans by sharing her creation online — but seven-year-old son, Booker, was harder to impress. ‘Oh my God, Mummy, what’s wrong with you?’ he asked.

He dabbled in cocaine and heroin in his youth, but these days punk icon Johnny Rotten is addicted to Kim Kardashian’s favourite moisturising cream, which costs up to £1,700.

‘I buy Creme de La Mer. It’s the best face cream in the world,’ says the Sex Pistols star.

‘I squeeze a tonne of it onto my face. It really does work. It costs an arm and a leg, but if you want your arm and your leg to look good, do it.’

The picky 65-year-old, whose real name is John Lydon, adds: ‘I’ve tried that Boots E45, but I find it to be like rubbing chalk on, it’s so dense.

‘Oil of Olay has been around for ever but it doesn’t seem to do anything; it just sits there until it evaporates.’

Kate happy to let (mini) Moss grow under her feet

She's one of the most successful models in the world, but Kate Moss does not want to outshine her rising star of a daughter.

The 47-year-old, who has appeared on more than 40 British Vogue covers, appears to be scaling back her own modelling as Lila, 18, takes the fashion industry by storm.

‘Kate will always model, but her main focus now is her talent agency,’ says a friend, referring to Moss’s eponymous firm, set up in 2016.

Kate Moss, 47, who has appeared on more than 40 British Vogue covers, appears to be scaling back her own modelling as Lila, 18, takes the fashion industry by storm

‘She’s delighted that Lila is doing so well.’ Lila, whose father is magazine editor Jefferson Hack, is signed to her mum’s agency and has starred in campaigns for Miu Miu and Marc Jacobs Beauty.

Kate’s decision to step back is reflected in newly published accounts which reveal a significant downturn at her Skate LLP and Tilly Church firms.

Skate LLP shrunk to a zero net worth last year from just over £139,851 in 2019; while sister firm Tilly Church has gone from being £1.8 m in the black in 2019 to £329,711 in the red as of November 2020.

Former wild child India dreams of quiet nights in

Rebellious porn heiress India Rose James had a child with a rock star and at 21 was richer than the Queen, but insists she prefers the quiet life now.

‘I don’t like being out of lockdown,’ she tells me at the launch of BiBo restaurant at the Mondrian Shoreditch hotel, East London. ‘I’m juggling opening up the Soho Revue gallery, being a mother and now having to maintain a social life after having done nothing except sit in front of my laptop.’

The 29-year-old, who inherited a large portion of her porn publisher grandfather Paul Raymond’s £1 billion Soho Estates property empire, prefers being at home with her four-year-old daughter — whose father is The Kooks guitarist Hugh Harris — and her boyfriend, gallery owner Boe Distassi, 26.

Rebellious porn heiress India Rose James had a child with a rock star and at 21 was richer than the Queen, but insists she prefers the quiet life now

Tired of waiting around for grandchildren, Eton-educated Roddy Campbell — father to top model Edie — has found another way to expand the family aged 61.

The entrepreneur’s 32-year-old wife, Elif Kutsal, gave birth to their second child this week, and Roddy jokes: ‘My children are slow, so I’m having my own grandchildren.’

He and business consultant Elif, whom he married in 2016, welcomed their first child two years ago.

As well as Edie, he also has two other children from his first marriage.

Dame Joan Bakewell hoped to have a pleasant evening at the Proms this week, but was infuriated when she had to pay £12.75 for a small glass of white wine at the bar. ‘It’s not what I am used to paying,’ the TV presenter, 88, tells me. ‘I think it’s to do with the Royal Albert Hall rather than the The Proms — it’s perhaps an extortionate venue. I am used to paying £6 to £8!’

Simples! Top chef's easy nosh recipes

Move over, Delia! There’s a new simple food cookbook queen in town.

Having fed the rich and famous for decades at her organic Kensington restaurant Clarke’s (a favourite of Harry and Meghan), Sally Clarke is now being hailed the new guru of easy home-cooking with the release of her ‘gentle guide’, First Put On Your Apron.

Featuring classics such as kedgeree and tuna sandwiches, the £30 book was inspired by her son, Samuel.

‘I started writing when he was about to move to uni,’ she tells me. ‘With two lockdowns, I slightly dragged my feet — he has now graduated –— but I’m hoping there will be other young people just leaving home, or older young people who have focused on their career rather than home.’

Having fed the rich and famous for decades at her organic Kensington restaurant Clarke’s (a favourite of Harry and Meghan), Sally Clarke is now being hailed the new guru of easy home-cooking with the release of her ‘gentle guide’, First Put On Your Apron

Sally hopes her book is ‘more light-hearted’ than Delia Smith’s culinary bibles.

Move over, Delia! There’s a new simple food cookbook queen in town.

Having fed the rich and famous for decades at her organic Kensington restaurant Clarke’s (a favourite of Harry and Meghan), Sally Clarke is now being hailed the new guru of easy home-cooking with the release of her ‘gentle guide’, First Put On Your Apron.

Featuring classics such as kedgeree and tuna sandwiches, the £30 book was inspired by her son, Samuel.

‘I started writing when he was about to move to uni,’ she tells me. ‘With two lockdowns, I slightly dragged my feet — he has now graduated –— but I’m hoping there will be other young people just leaving home, or older young people who have focused on their career rather than home.’

Sally hopes her book is ‘more light-hearted’ than Delia Smith’s culinary bibles.

Trot on at Princess Anne's home estate

She was the first British royal to compete in the Olympics, and now Princess Anne is giving fellow horse-lovers a chance to trot in her footsteps.

The Queen’s daughter, who turns 71 tomorrow, has opened her glorious Gloucestershire estate to allow riders to practise in the grounds for £25 an hour.

‘By kind permission of HRH The Princess Royal and Gatcombe Park Estate, Gatcombe Park XC Hire offers a small selection of cross‑country fences available for schooling,’ confirms a spokesperson.

The Princess Royal competed in the 1976 Games, and her former husband, Mark Phillips, won Gold in Munich in 1972.

(Very) modern manners

We're all fastidious hand-washers these days, but should we ditch the posh soap before guzzling champagne?

Double Michelin-starred chef James Knappett, a protege of Gordon Ramsay, reveals he won’t stock any high-end ones at his Fitzrovia restaurant, Kitchen Table, when it re-opens next month after a revamp.

‘One of my favourite soaps is incredible, but the scent lingers on the hand. Then, if you have a glass of wine, you end up smelling seagrass and fennel when you want to be smelling champagne,’ he declares.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The rocker has finally set aside his feud with brother Noel for a new Oasis documentary, 12 years after the band split.

And on Thursday, Liam Gallagher, 48, enjoyed a stroll around North London with lookalike son Gene, 20, who he shares with ex Nicole Appleton, 46.

The singer wrapped up in a khaki green raincoat which he wore over black skinny jeans and a hooded jumper.

Father and son time: On Thursday, Liam Gallagher, 48, enjoyed a stroll around North London with lookalike son Gene, 20, who he shares with ex Nicole Appleton, 46

Gene kept things equally casual, wearing slate grey sports shorts and a grey Nike hoodie with a baseball cap.

Liam is dad to four children: sons Gene and Lennon, 21, and daughters Gemma, eight, and Molly, 23, the latter of whom was estranged until recently.

The outing with his youngest son comes after Noel and brother Liam put aside their differences as they both worked on a new documentary film on the band's iconic Knebworth shows in 1996.

Speaking about the project where both siblings serve as executive producers, Noel told The Sun : 'There's lots me and Liam will never agree on, and with Oasis we both have the chance to say no to anything, but doing this was a no-brainer.'

Dressed for the weather: The singer wrapped up in a khaki green raincoat which he wore over a hooded jumper

Father of four: Liam is dad to four children: sons Gene and Lennon, 21, and daughters Gemma, eight, and Molly, 23, the latter of whom was estranged until recently

The Oasis Knebworth 1996 film sees the band taking to the stage in front of 250,000 fans and later discussing the event, predicting it will never be repeated.

Noel told how 30 cameras captured every moment of the shows but the band ended up forgetting about the footage after their American tour 'imploded' because both Liam and Noel missed shows and they later went straight into recording a new album.

He said: 'We were going to do the film of it then and if you remember the timescale we left Knebworth, went to America and that tour imploded, it all went t**s up and when we came back, like idiots, the first thing we did was go back in the studio and made a new record.'

Noel said the documentary reflects a 'by-gone era' before the internet when people would not film concerts on their phones.

Film: Noel (far right) and Liam (centre) have put aside their differences as they both worked on a new documentary film on the band's iconic Knebworth shows in 1996 (pictured in 1996)

Brothers: Noel said: 'There's lots me and Liam will never agree on, and with Oasis we both have the chance to say no to anything, but doing this was a no-brainer'

The rocker has since tried to have smaller gigs with no mobile phones but thinks it wouldn't be possible at larger shows.

Noel previously told how he believes Liam was at his peak with the band during the Knebworth shows.

He told The Sun: 'I have to say, listening to the audio on that, we were on fire. Liam was at his absolutely f*****g peak and I've since realised Oasis was at its best when he was at his best.

'And when he started to deteriorate, the band started to go downhill. In my own view, the singles were always great.

Documentary: The Oasis Knebworth 1996 film sees the band taking to the stage in front of 250,000 fans and later discussing the event, predicting it will never be repeated

'The albums started to tail off a bit but when you see this thing, Liam's at his absolute. It was great looking back on it and I could actually see what all the f*****g fuss was about.'

It comes after Noel seemingly solidified his stance on ever returning to Oasis.

The rocker told MR PORTER: 'You don't really understand unless you've really been in it. Once you've quit, there is no going back. There's no point in going back.

'Bands are weird, you start off as young men and end up going all the way through to being middle-aged dads and all that goes with it.'

Noel decided to leave Oasis after Liam contracted laryngitis ahead of V Festival in August 2009, with the band cancelling the gig.

Footage: Noel told how 30 cameras captured every moment of the shows but the band ended up forgetting about the footage after their American tour 'imploded'

Noel issued a statement, blaming his brother for the cancellation, but cited Liam having a hangover as the reason.

Liam then sued Noel, demanding an apology, which he did - after which he quit the band, saying, 'I simply could not go on working with Liam a day longer'.

Both brothers went on to form new bands after this, and have been embroiled in a public feud ever since.

Elaborating on whether Oasis would have been a stadium band had they started out now, Noel said: 'It would be mad to think that the first two records [Definitely Maybe and (What's The Story) Morning Glory] would not transcend into a different era.

'So, I'd probably say yes, we'd be as big. But we were going for three years before we got signed, and we might not have made it to three years.

'Now, somebody could film you at a gig and go, 'Nah, they're s**t', so we wouldn't have been given time to develop.

'Would we have got our foot in the door? Maybe not. But would we have been as successful? In any era, I think 'Don't Look Back In Anger' and 'Live Forever' are going to be pretty special tunes.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britney Spears was in a dancing mood on Friday, just a day after it was revealed that her father Jamie would be stepping down from her controversial conservatorship.

The 39-year-old pop star put on a high-energy display in black lace catsuit while striking a number of poses, captioning the post simply with three kiss emojis.

It follows Thursday's court filing by Jamie, 69, who is finally relinquishing control of his daughter's estate, marking a huge victory for the singer as she battles to end a 13-year conservatorship - even though he did not immediately resign.

Britney has been known to share a wealth of content for her fans on social media, and has made more than a few pointed digs at her family members and her current situation.

Freedom: Britney Spears dances in lace bodysuit in her latest Instagram video on Friday... just a day after father Jamie agreed to step down as conservator of her estate

Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Jamie has been paying himself $16,000 a month since 2008 to manage his daughter's estimated $60million fortune.

He announced Thursday that he would stepping down, as his daughter has long demanded, provided Judge Brenda Penny asked him to and there was a plan in place for Britney's care.

The 39-year-old pop star put on a high-energy display in black lace catsuit while striking a number of poses, captioning the post simply with three kiss emojis.

Moving on: It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators

Pointed: Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Busting a move: The singer delights her fans with her social media content

Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, said it was 'a vindication for Britney'.

'We are pleased that Mr. Spears and his lawyer have today conceded in a filing that he must be removed,' he said. 'It is vindication for Britney.'

In the court documents, obtained by TMZ, his lawyers write: 'There are, in fact, no actual grounds for suspending or removing Mr. Spears as the Conservator of the Estate ... and it is highly debatable whether a change in conservator at this time would be in Ms. Spears' best interests.

'Nevertheless, even as Mr. Spears is the unremitting target of unjustified attacks, he does not believe that a public battle with his daughter over his continuing service as her conservator would be in her best interests.'

Jamie Spears, pictured with Britney in 2015, on Thursday resigned as her conservator. He said that he was stepping down because he did not feel the continued public battle was in her best interests

It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators.

Meanwhile, Britney appears to be free to continue to post as she pleases on her Instagram account.

Her friend, Paris Hilton took to Twitter yesterday, to express her relief that Britney is a a step closer to her freedom.

'I’m so happy to hear this news,' the socialite, 40, wrote with emojis of clapping hands and a heart. 'It’s been so long overdue but I’m so glad that Britney is on her way to finally being free.'

Ecstatic: Britney certainly looks upbeat after the news of her father Jamie stepping down

Twists and turns: Fans have been glued to her Instagram account amid the ongoing drama

Not so mellow yellow: The star put on an energetic display in the latest Instagram video

Happy: Britney appeared to be in a good mood in her latest video

The hotel heiress added, 'Sending so much love!' adding the now-ubiquitous hashtag #FreeBritney.

Rosie O'Donnell also took to Instagram to comment on the latest development in the case, sending her well-wishes to the pop star, as she said: 'That's right, he's stepping down, all the pressure worked, good for you Britney, being brave - tick tock you don't stop!'

Jamie, who has always insisted he was acting in the best interests of his superstar daughter, said that he will work with the legal teams to bring the complex case to an end.

'So, even though he must contest this unjustified Petition for his removal, Mr. Spears intends to work with the Court and his daughter's new attorney to prepare for an orderly transition to a new conservator,' his lawyers wrote.

Jamie, who is not believed to have spoken to his daughter since before Christmas, said that he will continue to look out for his daughter's best interests.

Jamie, 69, is pictured in 2008 leaving Los Angeles County Superior Courthouse - when her conservatorship was introduced. After 13 years, it now finally seems to be coming to an end

Mathew Rosengart, Britney Spears's lawyer, was appointed on July 14 to represent her - replacing the court-appointed Sam Ingham

'Regardless of his formal title, Mr. Spears will always be Ms. Spears' father, he will always love her unconditionally, and he will always look out for her best interests,' the lawyers said.

'If the public knew all the facts of Ms. Spears' personal life, not only her highs but also her lows, all of the addiction and mental health issues that she has struggled with, and all of the challenges of the Conservatorship, they would praise Mr. Spears for the job he has done, not vilify him.'

He said that the arrangement 'has worked as intended' and it was not surprising that Britney had felt 'constrained'.

The lawyers wrote: 'The Conservatorship has provided Ms. Spears with a structure to help her navigate the daily challenges of her personal life, family matters, medical issues, and career.

'By nature, the structure includes safeguards to protect the Conservatee from self-harm or harm from others.

'It is not surprising that Ms. Spears has often felt constrained or subject to excessive supervision.

'But, at least for the greater part of the past thirteen years, the Conservatorship has worked as intended.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Singer Erykah Badu has apologized to the Obamas for being a 'terrible guest' after sharing unauthorized photos from Barack's 60th birthday bash held at Martha's Vineyard.

The On & On star posted social media snaps of a mask-free Barack and Michelle, 57, dancing around hundreds of guests - that the former President will have no doubt wanted to have been kept private.

'Mr. And Mrs. Obama, Please forgive me 4 being the 'terrible guest' at such a sacred event for your family,' the 50-year-old Grammy winner tweeted on Thursday.

The footage sparked intense backlash online.

Sorry: Erykah Badu apologizes to the Obamas for being THAT 'terrible guest' who sparked backlash by sharing maskless party snaps of Barack dancing at Martha's Vineyard

Badu - real name Erica Wright - had attended the party on August 7, with her much-younger boyfriend JaRon Adkison, 28.

'I was so inconsiderate,' Badu went on adding: 'Thank you for all your love. What an example of 'how NOT' to be.'

She has since removed the pictures from her social media account of the luau-themed party, that had been scaled back from 500 to 200 guests amid concerns over the spread of coronavirus.

Sorry: The Grammy winning star issued a full apology on Twitter

Trouble: While the former president's back was turned, she managed to take a selfie video capturing Obama fully in the frame, which she then posted directly to Instagram

'Terrible guest': Badu - real name Erica Wright - had attended the party on August 7, with her much-younger boyfriend JaRon Adkison, 28

However, it wasn't long before Badu's footage had sparked outrage on Twitter, with the hashtag #ObamaVarient being used on posts citing hypocrisy over the event.

'Every American, no matter party, should be outraged at this "let them eat cake" moment, but instead, their simpleminded sycophants justify the blatant hypocrisy,' one angry user tweeted.

Conservative author Brigitte Gabriel fumed: 'Where is Barack Hussein Obama's mask?! #ObamaVariant.'

One Twitter user suggested that the Obamas had forced Badu to take down the footage and apologize, but the singer later clarified that it was just the 'right thing' to do

She wasn't the only one: Singer H.E.R. also posted this snap with with Barack and Michelle Obama, her manager Jeanine McClean (far left) and another partygoer

TJ Chapman (left) and the DJ/musician he manages, Trap Beckham (right), managed to shoot footage and snap photos at the event while talking to their followers as party unfolded, with both appearing to smoke cannabis

One Twitter user suggested that the Obamas had forced Badu to take down the footage and apologize, but the singer later clarified that it was just the 'right thing' to do.

The singer signed off with an apology using her government name Erica.

In her video, Obama could be seen holding a microphone and strutting his stuff in the middle of the raised dance floor.

Obama could seen wearing an untucked, light grey patterned shirt and white pants together with some black beads around his neck as he made his way across the floor, to cheers from gathered guests.

Guests could be seen mingling outside of the tents late into the night as the party got into full swing. The house can be seen in the background, together with purple lighting

TJ Chapman, manager for musician Trap Beckham, posted Instagram stories of some of the amazing food and drink at the birthday party for President Barack Obama in Martha's Vineyard

Trap Beckham posted images of some of the food being offered to those working at the party - which included shrimp and fried chicken and steak - despite claims the menu would be meatless and curated by Questlove

Causing controversy: Erykah's posts got her into trouble

Not the only one: Other guests at the event also shared snaps that spread like wildfire

Badu had been performing with members of her band and managed to convince Obama to get on stage as part of the celebration.

While the president's back was turned, she managed to take a selfie video capturing Obama fully in the frame, which she then posted directly to Instagram.

Badu gave a cheeky smile to the camera as she did so, perhaps knowing that such photography had been banned.

Huge crowds of people could be seen in the background, despite Obama insisting the event had been scaled back because of the spread of the Indian Delta variant of Covid.

One staff member told DailyMail.com that 300-400 people were in attendance.

Singer H.E.R. - real name Gabriella Sarmiento Wilson, 24 - posted a photo to Instagram and Twitter of her with her manager Jeanine McClean and the Obamas.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's set to make a grand return Channel 4's upcoming Changing Rooms reboot

But Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen has revealed that he's glad that original host Carol Smillie will not be returning to the helm as he feared the reboot would look like 'Jurassic Park'.

In a new interview, the presenter, 56, explained that producers made a 'clever' decision in not inviting the Scottish TV star, 59, back, as it was important the new home improvement show was a 'rejuvenation'.

Honest: Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen revealed that he's glad that original Changing Rooms host Carol Smillie will not be returning to the reboot as he feared it would look like 'Jurassic Park'

So much so that Laurence insisted that he himself initially was hesitant in returning to the programme in which he starred on as a designer from 1996, before taking over presenting duties in 2003.

On whether he would have liked Carol to return as the show's host, he told The Sun: 'No, and hand on heart, what the producers and what Channel 4 have done is actually very clever. They have moved on and it wouldn’t have worked if it had been Jurassic Park — it had to be a reinvention.

'And to be fair, I resisted it for a long time. I was very keen that they really should look at finding possibilities with other people.

'Otherwise, it would just be a revival, actually it always needed to be a reboot.'

No going back: In a new interview, the presenter, 56, explained that producers made a 'clever' decision in not inviting the Scottish TV star, 59, back, as it was important the new home improvement show was a 'rejuvenation' (Carol pictured in 2015)

The new series will instead be hosted by Naked Attraction star Anna Richardson.

Laurence also likened Changing Rooms to the X Factor in the fact that it was one of the first reality shows, adding that pal Simon Cowell would 'adore' being compared to him.

It comes after the first look trailer for the new Changing Rooms was released on Friday, hinting at some dramatic scenes to come.

The home makeover show, which previously ran from 1996-2004, follows a terrifyingly trusting format in which two sets of neighbours swap keys to their homes to create each other's 'dream room' in just two days.

Way back when: So much so that Laurence insisted that he himself initially was hesitant in returning to the programme in which he starred on as a designer from 1996, before taking over presenting duties in 2003 (pictured the Changing Rooms cast in 1998)

Opinion: 'Hand on heart, what the producers and what Channel 4 have done is actually very clever. They have moved on and it wouldn’t have worked if it had been Jurassic Park — it had to be a reinvention'

The trailer for the new series of the cult 90s show sees contestants gasping, screaming and crying - with one simply uttering: 'I really am scared'.

First look footage shows Anna and Laurence getting stuck in with helping the public refurbish their neighbour's homes, alongside their designers Jordan Cluroe and Russell Whitehead.

'Friends for 25 years? Not for much longer,' jokes Anna as the neighbours get started painting each other's homes with no idea if they'll approve their decor decisions.

Tears and tantrums: It comes after the first look trailer for the new Changing Rooms was released on Friday, hinting at some dramatic scenes to come

Nervous: The show is set to return on Wednesday August 18 and will be hosted by long-term star Laurence, as well as newcomer Anna Richardson (pictured)

The series is a long time coming, after it was announced in August last year that Channel 4 would be re-launching the much-loved BBC show.

Davina McCall was originally slated to host, but after filming was rescheduled twice due to coronavirus lockdowns, she could not longer commit to the dates.

Despite the upheaval, long-term host Lawrence exclaims in the trailer: 'It's like we were never away!' as decorating chaos reigns around him.

The first episode of Changing Rooms will take place in Swansea, South Wales and airs on Channel 4 at 8pm on August 18.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaley Cuoco expressed her outrage over an incident at the Tokyo Olympics in which a German pentathalon coach punched a horse.

On Friday, the 35-year-old actress slammed equestrian trainer Kim Raisner for striking the horse Saint Boy and criticized rider Annika Schleu with two scathing posts on her Instagram Story.

'I feel it's my duty here to comment on this disgrace,' Kaley wrote on an image of Schleu taken during the competition.

Furious: Kaley Cuoco expressed her outrage over an incident at the Tokyo Olympics in which a German pentathalon coach punched a horse

'This is not Olympic show jumping,' continued Cuoco, who owns several horses and competes in show riding.

'This is a disgusting classless abusive representation of our sport in so many ways. This team should be ashamed of themselves.'

'You are your team did not do your country proud or this sport,' The Big Bang Theory star said. 'You make us look bad.

'Shame on you and Godspeed to any animal that comes into contact with you.'

The well-known animal lover continued to vent her feelings with another post to her Story. On a picture of Annika astride Saint Boy, she wrote, 'Pure classless behavior right here.'

'Disgusting on all levels. This is our sport. This does not represent our sport.'

Making an offer: Kaley said, 'This rider and her 'trainer' are a disgrace. I'll buy that horse outright and show it the life it should have. Name your price'

She went on to say, 'This rider and her 'trainer' are a disgrace. I'll buy that horse outright and show it the life it should have. Name your price.'

Kaley, who has been riding horses since she was a teenager, is married to professional equestrian Karl Cook, 30. In March 2016, the couple met at a horse show where Cook was competing.

They immediately bonded over their love of horses and eventually tied the knot in June 2018 at a horse stable.

Interests in common: Kaley, who has been riding horses since she was a teenager, is married to professional equestrian Karl Cook, 30

Cuoco owns 25 horses and frequently shares updates from her 40-acre ranch in the Hidden Hills as well as photos from her competitions.

Karl, who is the son of Intuit founder and billionaire Scott Cook, owns the massive Pomponio Ranch South in Rancho Santa Fe, Calfornia. He has won multiple competitions including the SmartPak Grand Prix in 2015.

The notorious Olympics incident made headlines worldwide and has drawn the ire of animal rights organizations, who are calling for changes to the sport.

Kicked out: Raisner was thrown out of the Games after punching Saint Boy. Pictured in 2016

Breaking down: Annika, who had been leading the field, was in tears as she came into the ring

Raisner was thrown out of the Games after punching Saint Boy. At the time, she was trying to help Schleu as she battled to control Saint Boy ahead of her showjumping round in the women's event on Friday.

Athletes are given only 20 minutes to bond with an unfamiliar horse before their round and Annika, who had been leading the field, was in tears as she came into the ring.

Saint Boy, who had already proven a tricky ride for his first athlete, bucked and refused to trot around the course, with a number of people on social media raising concerns about the way Schleu and Raisner were treating the horse.

Alarmed: Saint Boy, who had already proven a tricky ride for his first athlete, bucked and refused to trot around the course, with a number of people on social media raising concerns about the way Schleu and Raisner were treating the horse

The world governing body for modern pentathlon, the UIPM, acknowledged those concerns ahead of the men's event on Saturday and then issued a statement revealing Raisner's punishment.

The statement read: 'The UIPM Executive Board (EB) has given a black card to the Germany team coach Kim Raisner, disqualifying her from the remainder of the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games.

'The EB reviewed video footage that showed Ms Raisner appearing to strike the horse Saint Boy, ridden by Annika Schleu, with her fist during the riding discipline of the women's modern pentathlon competition.

Scared: Schelu's horse appeared spooked before and after entering the arena, and aimlessly made his way around the challenging course while refusing several jumps

'Her actions were deemed to be in violation of the UIPM competition rules, which are applied to all recognised modern pentathlon competitions including the Olympic Games.

'The EB decision was made today at the Tokyo Stadium before the resumption of the men's modern pentathlon competition.'

Raisner is a former modern pentathlete who competed at the 2004 Olympics in Athens.

Schelu's horse appeared spooked before and after entering the arena, and aimlessly made his way around the challenging course while refusing several jumps.

Coverage seemingly showed an emotional Schleu, 31, in floods of tears before even beginning her performance. While on top of her mount, she looked to get the panicked Saint Boy to co-operate using her whip.

Having then made their way into the arena, Schleu set about attempting to salvage her dreams of a podium finish. However, despite the horse clearing four sets of hurdles to begin with, he then collided with the fifth.

That brought a rapid end to her lead, and Saint Boy then buckled despite Schleu looking to guide him around the course for another go. In the end, she was made to finish with zero points, leaving her rock bottom.

Having narrowly missed out on a medal in Rio 2016, after finishing fourth, Schleu was again left devastated. Her tears were broadcast for all to see as Saint Boy jumped around, remaining alarmed and in no fit state to compete.

She had held the equivalent of a 24-second advantage after the fencing and swimming legs, but fell out of contention for silverware for the laser round.

The chaos saw Great Britain's Kate French claim gold, in what is Team GB's first triumph for 21 years in the event.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He had a successful Tokyo 2020 Olympics bringing back a bronze medal for the 10m platform dive and a gold medal for his synchronised dive with partner Matty Lee.

And Tom Daley was out celebrating on Friday after returning from the Games as he joined Matty and a host of other GB Olympic athletes for a raucous night out.

The star, 27, headed for drinks and dinner at Bob Bob Ricard in Soho before moving on to a bar in Flat Iron Square and then OMEARA club in London Bridge, for what The Sun reports was a 12-hour drinking session.

Yay! Tom Daley was out celebrating on Friday after returning to the Games as he joined Matty Lee (pictured together) and a host of other GB Olympic athletes for a raucous night out

Tom's husband Dustin Lance Black was notably missing from the celebrations as he is currently working in Canada.

Tom looked in high spirits as he posed with Matty, 23, in a sweet selfie at the start of the night with the pair both wearing jazzy shirts.

He then posted a group shot as the team enjoyed some drinks with the captions: 'Cocktails with the fittest athletes on earth' and 'Let the celebrations begin.'

Tom was joined by divers Grace Reid, Daniel Goodfellow, Jack Laugher and Lois Toulson for the celebrations.

Later in the night Tom posed for a playful picture with his sunglasses on inside the restaurant and pulled a funny face.

In a separate group shot Tom took a selfie of the whole team as they continued the rest of their night out before sharing more tipsy shots drinking in various clubs and bars.

Drinks! Later in the night Tom posed for a playful picture with his sunglasses on inside the restaurant and pulled a funny face

Happy: He then posted a group shot as the team enjoyed some drinks with the captions: 'Cocktails with the fittest athletes on earth' and 'Let the celebrations begin'

During the Olympics Tom and Matty beat China by just 1.23 points after a nerveless display in the synchronised category as Daley collected his third Olympic medal.

Daley made his Olympic debut as a 14-year-old in Beijing and won bronze at London 2012 and Rio five years ago.

Daley and Lee were not expected to win, with China the favourites, but they never dropped out of the top two and finished with a score of 471.81 following an exceptional forward four-and-a-half somersaults pike when the pressure was on in the final round.

Animated: In a separate group shot Tom took a selfie of the whole team as they continued the rest of their night out before sharing more tipsy shots drinking in various clubs and bars

China's poor fourth-round dive let the Team GB pair take the lead and they never looked back, with the ROC claiming bronze.

'It's kind of unbelievable. I dreamt, as has Matty, since I started diving 20 years ago for this moment,' said Daley.

'I thought I was going to win an Olympic gold in Rio and that turned out the complete opposite by a long shot.

'My husband said to me my story wasn't finished and my son (Robbie) needed to be there to watch me win an Olympic gold medal.

What a night: The star, 27, headed for drinks and dinner at Bob Bob Ricard in Soho before moving on to a bar in Flat Iron Square and then OMEARA club in London Bridge

'I can say my son watched me become an Olympic champion, albeit on TV as they couldn't be here. It's such a great feeling.'

Lee added: 'It felt crazy, obviously. In October 2018 I moved my whole life to London from Leeds. I was away from my family and friends, everyone. I had nothing in London. Our aim was to win an Olympic medal.

'To be able to put the well-deserved gold medal around his neck was really special to me and I'm very very proud of him. Obviously it's my dream to be a gold medallist, an Olympic gold medallist, and it's great to be able to have won that with him.'

Champagne: The night out started out more tame with the group enjoying a fancy dinner out before going clubbing

Here we go! Tom shared another selfie with two pals as he enjoyed a sip of his drink after the Olympic success

Daley's husband Dustin Lance Black won the Best Original Screenplay Oscar for Milk in 2008 but Daley admits he does not know whether his medal or the Oscar will take pride of place at home.

He said: 'My husband's Oscar goes in the downstairs loo. People often mistake it for a loobrush. We had to get an Oscar loobrush because people were picking it up and realising it was an actual Oscar, not just a toy.

'I don't know why he does that, he says he doesn't want to give it any more power than it needs. He's done it and moving on to the next thing.'

Finally: The British sportsman broke down in tears as he and diving partner Matty triumphed in the 10m synchronized platform event during the Games - his first gold medal in four Olympic games (pictured July 26)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brian McFadden shared an adorable video on Instagram of his daughter potting some holes at the driving range on Friday.

The Westlife singer, 41, held his daughter, Ruby - who he shares with fiancee Danielle Parkinson, 39, in his arms as showed her how it's done while swinging the golf club.

They looked as if they were having a blast as he donned a very quirky pineapple print blue shirt and light blue board shorts paired with white Nike trainers.

Cute: Brian McFadden, 41, shared an adorable video on Instagram of his daughter potting some holes at the driving range on Friday

Teaching her the tricks: The hitmaker captioned the social media post: 'Getting Ruby into it early!'

His three month old daughter looked as if butter couldn't melt as she wore a very sweet pink onesie.

The hitmaker captioned the social media post: 'Getting Ruby into it early!' before sharing another adorable post of them both, with Brian holding Ruby in a papoose against his chest.

It seems like baby Ruby may have an affinity with the sport as it was revealed earlier this year that Danielle's waters broke as the couple were playing golf.

Golf baby: It seems like Ruby may have an affinity with the sport as it was revealed earlier this year that Danielle's waters broke as the couple were playing golf

Speaking about their little girl's shock arrival, Danielle recalled to OK! Magazine that she was playing the sport when she went into labour earlier than expected.

Smiling at his stunning wife-to-be, Brian said: 'It kinda all happened so fast!'

Danielle then explained: 'We went home and at 8pm I started having weird pains and by 10pm they were intense so we went to the hospital.

Daddy-daughter: They looked like they were having a blast as they hit balls together, with Brian wearing light blue board shorts and a graphic shirt and Ruby looking adorable in a pink onesie

'There was a queue for the theatre so I was having to go through these contractions, which were horrific. I was in so much pain and desperate for any pain relief.'

When she was seen at hospital, Danielle was only a centimetre dilated and in agony, with Ruby then getting a little 'distressed' meaning things started to move quickly.

Danielle continued: 'But then, it sounds disgusting, she pooed inside me and that means they're in a bit of distress so they took me straight to the emergency bit.

'I was kind of thankful she'd done that as the contractions were the worst pain I've ever experienced.'

Excited: The pair were finally able to welcome their first child together after undergoing IVF treatment and two miscarriages and recently shared their birthing story with OK!

Reflecting further on the pain, Danielle said gas and air 'didn't touch the sides' and that if she has another child she'll be having an 'epidural' and 'all the pain relief'.

Brian - who also has Molly, 19, and Lily-Sue, 18, with ex-wife Kerry Katona - predicted that his future wife would demand drugs even though she planned a natural birth.

He recalled how while they were preparing for Ruby's arrival and doing prenatal classes he had a feeling that despite Danielle saying she wanted to give birth as naturally as possible, she would take some drugs during labour.

The pair said they were surprised by how quick Ruby was delivered and that they are thankful she's healthy, with proud mama Danielle saying the experience was 'surreal'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Line of Duty's Martin Compston has admitted that part of the reason he fell for his wife Tianna Flynn was that she had no idea who he was when they first met.

The actor, 37, - who's soon to star in the new BBC drama Vigil - met the aspiring American actress, 34, in 2013 at a hotel bar in LA.

He explained that because he wasn't well-known for his acting work in the States she 'had no scooby who he was' making their budding romance smooth sailing.

Sweet: Line of Duty's Martin Compston has admitted that part of the reason he fell for his wife Tianna Flynn was that she had no idea who he was when they first met

He told The Telegraph: 'It really helped that she just liked me for me. With actors, we're all self-conscious and paranoid.

'I liked the fact that she had no scooby who I was, we just had a laugh, exchanged numbers and went on dates.'

He added: 'She's the biggest support in my life, the person I talk to most for advice, she's the person to tell me to shut up and stop overthinking things'.

The couple married in 2016 at Martin's family chapel in Greenock, Scotland, before a party at Mar Hall in Renfrewshire. They welcomed their first child in 2020.

Love: The actor, 37, - who's soon to star in the new BBC drama Vigil - met the aspiring American actress, 34, in 2013 at a hotel bar in LA

He told the publication that that becoming a parent 'changes everything' including you 'priorities', before adding that 'family comes first'.

Martin splits his time between Scotland and the couple's Las Vegas home as well as hotels when he is away working.

He explained that Tianna 'knows what stage he's in in his career' and that being apart is 'tough' when he has to work but that it's 'not always going to be this way.'

The star- famed for his portrayal of DI Steve Arnott in Line of Duty - also touched on his career and his self confidence as an actor.

Cute: He explained that because he wasn't well-known for his acting work in the States she 'had no scooby who he was' making their budding romance smooth sailing (pictured last month)

He explained how his 'working class' roots make him feel like he has 'something to prove' when he starts a new job.

Martin also touched on some fans' disappointment with the Line of Duty final saying that because people have invested so much time in it they were 'more than entitled to their opinion.'

Earlier this summer Martin said viewers 'need time away' from the show after a backlash over the 'disappointing' finale.

Work: The star- famed for his portrayal of DI Steve Arnott in Line of Duty - also touched on his career and his self confidence as an actor

The BBC police drama wrapped up season six earlier in April by finally revealing who the 'Fourth Man' was, but viewers were left underwhelmed, taking to social media in droves to share their upset.

Speaking to ES Magazine about the show's future, the actor admitted he would be 'heartbroken' if it doesn't return, and the fate of the series is currently hanging in the balance.

Martin also admitted he understood why some fans were disappointed by the finale, in which DSU Ian Buckells was unveiled as 'H'.

He said: 'You've got to respect people have invested so much in this thing and everybody has a different version of their ending, but yes… it's been a pretty wild few days.'

Martin added that there would have been 'riots in the streets' if the series didn't give away H's identity, but praised the show's creator Jed Mercurio for not taking the 'easy option' and showing a 'crazy gun shoot-out', which he believed would have been a 'cop-out'.

There has yet been no word on whether Jed has decided to end the show or will write season seven to air in the future.

Time out: Earlier this summer Martin said viewers 'need time away' from Line of Duty after a backlash over the 'disappointing' finale

Although this has been the case after every season, Martin revealed that there is extra significance this year following the fan backlash.

He explained: 'The idea that I would never work with all the guys again together would be heartbreaking.

'But also with everything that's just gone on this week, I think everybody, including the audience, needs a bit of time away from it. So we'll see.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's been busy promoting her latest single Rumors, a collaboration with Lizzo.

And on Friday, Cardi B proudly put her baby bump on display in behind-the-scenes snaps from the music video shared to her Instagram.

The 28-year-old rapper, who is expecting her second child with husband Offset, flaunted her growing belly in a gold breastplate and body chains.

Setting the Internet alight: Cardi B (pictured), 28, put her bump on display in a gold breastplate and body chains, as she shared snaps from her Rumors music video to Instagram on Friday

Posing by a throne, the artist, real name Belcalis Marlenis Almánzar, also drew attention to her legs in a white Grecian-style skirt with daring splits at either side.

Cardi B kept with the theme by sporting Gladiator-style strappy heels and oversized gold drop earrings.

Her glossy dark tresses were styled straight and in a middle parting, and her makeup was ultra glamorous, consisting of winged eyeliner, false lashes and a glossy pout.

Goddess: Posing by a throne, the rapper also drew attention to her legs in a white Grecian-style skirt with daring splits at either side

Joining forces: In a teaser for the music video, Cardi shows off her baby belly in a metallic gold bra and matching briefs

Promoting the single in the post's caption, Cardi B wrote: 'ALL THE RUMORS ARE TRUE !!!'

In a teaser for the music video, Cardi shows off her baby belly in a metallic gold bra and matching briefs.

Joined by rapper Lizzo - real name Melissa Viviane Jefferson - the pair channel Greek goddesses.

Cardi B teams the two-piece with a pair of matching wrap-around gold heels, a statement gold headpiece and flowing white fabric attached to her revealing attire.

Eye-catching: Cardi B teams the two-piece with a pair of matching wrap-around gold heels, a statement gold headpiece and flowing white fabric attached to her revealing attire

Shining: Lizzo, 33, sports an embellished jumpsuit with strategically placed Greek symbols

Lizzo, 33, sports an embellished jumpsuit with strategically placed Greek symbols.

The dynamic duo previously unveiled the glamorous cover art for the single.

'Fun fact: we took this picture right after Cardi whispered "I want to eat yo p*ssy" in my ear,' joked Lizzo in her Instagram post's caption on Thursday.

Powerful imagery: The duo stand as lightning strikes when they touch fingers

She continued: 'RUMORS THIS FRIDAY YOU READY?'

The Rumors cover art shows Cardi B and Lizzo posing in front of a black backdrop, while adorned in countless pieces of chunky gold jewellery.

Some of the statement pieces include earrings shaped like ears, as well as thick gold bangles and choker chains.

Dripping in bling: Cardi B and Lizzo previously unveiled the glamorous cover art for the single

Setting the Internet alight: The duo sent fans into a frenzy earlier this week when they announced their collaboration

Glam: The Rumors cover art shows Cardi B and Lizzo posing in front of a black backdrop, while donning countless pieces of chunky gold jewellery

Cardi B posed with her manicured hand pressed to her ear, while Lizzo leaned in close and gazed directly into the camera.

Though she announced Rumors' release last week, it was not until Monday that Lizzo revealed Cardi B would be featured on the highly-anticipated song.

The Truth Hurts singer did so by conducting a FaceTime call with the WAP rapper, which she later shared to Instagram.

Surprise! Though she announced Rumors' release last week, it was not until Monday that Lizzo revealed Cardi B would be featured on the highly-anticipated song

Big reveal: The Truth Hurts singer did so by conducting a FaceTime call with the WAP rapper, which she later shared to Instagram

Recent: Cardi B's collaboration with Lizzo comes just weeks after she appeared on Normani's long-awaited single Wild Side

'It’s Harry Styles,' Lizzo joked as a sleepy Cardi B answered while rocking a hot pink beanie.

'GRAND RISING MUTHAF**KASSSSS…. GUESS WHOS HOPPIN ON ‘RUMORS’ W/ ME?!?' captioned Lizzo, who boasts over 11 million followers on the platform.

Cardi B's collaboration with Lizzo comes just weeks after she appeared on Normani's long-awaited single Wild Side.

Rumors is Lizzo's first single after a two-year hiatus following the release of 2019's Cuz I Love You.

The album went on to earn eight Grammy nominations, winning three in the Best Pop Solo Performance, Best Traditional R&B Performance, and Best Urban Contemporary Album categories at the 2020 ceremony.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jess Wright has been soaking up the sun in Ibiza for her glamorous hen party ahead of her wedding to fiancé William Lee-Kemp, 38.

And on Friday, the former TOWIE star was in the party spirit as she celebrated her last days as a bride-to-be with a group of her nearest and dearest at idyllic Nikki Beach.

The 35-year-old showed off her incredible figure in a racy white swimsuit as she indulged in rosé and danced up a storm, while surrounded by pals and shirtless men.

When in Spain! Jess Wright (pictured) showed off her curves in a racy white swimsuit as she danced and indulged in wine during her VERY wild hen party festivities in Ibiza on Friday

Jess revealed her cleavage in the slinky swimwear, which she accessorised with a glamorous gold chain belt and a matching sheer sarong.

The brunette added touches of bling in the form of her sparkling engagement ring, reportedly worth £25k, bangles, hoop earrings and a delicate pendant necklace.

Her long tresses were swept into a high ponytail, accentuating her striking facial features and glamorous makeup, which included gold glitter on her cheekbones.

Curves ahead: The former TOWIE star, 35, revealed her cleavage in the slinky swimwear, which she accessorised with a glamorous gold chain belt

Bling: The brunette bombshell added touches of bling in the form of her sparkling engagement ring, reportedly worth £25k, bangles, hoop earrings and a delicate pendant necklace

All that glitters: Her long tresses were swept into a high ponytail, accentuating her striking facial features and glamorous makeup, which included gold glitter on her cheekbones

Letting her hair down: The influencer appeared keen to let her hair down, at times seen dancing at the beachside bar with her pals, who also wore revealing white ensembles

Jess' makeup was carefully applied prior to the celebrations, consisting of defined brows, lashings of mascara, bronzer and a slick of glossy nude lipstick.

The influencer appeared keen to let her hair down, at times seen dancing at the beachside bar with her pals, who also wore revealing white ensembles for the party.

She appeared relaxed as she indulged in rosé and posed for snaps with pals and a group of shirtless men.

Memories: Jess kept her iPhone nearby, no doubt wanting to capture fun snaps of the day

How do I look? Jess teamed her slinky white swimsuit with a matching sheer sarong

Animated: At times, Jess was captured making a number of animated facial expressions

The group later made their way to a party bus for their trip home, with Jess donning a veil and changing into a rather racy white crop top, mini-skirt and perspex heels.

Jess took to her Instagram Stories throughout the day, sharing details of her hair and makeup, as well as a clip of the group celebrating as they headed to Nikki Beach.

The starlet was forced to postpone her dream June wedding in Mallorca to William due to the pandemic.

Cheers! The sister of reality star Mark Wright indulged in rosé as she mingled with her pals

Prized bling: Jess drew attention to her stunning engagement ring, reportedly worth £25k

Enjoying herself: As the celebrations got underway, Jess seemed relaxed and at ease

Living it up: Jess looked sensational as she posed for a series of snaps with her gal pals

Jess recently revealed she will now walk down the aisle with William in September.

In an interview with Hello! Magazine she admitted she and William had considered scrapping plans to exchange nuptials in Mallorca and have a smaller ceremony in England, as pandemic regulations affect travel.

Noting that she's far from alone in her dilemma, Jessica told the publication: 'I really feel for all brides out there. Every day, we have been back and forth trying to decide what to do – I've been driving myself insane with it.'

Celebrations: Jess' brunette tresses were let out, cascading down past her shoulders. She clutched onto her wine glass as she captured more snaps with her pals

Scenes: The group were surrounded by party-loving shirtless men at the idyllic Spanish spot

Enjoying herself: The stunner let her hair down and danced up a storm with the group

Soon-to-be bride: Jess also sported a traditional veil as she celebrated on the Balearic island

She continued: 'We always wanted to get wed abroad with all our family and friends, but we have explored every option, different dates, different places. A few weeks ago I said to Will: "Shall we have a smaller wedding here in England?"

Of their autumn wedding, she explained: 'It gives more time for things to get back to normal and for all our nearest and dearest to be there.

'I have definitely relaxed since setting the new date. I can't wait to wear my dress – I just want to do it now.'

Fun in the sun: Jess' pals revealed their toned figures in skimpy swimwear as they celebrated with the bride

Glamorous: Jess took to her Instagram Stories prior to the celebrations, showing off her hair and makeup look

William popped the question on the snow capped peaks of Courchevel, France, in February 2020 after 13 months of dating.

Jess previously told Hello! that her sister-in-law Michelle Keegan, the actress wife of her brother Mark, would be one of the bridal party, as well as her sister Natalya.

TV personality Mark, 34, who tied the knot with Michelle in 2015, has been drafted in to serve as the master of ceremonies on his sister's big day.

Ready to celebrate: She appeared in great spirits as she sipped on a beverage and captured video while on a party bus

On the go: The group appeared a tad worse for wear as they headed to their next destination

Stunning: Also on Friday, Jess was seen looking sensational in a slinky crop top, mini-skirt and heels, which she teamed with a traditional veil and bling

Loved-up: Jess was forced to postpone her June dream wedding in Mallorca to fiancé William Lee-Kemp (pictured), 38, due to the pandemic

There she is: Jess looked in good spirits as she headed out in Ibiza recently
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They both starred in this year's raunchy Netflix drama Bridgerton.

And Phoebe Dynevor and Sabrina Bartlett proved they're friends away from the camera too as they enjoyed a sun-soaked girly trip to Croatia together this week.

Actress Phoebe, 26, who played Daphne Bridgerton in the series, wowed in an orange bikini as she took a bike ride before having cocktails with pal Sabrina, 29, who played Siena Rosso.

Sun: Phoebe Dynevor showed off her figure in an orange bikini on bike ride before enjoying cocktails with Bridgerton co-star Sabrina Bartlett during girly trip to Croatia this week

Radiant Phoebe beamed as she posed on the bike at the Meneghetti Wine Hotel & Winery, teaming her bright swimwear with cream shorts and accessorising with a cap and huge sunglasses

In another shot Sabrina joined her on a bike wearing a pink and black polka dot bikini and statement sun hat.

The pair later enjoyed an Aperol Spritz in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together before heading out on a fun boat trip.

Fun: The pair enjoyed an Aperol Spritz during their day trip in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together

The stars - who are both based in the UK - will not have to quarantine when they come home as Croatia is currently on the green travel list.

It comes after Phoebe said she wasn't embarrassed that her mum and dad have watched her sex scenes from Bridgerton, saying they 'probably understand more than most'.

In January, the former Waterloo Road actress told an awards panel: 'Luckily they are in the industry so I guess they probably understand more than most.'

Gals: In another shot Sabrina joined her on a bike wearing a pink and black polka dot bikini and statement sun hat

Gorgeous: Phoebe looked flawless in another selfie from the trip which saw her clad in a blue paisley print sundress

The star's mum Sally Dynevor, 58, plays none other than Coronation Street's Sally Webster, and her dad Tim Dynevor, 59, is an Emmerdale writer.

'I think they are really proud to see me work so hard on the show', the starlet added.

Phoebe became a household name after she turned up the heat with Regé-Jean Page during their raunchy on-screen scenes together.

Her mum Sally, however, has been an established name on the soap since 1986 when Kevin Webster (played by Michael Le Vell) accidentally splashed her while she was waiting for a bus.

Out at sea: The pair also had time for a boat trip as they hopped aboard and enjoyed some drinks at sunset

The British actress also spoke to the platform about her initial worries of her daughter following the same career path as her.

The Greater Manchester native, who shares Phoebe with her husband and Emmerdale writer Tim, said: 'My mother-in-law said 'You mustn't dissuade her. Actors are the most wonderful people in the world and the most fun'.'

The interview with the mother-daughter-duo comes as filming was delayed for the second series of Bridgerton once again, after a Covid outbreak on set.

The stalling of series two filming is said to be causing Netflix 'an expensive headache'.

Steamy! It comes after Phoebe said she wasn't embarrassed that her mum and dad have watched her sex scenes from Bridgerton, saying they 'probably understand more than most'

Due to a previous case, shooting had only just resumed again - but a day after cast and crew returned to the period drama things are once again on ice.

The likes of Phoebe and another co-star Jonathan Bailey, who plays Viscount Anthony Bridgerton, have had to cease work while various members of the production isolate.

'The demand for the second series is huge, so to stop filming again is a real headache,' a source told The Sun. 'This could lead to proper delays and it will be extremely costly for them.'

'Shooting such a big production is expensive at the best of times, let alone when you've got sets staying empty and actors who can't work.'

Understanding: The former Waterloo Road actress told The Mirror, 'Luckily they are in the industry so I guess they probably understand more than most. Pictured: Phoebe with her mum and Corrie star Sally Dynevor, 58

'Filming was stopped ­immediately as soon as the new positive case was detected but they had only just got back on set.'

'They have a rigorous testing regime, so it's hoped the case was found quickly enough and that no one else on set got it. But a lot of people are now isolating.'

'Filming will start again once it is deemed safe but for now it has been paused indefinitely.'

The series had been shooting at Wrotham Hall in ­Hertfordshire when the news was delivered concerning the new Covid case.

The first season focused on the romance between Daphne Bridgerton and Simon, Duke of Hastings, the role which Regé-Jean bade farewell to in April– to the dismay of his many fans.

The second season will shift the focus to Daphne's brother Anthony Bridgerton, who will go on the hunt for a suitable bride when he meets sisters Kate (Simone Ashley) and Edwina (Charithra Chandran) Sheffield, renamed Sharma for the show.

While he tries to pursue Edwina he finds himself becoming attracted to Kate instead, despite the fact they are often at odds with each other.

A release date has yet to be announced.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Their romance came to a screeching halt mere hours after leaving the villa.

And Hugo Hammond and Amy Day were brought together for the first time since she slammed his 'patronising behaviour' as they joined their co-stars for a night out at the STK restaurant in London on Friday evening.

The pair arrived separately for the evening with their pals after Hugo made remarks about his journey on the show being 'tragic,' despite being in the early stages of a romance with Amy.

Awkward! Hugo Hammond (L) and Amy Day, both 25, were spotted together on a night out with fellow Love Island cast members to STK restaurant in London on Friday evening

Amy looked sensational for the night out in the city, as she donned a busty black corset top with a patterned mini skirt.

Her toned pins were elongated by wearing black strappy heeled sandals, and she accessorised by carrying a black shoulder bag in her hand.

Amy's dark locks were swept into a side parting and they flowed effortlessly around her shoulders in soft waves.

Meanwhile, Hugo looked in high spirits as he opted for a more casual look - wearing black skinny jeans and a checked shirt for the event - before hugging fellow Love Islander Aaron Francis.

The outing comes after Hugo and Amy clashed in the post-villa chat, with Amy branding Hugo 'fake' for 'friend-zoning' her shortly after they were booted out of the Love Island villa.

Exes: The pair were together for the first time since their romance came to screeching halt, when Hugo branded his journey in the villa 'tragic'

Drama: They arrived separately for the evening with their pals after Hugo made remarks about his journey on the show being 'tragic,' despite being in the early stages of a romance with Amy

Sitting opposite Hugo while still in Spain, Amy lambasted Hugo for his behaviour, saying: 'It's the Hugo show, that's all it is,' and adding: 'I think we need to clear up a few things because I feel like I had my time wasted a little bit, staying with you.'

The bombshell continued: 'I thought there was something there. We leave the villa, and you just flipped and friend-zoned me. You've come across quite fake now.'

Hugo was quick to fire back: 'I completely disagree with you on that front,' with Amy quipping: 'Course you do.'

Pals: Hugo, who looked casual for the outing in black skinny jeans and a checked shirt posed for a photo with fellow love islander Aaron Francis, 24

Bromance: The two of them hugged as they reunited before heading into the restaurant

Attempting to explain himself, Hugo continued: 'We had the chat in there about how we had come to a cross road on our journey and I think that was clear to both of us but apparently not.'

Taken aback, Amy responded: 'I wasn't part of that conversation. That was massively lost in communication.

'I never had a conversation with you where it was, ''we would go this way or we would go this way''. It was, ''let's stop having the pressure on us''.'

Explanation: Attempting to explain himself, Hugo continued: 'We had the chat in there about how we had come to a cross road on our journey and I think that was clear to both of us'

At that moment, Hugo started laughing, much to Amy's dismay.

'You're so patronising,' she said, adding: 'Why are you laughing? This isn't funny.'

Love Island and Aftersun host Laura Whitmore later spoke to both Hugo and Amy via videocall, with Hugo berating his former flame for spending the first in Casa Amor in Tyler Cruickshank's bed and explaining that her actions made him feel as though he was merely a 'green card into the villa'.

Hugo has taken the opportunity to discuss the 'tragic' comment he made with Christine Lampard on Lorraine.

Clearing things up, Hugo explained: 'That was more of a reflection of my journey in there. Obviously I’d been there for so long.

'I’d tried it with quite a few girls and then some bombshells came in for me and didn’t work out, so that wasn’t a reflection of Ame’s herself but more a reflection of me and my journey, and what I’d been through in there.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kelly Clarkson celebrated on Wednesday after a judge upheld the prenuptial agreement in her bitter divorce battle with ex-husband Brandon Blackstock.

And now a report by TMZ on Saturday claims The Voice coach - who is said to be worth over £32million ($45million USD) - wants to go 'full steam ahead' in selling their Montana ranch which she owns, and where Blackstock is currently residing.

Sources tell the outlet that Clarkson's attorney, famed divorce lawyer Laura Wasser, previously asked the judge for permission to sell the property, to which Blackstock's lawyers objected, with no ruling on the prenuptial agreement at the time.

Moving on: Kelly Clarkson (pictured), 39, reportedly wants to go 'full steam ahead' in selling her Montana ranch ex-husband Brandon Blackstock STILL lives in - after a judge UPHELD their prenup on Wednesday amid their bitter divorce battle

With Blackstock still living in the property, TMZ suggests Clarkson's lawyers would have to file court documents to determine conditions in which the ranch could be sold.

MailOnline has reached out to Clarkson's representatives for comment.

Clarkson had reason to celebrate on Wednesday after learning that a judge has upheld the prenuptial agreement in her bitter divorce battle with Blackstock.

Reports: Sources told TMZ on Saturday that Clarkson's attorney, Laura Wasser, previously asked the judge for permission to sell the property, to which Blackstock's lawyers objected, with no ruling on the prenuptial agreement at the time. Pictured with Blackstock in 2018

TMZ reported at the time how Clarkson, 39, was on set of The Voice when she 'let out a scream' of joy, with fellow coaches Blake Shelton and Ariana Grande joining in.

Sources told the outlet that while Clarkson was filming the singing competition, she received an email from her lawyers sharing the good news that her prenup had been kept in place, meaning she will keep the bulk of her assets and income.

Last month, Clarkson had been temporarily ordered to pay Blackstock nearly $200,000-per-month (£144,000) in spousal and child support.

The documents also revealed details into Clarkson's finances, showing that she personally earns over $2.4million (£1.8million) a month.

Reason to celebrate! Clarkson was said to have found out that her prenup with Blackstock will be upheld, while she was filming The Voice on Wednesday

TMZ reported that Clarkson will keep the lion's share of their assets including the Montana ranch where Blackstock is currently residing.

Blackstock had been contesting the prenup and wanted to split their properties 50/50, in addition to the income that she earned throughout their marriage - but a judge has reportedly stopped his request.

Sources added that Clarkson's friend and fellow coach Shelton recently cut ties with Blackstock, who had managed the country singer for a number of years.

A judge is said to have agreed with Clarkson's attorney that the signed prenup had to be taken into account.

It's over: Per reports, Clarkson has been awarded primary custody of their children - River, seven, and Remington, five (pictured above, as well as his elder kids Seth and Savannah)

Clarkson now has the right to sell the Montana ranch as she is the one who purchased it, according to the report.

The ex couple's divorce has been 'bifurcated' meaning the end of the marriage has officially been declared.

Per the report, Clarkson has been awarded primary custody of their minor children - River, seven, and Remington, five.

Earlier this week, it was reported that Clarkson would pay 70 per cent of her children's school fees and expenses but had refused to pay for the Montana ranch.

The judge had ordered that Blackstock carry the financial burden of his Montana ranch, that costs around $81,000 (£58,000) a month to run in expenses.

Cause for celebration: Blake Shelton and Ariana Grande are said to have celebrated Kelly's legal win backstage on The Voice according to a report (John Legend also pictured)

Blackstock is currently living at the ranch, and is using it as his primary residence.

Court documents obtained by TMZ confirm Clarkson will continue to pay Blackstock $150,000 (£108,000) per month whilst the divorce case continues in court as well as $45,000 (£32,000) in child support.

The permanent specifics of any spousal support is still unclear.

The singer has sold a staggering 25 million albums and 45 million singles worldwide in her career, and currently has her own hit talk show.

Kiss off: Earlier this month Clarkson asked for the courts to legally declare her single, over one year after she initially filed for divorce in June 2020 (pictured in 2018)

Clarkson first began dating Blackstock - a country music manager - back in 2011 and married him in 2013.

Blackstock also shares his 13-year-old son Seth and 17-year-old daughter Savannah with his ex-wife Melissa Ashworth.

The Piece By Piece hitmaker had sparked speculation last year that she and Blackstock could have been set to have a third child, as she confessed she had 'baby fever' after chatting to celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay.

During their chat, in which Gordon's 13-month-old son Oscar appeared, Clarkson said: 'Oh my gosh! Do not do this to me. I so want another child, and my husband is like, 'No! We have four!'

'You get baby fever when you see them and you're like, 'Oh, I miss the chubby little legs and the little face.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He has been forced to take a break from filming the upcoming Indiana Jones 5 movie for three months as he recovers from a shoulder injury sustained on set.

And Harrison Ford was relaxing during his time off as he stepped out to grab a takeaway pizza in Mayfair, London, on Friday.

The legendary actor, 79, cut a casual figure as he headed home with his dinner while enjoying a relaxed stroll.

Star: Harrison Ford, 79, stepped out to grab a takeaway pizza in Mayfair on Friday after having to take three months off Indiana Jones 5 filming due to shoulder injury

He dressed low-key in a black jumper, dark trousers and brown shoes as he made his way down the street.

The star looked happy and healthy during his understated solo outing to grab some dinner.

Harrison has been in London for several weeks sightseeing while on his break from production.

Out and about: The legendary actor, 79, cut a casual figure as he headed home with his dinner while enjoying a relaxed stroll

Stepping out: He dressed low-key in a black jumper, dark trousers and brown shoes as he made his way down the street

Filming for the fifth and final Indiana Jones movie in the series was originally due for release in 2022, however that was before filming was pushed back by three months due to Harrison's injury.

It's been a fresh blow for the movie - which sees James Mangold taking on directing duties from long-time helmer Steven Spielberg - after shooting was previously pushed back as a result of the coronavirus pandemic.

An insider told The Sun's Bizarre column because it's Harrison's last outing as Indiana, everybody was expecting it to be plain sailing.

Recovery: The star looked happy and healthy during his understated solo outing to grab some dinner

They said: 'After the initial delays everyone was raring to go. But now Harrison is injured and it is worse than first thought.

'The film's bosses have come together to work out the scheduling and it's chaos. The earliest they think they can restart the production is September.

'It was not what anyone was expecting so to have to change everything is a huge blow. Everyone was concerned for Harrison and they are glad he is on the mend.'

Raiders Of The Lost Ark director Steven Spielberg famously branded himself 'an idiot' for allowing Harrison to do his own stunts, including one where the starring actor had to outrun a prop weighing 300 pounds.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amber Davies put on a leggy display while sipping bubbly as she posed for an Instagram post on Friday following her split with Nick Kyriacou.

The Love Island star, 24, enjoyed her girls' night as she posed in the picturesque sunset wearing an oversized yellow shirt.

Amber'stoned pins were on full display as she donned a thigh skimming patterned mini skirt.

Wow: Amber Davies, 24, put on a leggy display while sipping bubbly on Friday evening amid her split with Nick Kyriacou

She elevated her height by opting for very high orange stilettos as she posed in the candid shot.

Elsewhere in another photo, she posed in a video with her hair tied loosely back from her face, revealing her natural beauty.

The actress wore golden eyeshadow and a slick of black mascara across her eye line in one sultry selfie of her look.

Stunning: The Love Island star highlighted her natural beauty with subtle make up as she posed at Golden Hour in an oversized yellow shirt

She put the details of her outfit on full display, revealing a gold chain bracelet and a chic black Dior saddle bag.

The posts come amid reports she has split from her beau Nick, 28, just one month after they reunited.

She is said to have already unfollowed Nick on Instagram after deciding to end their on-off romance.

A source told The Sun: 'Sadly they couldn't make it work second time around and broke things off again.

Fashionable: She put the details of her outfit on full display, revealing a gold chain necklace and a black Dior saddle bag

'Amber is really heartbroken and unfollowed Nick as she couldn't bear to see him on social media.'

Amber and Nick previously split after they moved in together during lockdown and found their relationship had become 'too intense too soon'.

They decided to try again and take things slowly but have now parted ways once more.

MailOnline contacted representatives for Amber Davies for comment at the time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's gearing up to play the new Bond villain, Safin, in No Time To Die.

And Rami Malek used his downtime to enjoy a tennis lesson in Los Angeles on Thursday.

The American actor, 40, cut a sporty figure in a white T-shirt and black workout shorts, which he teamed with black socks and pristine white sneakers.

Athletic: Rami Malek, 40, cut a sporty figure as he arrived for a tennis lesson in Los Angeles on Thursday

Rami concealed his gaze behind trendy black sunglasses and wore a blue cap, worn backwards.

The Bohemian Rhapsody star also carried his tennis lesson essentials in a black backpack.

Rami is an avid tennis player, having recently been pictured leaving a session with his good friend and Twilight star Robert Pattinson.

Attire: The American actor showed off his lean frame in a white T-shirt, black workout shorts, black socks and pristine white sneakers. He finished off the sporty look with trendy black sunglasses and a blue cap, worn backwards

He was also spotted watching the women's singles quarterfinal match between Elena Rybakina and Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova at the 2021 French Open in June.

Rami most recently starred alongside fellow Oscar winners Denzel Washington and Jared Leto in The Little Things, debuting in theatres and on HBO Max in January.

He also stars in the apocalyptic thriller podcast series Blackout, returning for a second season later this year on Apple podcasts.

Highly-anticipated: The Bohemian Rhapsody star is gearing up to play the new Bond villain, Lyutsifer Safin, in the No Time To Die movie. The film will be released in October this year

Rami returns to the big screen as Lyutsifer Safin in the highly-anticipated James Bond film No Time To Die, in theatres this October.

No Time To Die was originally slated for release in April 2020, but was postponed due to the pandemic.

The blockbuster will see Daniel Craig's final adventure as James Bond.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They've been going strong since confirming their romance in June last year.

And Gabby Allen and beau Brandon Myers looked happier than ever on Friday as they packed on the PDA while out celebrating his birthday at Sumosan Twiga restaurant in London.

The Love Island star, 26, put on a leggy display in a quirky nude dress as she and her boyfriend, 25, made their way down the street along with his parents.

Love: Gabby Allen and beau Brandon Myers looked happier than ever on Friday as they packed on the PDA while out celebrating his birthday at Sumosan Twiga restaurant in London

Gabby stunned in the thigh-skimming number which featured a scoop neckline and a striking square pattern.

The beauty teamed her dress in eye-catching orange heels and a nude handbag, while finishing off her look with delicate gold jewellery.

The fitness enthusiast appeared enamoured with her beau as they happily smooched and canoodled for the cameras.

Birthday boy Brandon meanwhile looked dapper in a crisp white shirt paired with stone coloured trousers and chunky lace-up boots.

Looking good: The Love Island star, 26, put on a leggy display in a quirky nude dress as she and her boyfriend, 25, made their way down the street along with his parents

Meanwhile, his parents appeared to also be enjoying the limelight, with Brandon's very youthful looking mother stealing the show in a turquoise mini dress.

The stunner showed off her toned legs in the form-fitting outfit, while she boosted her height with nude cage heels.

Their outing comes after the pair returned home from a sun-soaked trip to Greece in July.

Walk this way: Gabby stunned in the thigh-skimming number which featured a scoop neckline and a striking square pattern

Fashionista: The beauty teamed her dress in eye-catching orange heels and a nude handbag, while finishing off her look with delicate gold jewellery

Devoted: Brandon couldn't keep his hands off his girlfriend as he planted a tender kiss on her cheek

Fun times: Gabby, Brandon and his parents all appeared to have had a great night out as they flashed dazzling smiles after leaving the restaurant

Greece was not the first trip abroad that the couple have been on during lockdown.

Gabby and Brandon jetted to Dubai in the first week of December last year and stated she was staying 'for the foreseeable future' for work reasons.

The loved-up couple have been dating since June last year and went public with their romance two months later.

Say cheese: Meanwhile, his parents appeared to also be enjoying the limelight, with Brandon's very youthful looking mother stealing the show in a turquoise mini dress

Work it! The stunner showed off her toned legs in the form-fitting outfit, while she boosted her height with nude cage heels

Loving life: Brandon kept a supportive hold of his mother as they made their way down the street following their merry night out

The television personality initially denied speculation they were in a relationship, stating at the time they were 'just friends'.

Gabby previously dated Rak-Su star Myles Stephenson until August 2019, when she accused him of cheating on her.

The reality star is thought to be worth an estimated £1.3million since finding fame on the 2017 series of Love Island.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Killing Eve's Jodie Comer has revealed to BBC Radio 1 that she's been asked by fans in the street ‘can you pretend to strangle me?’

The Emmy award-winning actress, 28, spilt set secrets from the acclaimed British spy thriller television series as well as reminiscing on the ground-breaking drama My Mad Fat Diary and working with Ryan Reynolds for their brand new film Free Guy.

Jodie, renowned for playing Oksana Astankova/Villanelle in Killing Eve, said that fans frequently ask her to do her accent - but every so often they go as far as asking her to strangle them in a photo opportunity.

Disclosing all: Killing Eve's Jodie Comer revealed on BBC Radio 1 fans ask her to 'STRANGLE them' in snaps as she detailed improvising on set and keeping Villanelle's 'really good shoes'

She told the show: 'I get a lot of people asking me to do the accent or they’re like "can you say I'll kill you?", or if I’m in a picture with someone it’s like "can you pretend to strangle me?" but it's mainly to do the accent.'

And on a more light-hearted note, Jodie joked: 'I definitely do take costumes from Killing Eve when I'm allowed, although they kind of cling on to them now,' also adding that she takes Villanelle's shoes because they're 'really good.'

On improv moments in the show, Host Ali Plumb asked: 'What was it like to do those real moments like a slap fight on the bus or shouting "this is so boring?" Do you have a particularly surreal moment that sticks with you?'

The actress responded: 'The "boring" moment wasn't scripted. Me and Kim [the director] were doing that scene and we'd done it a good few times and we were in a really quiet art gallery and I was just so tempted to do it, so I did it.

Volatile: Jodie, renowned for playing Oksana Astankova/Villanelle in Killing Eve, said that fans frequently ask her to do her accent - but every so often they go as far as asking her to strangle them in a photo opportunity

In role: On a more light-hearted note, Jodie joked: 'I definitely do take costumes from Killing Eve when I'm allowed, although they kind of cling on to them now,' also adding that she takes Villanelle's shoes because they're 'really good'

'So his reaction was real, which I love and Kim loves that, he always likes to be surprised. So at any moment I'm like "oh this is a great opportunity to", so it was great!'

The talented star was also cast as one of the leading roles in E4's My Mad Fat Diary, playing Chloe Gemell, the best friend of 16-year-old, 16 stone Rae Earl, who just left a psychiatric hospital.

Jodie branded the role 'ground-breaking.'

Additional endeavours: The talented star was also cast as one of the leading roles in E4's My Mad Fat Diary, playing Chloe Gemell, the best friend of 16-year-old, 16 stone Rae Earl, who just left a psychiatric hospital

Grateful: The 28-year-old believes that My Mad Fat Diary 'hugely shaped' who she is

'I was so young when we started that, I think I was like eighteen, nineteen when the first series started and I remember just reading the scripts and being like "wow, we're tackling something really important here."

'But the way in which it's been delivered it’s very accessible and it's very fun and it's relatable. So I'm so proud of Mad Fat [Diary] and it was also the first project I was a part of where I was with a lot of people my own age, then the trouble started Ali! It hugely shaped who I am,' Jodie divulged.

She also referred to the show as a hidden gem from her catalogue: 'I think it's the nineties. It's like an Oasis/Blur soundtrack, like it’s the best music, great costumes, has a really important message but is again, incredibly fun.

'And I feel like every generation will be able to watch that and I think it will stand the test of time.'

Film star: The multi-talented actress' ventures don't stop there, as she has recently starred in action-comedy film Free Guy with Ryan Reynolds

And the multi-talented actress' ventures don't stop there, as she has recently starred in action-comedy film Free Guy with Ryan Reynolds.

'Working with Ryan and seeing how he works and the speed at which his brain works, I said this to him, I was like "how do you do it?" And he's like "I prepare, I do the work."

'But he will be on set and if there's a certain kind of line that's a joke that he's maybe done a couple of times and he's like "I want to try something new", he will have five ready to go and each one is as funny as the last. And everyone behind the camera is laughing out loud. But it's so incredible to see and to learn from,' Jodie disclosed.

Admiration: Jodie said that it's 'incredible' to see Ryan's work and learn from it

The Doctor Foster actress also admitted that doing stunts for the film was the most challenging part.

'When I first went to Boston I spent three hours a day with the stunt team. First just getting the basics together like my coordination, footwork, because I really wanted to do as much as I possibly could and they were so up for that.

'I think they appreciated my enthusiasm but I did have an incredible stunt double. So for instance, with that stunt with the motorbike moment, I kind of like jumped in the air in a harness, she [stunt double] did the flip and I did the landing,' she said.

Free Guy was released in the US on Friday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Love Island fans were left in stitches on Friday night's episode after Chloe Burrows and Toby Amolaran broke their bed after a particularly energetic night of passion.

In early scenes on the ITV2 show, the couple were seen getting getting frisky between the sheets before a sudden thud brought the proceedings to a halt.

And as it emerged the couple had busted the furniture, viewers at home were left howling at the scenes, with one even joking that ITV should 'send them an invoice' for the breakage.

Whoops! Love Island fans were left in stitches on Friday night's episode after Chloe Burrows and Toby Amolaran broke their bed after a particularly energetic night of passion

After recently graduating, the islanders code name for having sex, the amorous pair wasted no time in getting down to some serious extra curricular activities when the lights went down.

But it appeared they had put too much effort into their bedroom antics and their poor bed paid the price with Chloe giggling: 'the bed has completely broke!' while Toby bizarrely walked off and left her to it.

Taking to Twitter, fans were quick to react to the hilarious scenes, with one writing: 'Chloe & Toby’s bed really said NOT TODAY!'

Oh dear! In early scenes on the ITV2 show, the couple were seen getting getting frisky between the sheets before a sudden thud brought the proceedings to a halt

While another shared: 'toby and Chloe's bed breaking pls that's the highlight of tonight's show.'

'Toby and Chloe needs to win the 50k to buy back that bed' commented a third.

'ITV should send Toby and Chloe an invoice for that bed! Too much graduating going on!' joked a fourth watcher.

'Chloe and Toby broke the bed. Give them the 50K now' remarked a fifth.

Accident: As it emerged the couple had busted the furniture, viewers at home were left howling at the scenes, with one even joking that ITV should 'send them an invoice' for the breakage

Bed time: After recently graduating, the islanders code name for having sex, the amorous pair wasted no time in getting down to some serious extra curricular activities when the lights went down

Disaster: But it appeared they had put too much effort into their bedroom antics and their poor bed paid the price with Chloe giggling: 'the bed has completely broke!' while Toby bizarrely walked off and left her to it

With another adding: 'Toby was going crazy, how are you breaking the bed on National TV.'

Their bedroom disaster comes after four couples confirmed they've had sex in the villa.

During Wednesday night's episode, the girls enjoyed a 'graduation ceremony' on the terrace the morning after a very steamy night in the shared bedroom in which they discussed various levels of intimate acts which had taken place.

Millie Court, Faye Winter, Chloe and Liberty Poole were all presented with caps by Priya Gopaldas as they detailed their antics the night before.

Reaction: Taking to Twitter, fans were quick to react to the hilarious scenes, with one writing: 'Chloe & Toby’s bed really said NOT TODAY!'

Since the start of the series the girls have been using the code of 'NVQ levels' (National Vocational Qualifications in education) to discuss how far they have gone with their partners, culminating in a 'graduation' when they finally have sex.

According to the girls an 'entry Level NVQ' is used to describe kissing, 'NVQ1' refers to any kind of handsy movement, whilst 'NVQ2' is code for oral sex.

Liberty had previously explained that an 'NVQ3' translates to 'the full shebang' which would lead to a graduation.

Shared bedroom antics: It comes after four Love Island couples confirmed they've had sex in the villa on Wednesday night's episode of the show

Celebrating: During Wednesday night's episode the girls enjoyed a 'graduation ceremony' on the terrace the morning after a very steamy night in the shared bedroom

In an unexpected twist, Liberty also revealed during the chat that she and boyfriend Jake Cornish had actually already enjoyed intimate relations with each other much earlier in the series.

Millie's partner Liam Reardon, Faye's partner Teddy Soares and Chloe's partner Toby all seemed to confirm the same news during a boys' chat using football as a metaphor.

Millie quipped during her 'graduation ceremony: 'I thought I was going to really struggle with this graduation because it was really quite hard.'

Meanwhile Faye commented: 'I had to resit the year so it's been a long time coming. I went from NVQ1 to graduation in one night.'

Love Island continues Sunday at 9pm on ITV2 and ITV Hub.

'Graduating!' Millie Court, Faye Winter, Chloe and Liberty Poole were all presented with caps by Priya Gopaldas in celebration of their antics the night before

New graduates: Chloe's partner Toby, Millie's partner Liam Reardon, and Faye's partner Teddy Soares all seemed to confirm the same news during a boys' chat
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They all jetted to Majorca with the hope of finding love.

And dumped Love Island stars AJ Bunker, Amy Day and Georgia Townend reunited on Friday as they headed to STK Restaurant in London for a catch up.

Ensuring to make a very stylish arrival, 28-year-old AJ sizzled in a skin-tight white dress which highlighted her ample cleavage and toned pins.

Here she comes! Love Island's AJ Bunker stunned in a skin-tight white dress which highlighted her ample cleavage and toned pins as she stepped out in London on Friday

AJ exuded confidence as she strutted along the street in her thigh-skimming mini dress which scooped at the front to show off her assets.

The beauty wore her long locks down and perfectly styled into loose curls, letting them cascade over one shoulder.

Not forgetting her accessories, AJ toted a small nude handbag and added a pretty necklace to complete her look.

Stunning: The beauty, 28, was joined by Amy Day (left) and Georgia Townend (right) who both put on sizzling displays in their thigh-skimming ensembles

Amy, 25, who left the villa alongside Hugo Hammond in a recent mass dumping, also commanded attention in a black corset and mini skirt ensemble.

She wowed as she posed up a storm for the camera, ensuring to showcase her enviable figure.

While Georgia, 28, cut a very fashionable figure in a white and black polka-dot dress styled with black heels.

She pulled her blonde locks back into a slick up do and accessorised with a small black clutch bag.

Work it: AJ exuded confidence as she strutted along the street in her thigh-skimming mini dress which scooped at the front to show off her assets

Gorgeous: Amy, 25, also commanded attention in a black corset and mini skirt ensemble

Stunning: Georgia, 28, cut a very stylish figure in a white and black polka-dot dress and heels

The look: AJ showed off her toned and tanned pins in the white dress which hugged her figure

The stunners were joined at the restaurant by some of the boys who had joined them in the villa including Danny Bibby, Aaron Simpson and Hugo.

Their night out comes as Friday's Love Island episode saw Jake Cornish finally tell Liberty Poole he loved her after she confronted him over his true feelings for her.

In recent days, Liberty has questioned Jake's genuineness over their romance, with her doubts heightened in the latest challenge in which they were voted the couple with the most one-sided relationship.

Reunion: Danny Bibby joined the glamorous girls on their night out, wrapping an arm around AJ as they posed for some snaps

Stylish arrival: Danny flashed a smile as he rocked his ripped jeans and T-shirt

Catching up: Aaron was also seen at the meal and looked smart in grey trousers and a jacket

Pals: Hugo and Aaron put their arms around each other as they posed for a photograph on the night out

Busty: Amy struggled to contain her assets in her black satin corset while Georgia looked more demure

Dumped: Amy left the villa alongside Hugo after they failed to keep their spark alive

New romance? AJ and Danny appeared to grow closer in the day before Danny left the villa

Sultry: Amy wore her dark tresses in loose waves over her shoulders and opted for a glamorous makeup look

Reunited: Hugo and Aaron hugged each other before heading into the restaurant together

Happy: The pair looked thrilled to be heading on their night out together on Friday

Pose: Aaron looked smart in a black jacket, grey T-shirt and navy chinos

And after a candid make-or-break conversation, Jake finally said those three little words four weeks after Liberty first uttered them, but viewers at home were not convinced and accused him of saying 'what she wants to hear'.

Sitting him down on the roof terrace, Liberty was determined to hear Jake's real feelings for her once and for all and questioned him on why he hadn't said 'I love you' despite her saying it a month previously.

She also confronted him on how much he actually liked her and how much was him playing up to the cameras, while she claimed she didn't want to feel like a 'mug' if their relationship was one-sided.

There he is: Hugo joined the group for their London date, beaming smiles for the cameras

Heading in: AJ gave one last look behind her as she waited with Danny to go inside

Radiant: She looked great and opted for a glowing makeup look with a slick of bronze over her cheeks

Gals: The girls looked in high spirits for their night out after only being in the villa a short time

Arguing his point, Jake said that he didn't want to 'throw out' the words 'I love you' and said that making her his girlfriend meant more than him saying it.

He also said that he didn't want to make the grand declaration after his return from Casa Amor as it didn't 'feel right'.

On whether their relationship was genuine, he told her that he'd never said anything that implied she had doubts, while he asked her to directly tell him if she didn't feel OK and for him not to have to hear it from other people.

Declaration: Friday night's Love Island episode saw Jake Cornish finally tell Liberty Poole he loved her after she confronted him over his true feelings for her

And after Liberty said how she felt about him, he finally told her the words that she longed to hear.

He said: 'I don’t feel like I’m going to get hurt from you but I haven’t told you how I feel... we are well suited and made for each other…you are a part of me, I feel like I’ve found what Iv’e been looking for because I love you.

'I love you for you, it’s scary to say but I love you.. Liberty Amor Poole I love you, you make me so happy.'

At this the couple leaned in for a passionate kiss, with Liberty overwhelmed by her boyfriend's declaration.

However, despite the sweet moment, viewers at home were not convinced by his words, with some accusing him of saying only what she wanted to hear.

Love Island continues on Sunday on ITV2.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Melanie Sykes, 51, shared snaps to social media on Friday as she reunited with her toyboy Riccardo Simionato, 24, in Venice.

The television personality recently jetted to the picturesque Italian city for her 51st birthday celebrations, where she met the gondolier last year.

And Melanie appeared to be making the most of her idyllic vacation as she gushed on Instagram that the city and the 24-year-old 'have her heart'.

'You have my heart': Melanie Sykes, 51, shared snaps to social media on Friday as she reunited with her toyboy Riccardo Simionato, 24, in Venice

In one photo, the presenter displayed her toned stomach and ample assets in a stone grey bikini as she posed crossed-legged on the shorefront.

She left her chocolate tresses in a natural straight hairstyle and sported silver-rimmed aviator shades.

In a separate snap, Melanie revealed her toned back and sun-kissed complexion in a backless dress as she captured the landscape.

She wore an elasticated belt cinched at the waist which emphasised her stunning figure.

Caught her eye: The television personality recently jetted to the picturesque Italian city for her 51st birthday celebrations, where she met the gondolier last year

'Ciao for now': And Melanie appeared to be making the most of her idyllic vacation as she gushed on Instagram that the city and the 24-year-old 'have her heart'

Melanie tucked her brunette tresses up with the help of a clip and shielded her eyes from the glorious sunshine with circular shades.

She penned alongside the post: 'Ciao for now beautiful Venice ❤️ you & your people have my heart ❤️,' before tagging: '@ricky_simionato ❤️amore'.

He sweetly replied: 'Thank you very much for the good times spent together.'

On her bikini-clad photo, she also wrote: 'Dearest Tara @tjgristwood thank you for my brilliant holiday read Perfect Twist. It’s pacy, fun and oh so sexy.

'I am so happy you are in my life and I am thinking of you. Cannot wait for the weekend at yours. All my love Melanie xxxxxxx

Stunning: In one social media snap, Melanie revealed her toned back and sun-kissed complexion in a backless dress as she captured the landscape

'#lidobeach #italy #venice #holidayread #tjgristwood #perfecttwist #bikini #beach #ontherocks as well as a holiday to celebrate my 51st birthday @melaniejburnett & I have been working on many future projects and Lots of content for the @thefrank_mag relaunching very soon xxxxx'. [sic]

Later in the day, Melanie captured the romantic Venice buildings from a gondola and penned: 'Night night [black heart emoji] #venice #veniceatnight #gondola #canal ✨#magicalvenicenight #magicalmoments.'

Melanie and the gondolier, who is 27 years her junior, first enjoyed a six-day romance in October, after she paid him £72 for a half hour's ride on his gondola.

The Today With Des and Mel star shared glimpses of her romantic getaway with Riccardo to Instagram in November, with the couple later enjoying a day out at Lake Garda.

Charming: Later in the day, she captured the romantic Venice buildings from a gondola and penned: 'Night night [black heart emoji] #venice #veniceatnight #gondola #canal'

Last week, Mel said she has decided to step away from television after her 30-year career because she has 'grown out of it'.

In an Instagram post she said: 'At the end of April this year I stepped away from television after filming 3 different projects on the bounce, which you will see over the coming months.

'It became apparent that I have out grown it in so many ways which I will discuss in detail in the future.

Admirer: Melanie and the gondolier, who is 27 years her junior, first enjoyed a six-day romance in October, after she paid him £72 for a half hour's ride on his gondola

'That said, I hope you enjoy the shows. Some are just pure "entertainment", some important.'

The I'm A Celeb star added: 'The decision to step away was very easy for me as after two years of being editor of @thefrank_mag I have found my calling creatively & through this I have reconnected with who I am, what I believe in and what I am good at.

'I've been busy on the relaunch of "Frank" due to go live in Sept. @melaniejburnett & I started out together in 2019 and our working relationship blossoms every day, it’s an extraordinary journey which I am relishing.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lisa Armstrong took to Instagram on Friday night to share a sweet selfie with beau James Green.

The makeup artist, 44, described their recent trip to Soho House as a 'perfect few days' as the pair beamed into the camera.

Lisa looked smitten as she posed alongside James, with her post garnering many comments from her fans who declared they were pleased to see her 'happy'.

It comes just one week after her ex-husband Ant McPartlin, 45, married Anne-Marie Corbett in Hampshire at a star-studded ceremony.

'Perfect few days': Lisa Armstrong shared a sweet selfie with beau James Green from a trip to Soho House on Friday following ex Ant McPartlin's wedding

One loyal fan penned: 'Lovely to see you looking so happy ❤️❤️' with another telling the star that she had 'hit the jackpot'.

One of her followers wrote considerately: 'Thought of you over the weekend . Glad to see you happy ❤️❤️. Looks like you have a good one there :)'.

Lisa was married to presenter Ant for 12 years before they divorced in 2018.

Happy fans: Lisa oozed radiance as she posed alongside James - and the post garnered many supportive comments which come after her ex Ant McPartlin, 45, remarried last weekend

New love: The Strictly Come Dancing makeup designer is believed to have started dating James at the beginning of 2020 and went public with their relationship last August, a few months after he separated from his wife Kirsty

Old flame: Lisa was married to presenter Ant for 12 years before they divorced in 2018 (pictured above in 2017)

The Strictly Come Dancing makeup designer is believed to have started dating James at the beginning of 2020 and went public with their relationship last August, a few months after he separated from his wife Kirsty.

Meanwhile, Ant and Anne-Marie tied the knot at Heckfield in Hampshire on Saturday in a lavish, star-studded ceremony.

During his speech at their reception the TV presenter told 100 guests: 'This beautiful woman saved my life.'

Just married: During his speech at their reception Ant said of his new wife Anne-Marie, 'This beautiful woman saved my life'

After warming up the audience by joking 'My name is Ant, and I'm an alcoholic', he went on to talk about how Anne-Marie had 'put him back together again' after his life fell apart.

They got together after he was involved in an accident, crashing his Mini while over the drink-drive limit in April 2018.

Their relationship was publicly slammed by Lisa at the time, who tweeted: 'To think she was MY friend. My friend and OUR PA who I let into our home.'

She then went on to reveal that she did not know about the romance and had only found out about the new relationship after reading about it in the media.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She always highlights her flawless figure with incredibly stylish ensembles.

And Molly Smith flashed her defined abs in a chic olive green co-ord on Friday as she headed inside Menagerie Bar And Restaurant in Manchester.

The former Love Islander, 27, looked sensational in her off-the-shoulder crop top and matching satin shorts which revealed her toned legs, as she headed inside the eatery to celebrate her pal Laura Merrin's birthday.

Green without envy: Molly Smith flashed her defined abs in a chic olive green co-ord on Friday as she headed inside Menagerie Bar And Restaurant in Manchester

Her statement top featured billowing sleeves and ruched fabric around her midriff.

She boosted her height with strappy gold heels, complementing the gold detailing on her expensive Dior tote.

Molly completed the look with glamorous jewellery including hoop earrings and a pendant necklace.

The blonde beauty styled her tresses in effortless waves and enhanced her radiant complexion with a light slick of make-up.

Glamourpuss: The former Love Islander, 27, looked sensational in her off-the-shoulder crop top and matching satin shorts which revealed her toned legs, as she headed inside the eatery

Her friends also opted for figure-hugging outfits as they joined Molly at the restaurant.

It comes after Molly and her Love Island boyfriend Callum Jones appeared loved-up as they attended a Klarna Launch party in Manchester on Thursday night.

The Love Island star and her co-star beau, 25, walked arm-in-arm through the streets of the city before entering the glitzy showbiz bash.

Molly looked typically stylish as she flaunted her incredible abs once more in a black crop top, teamed with a pair of chic leather trousers.

Golden touch: She boosted her height with strappy gold heels, complementing the gold detailing on her expensive Dior tote as her friends also opted for racy, figure-hugging outfits

Celebration: Molly completed the look with glamorous jewellery including hoop earrings and a pendant necklace to celebrate her pal Laura Merrin's birthday

The reality personality styled the ensemble with an olive green blazer, while she carried her essentials in a black padded bag with a gold chain strap.

The blonde bombshell wore her long locks in a loose straight style and opted for a glamorous coat of make-up in bronze tones.

Molly accessorised with hoop earrings and a selection of rings, while she boosted her petite frame with a pair of Perspex heels.

Callum also looked on trend in a plain white T-shirt which he wore under a dark jacket and teamed with a pair of black trousers.

He completed his outfit with a pair of black and white trainers.

The couple, who are both from Manchester, have been inseparable since meeting on the reality show and they moved in to a new home together last year.

Molly entered the show as a Casa Amor bombshell and turned Callum's head from his former flame Shaughna Phillips.

Callum was an original Islander and had been coupled up with Shaughna from the beginning, before switching his affections towards Molly.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stephen Belafonte has taken a savage swipe at ex-wife Mel B and claimed she believed he would 'hurt' their daughter Madison, nine, in a shock social media tirade on Friday.

The producer, 46, took to Instagram to share a series of sweet pictures with his daughter in which he lashed out at the Spice Girl, 46, in the caption, while also branding her a 'horrible liar' on his stories.

Stephen and Mel, who split in 2017, are currently locked in a bitter custody battle over their daughter, who at present lives with her father in Los Angeles.

Wow: Stephen Belafonte has taken a savage swipe at ex-wife Mel B and claimed she believed he would 'hurt' their daughter Madison, nine, in a shock social media tirade on Friday

And making his feelings about Mel very clear in his caption, Stephen referenced the star and told how he had to be 'monitored in a room' with Madison as the singer believed he would do harm to their child.

He penned: 'Damn four years ago I got to see my daughter twice a week for two hours! I had to be monitored in a room because my ex said I would hurt my daughter!!

'Now my daughter lives with me in Los Angeles!! Never give up a fight for your beautiful child the payoff is worth more than every [diamond] in the [world].'

Shocking: The producer, 46, took to Instagram to share a series of sweet pictures with his daughter in which he lashed out at the Spice Girl, 46, in the caption, while also branding her a 'horrible liar' on his stories (pictured in 2019)

Alongside the pictures of him cuddling Madison, Stephen also shared videos of him spending quality time with his little girl.

One saw them chilling out on a plane together, while another showed him practicing walking her down the aisle while humorously forbidding her from marrying until she was 45.

On his Instagram stories, Stephen made another dig at his former spouse as he shared a video of himself and Madison dancing while watching a sunset.

Feud: Stephen and Mel, who split in 2017, are currently locked in a bitter custody battle over their daughter, who at present lives with her father in Los Angeles (pictured in 2016)

Rant: Making his feelings about Mel very clear in his caption, Stephen referenced the star and told how he had to be 'monitored in a room' with Madison as the singer believed he would do harm to their child

Dig: On his Instagram stories, Stephen made another dig at his former spouse as he shared a video of himself and Madison dancing while watching a sunset

Captioning the clip, he penned: 'If anyone knows me I had to fight a horrible liar who is diseased in her [brain].

'But she thought that I would ever give up my rights to my daughter and walk away??! She must've been smokin big rock!!'

MailOnline have contacted representatives of Mel B for comment.

Stephen's words comes days after Mel claimed that he video called their daughter Madison while 'surrounded by women in thongs on a yacht'.

Claims: 'Damn four years ago I got to see my daughter twice a week for two hours! I had to be monitored in a room because my ex said I would hurt my daughter!!'

Having his say: 'Now my daughter lives with me in Los Angeles!! Never give up a fight for your beautiful child the payoff is worth more than every [diamond] in the [world]'

Amid their custody battle, the Wannabe hitmaker now asking for a judge to grant her more time with Madison, according to reports.

Mel reportedly states in court papers that she is 'increasingly concerned about Madison's safety' and her former partner's 'parenting decisions, listing the alleged video as one of her concerns.

Following her split from Stephen in 2017, Mel moved back to the UK and is now based in Leeds, while Madison is in America with Stephen.

According to The Sun, Mel is now seeking more time with Madison and lists in court papers a concern is Stephen's 'video communication with Madison while he is on a yacht surrounded by young women consuming alcohol and dancing in thong'.

Custody battle: Mel B recently claimed ex-husband Stephen 'video-called daughter Madison while surrounded by women in thongs on a yacht'

The publication claims Mel told an LA court: ''Stephen is working constantly, leaving our daughter in the care of third-parties for extended times and through the days and nights.'

She claims she has been 'ignore and lied to' by Stephen and questioned who is 'caring for and around Madison' while she is in Los Angeles.

A judge ordered that Mel is informed of Madison's whereabouts when Stephen goes away and set a timetable for Madison to visit Mel in the UK.

MailOnline contacted representatives for Mel B and Stephen Belafonte for comment at the time.

The reports come after Mel addressed not being able to see Madison as much as she likes, with the coronavirus pandemic making it even more 'difficult' due to restrictions on international travel.

Ongoing: Mel and Stephen have been locked in a custody battle over daughter Madison, nine, since divorcing in 2017 - she is currently in LA with her dad while Mel is back in the UK

Tough time: Reports claim Mel is now asking for a judge to grant her more time with Madison and she allegedly listed her concerns about Stephen in court papers

Mel explained in an interview with OK! magazine that during lockdown she was forced to go 'months at a time' without seeing Madison - describing the distance between herself and her daughter as the 'hardest thing' to deal with.

'I've been a single parent for a long time, as I've always been the one who financially and emotionally supported my family,' Mel said.

'Unfortunately, due to the justice system, a difficult situation with my ex, and the fact that my youngest is an American citizen, I have shared care of Madison – and because of Covid, flying between America and the UK has been really difficult.

'Not having my baby with me for months at a time is the hardest thing I've had to deal with.'

Difficult: Mel said not being able to see Madison for 'months at a time' is the 'hardest thing to deal with' - especially as the pandemic has made things more difficult given restrictions (pictured with Madison in 2016)

Apart: Opening up about the difficult situation, Mel said: 'Not having my baby with me for months at a time is the hardest thing I've had to deal with' (pictured above with Madison)

Mel is also mum to daughters Phoenix, 22, from her previous relationship with ex Jimmy Gulzar, and Angel, 14, who she shares with ex Eddie Murphy.

She and Stephen married in 2007 and were together for 10 years, before splitting.

Mel previously accused ex-husband Stephen of 'emotional and physical abuse', which he has vehemently denied, and has claimed she attempted to leave her marriage for a decade but found it to be an 'impossible' situation.

In May, earlier this year, Mel spoke about her traumatic experience with domestic abuse during an appearance on Good Morning Britain.

US based: Madison is a US citizen and is currently based in LA with dad Stephen, who Mel was married to for 10 years before their split in 2017

The singer emotionally admitted being abused 'does crush your soul' as she claimed it would take 'forever to get that back', and explained how women in situations like hers struggle to get out of it.

Mel told co-hosts Susanna Reid and Adil Ray: 'As a woman that's gone through it, it does crush your soul, it does really strip you… I'm going to be taking forever to get that back.

'I've had to build myself up. One of the good things for me is to speak to other women who have been in a similar situation.'

Mel recently appeared in a Women's Aid video where she appeared beaten and covered in fake bruises as she attempted to flee a violent partner. The Spice Girls star is a patron of the charity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She decided to leave Little Mix in December last year to focus on her mental health and solo music career.

And now Jesy Nelson has inked a new contract with Ariana Grande’s label, Republic Records, in hopes of conquering the music charts in the United States.

The singer, 30, who is also signed to Polydor Records in the United Kingdom, is hoping to 'make it big' across the pond as she prepares for the release of her first solo single.

New deal: Jesy Nelson has inked a new contract with Ariana Grande’s label, Republic Records, in hopes of conquering the music charts in the United States.

A source said to The Sun on Friday: 'Jesy never really managed to make it big in the States with Little Mix, but thanks to the deal with Republic, she’s got the best team around her.

'There is a real buzz when it comes to her solo career and this single could be the thing to take her career to the next level.'

MailOnline confirmed with Jesy's representatives that she has signed with Republic Records who represent a plethora of stars including Ariana, 28, Taylor Swift, Drake and Nicki Minaj.

Rumours are also swirling that Nicki, 38, features on her new track, which is expected to be released next month.

Follow in her footsteps: The singer, 30, who is also signed to Polydor Records in the UK, is hoping to 'make it big' across the pond just like the Thank U, Next hitmaker, 28 (pictured)

It comes three years after the American rapper collaborated with Jesy and Little Mix on the song, Woman Like Me.

According to The Sun, Jesy's upcoming record will sample music from P Diddy, Black Rob and Mark Curry’s track Bad Boy For Life, which was released in 2001.

Jesy is reportedly at risk of sparking tension between herself and her former Little Mix bandmates with her solo material which is said to sound very similar to the band's music.

Revealed: A source said to The Sun on Friday: 'Jesy never really managed to make it big in the States with Little Mix, but thanks to the deal with Republic, she’s got the best team around her'

Duo? The publication also reported that Nicki Minaj, 38, features on her new track, which is expected to be released next month

A source told the publication that Jesy's similar sounding tracks won't go down well with Leigh-Anne Pinnock, Jade Thirlwall and Perrie Edwards, who it's claimed she primarily speaks to now through lawyers.

The insider said: 'Things have got progressively more strained, but seeing her return with a song and an image that could have been taken straight from the Little Mix playbook is going to be very divisive.

'The girls always vowed to stay friends after all they had been through, but now most of their communication happens through intermediaries including lawyers and managers, which is a real shame.

'Jesy’s new video shoot could have been a Little Mix single, it’s packed with choreography and the style is very similar too.'

The source added Jesy's ex-bandmates may wonder why she quit the band when she has returned just eight months later with a similar look and sound.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They both gained a high profile after appearing on Love Island.

And Francesca Allen, 25, and Georgia Steel, 23, showcased their unique styles on a night out in London on Friday, as they prepared to dine at Asian eatery Sexy Fish.

The 25-year-old travel and fashion advocate flaunted her washboard abs in a ruched black crop top, with Georgia, a former performing arts student, showcasing her toned pins in a leather ensemble.

Night out: Love Island's Francesca Allen (left) exhibited her washboard abs and Georgia Steel (right) put on a leggy display for an evening at Sexy Fish on Friday

Francesca, who appeared on the fifth series of Love Island two years ago, coordinated the ruched crop top with black trousers, which had red and white striped detailing and an ankle slit.

Keeping her makeup natural and her long locks flicked behind her shoulders, the reality star added a touch of colour to her look by carrying a miniature emerald bag.

Francesca wore a dainty gold necklace and small hoops, opting for comfort with a pair of platformed white trainers.

Toned: Francesca, who appeared on the fifth series of Love Island two years ago, co-ordinated the ruched crop top with black trousers, which had red and white striped detailing

Georgia, who graced the Love Island villa the year prior to her pal, coiffed her chestnut tresses in tight waves.

Her chic look consisted of an oversized cream leather blazer worn with shorts and a hint of a white tee.

The television star wasn't afraid to step out in an impressive pair of studded white heels which emphasised her toned pins.

Good friends: Georgia's chic look consisted of an oversized cream leather blazer worn with shorts and a hint of a white tee

Strutting their stuff: The girls looked ready for a night of good food and company as they linked arms walking down the street

Chic: Francesca opted for platformed white trainers, with Georgia wearing an impressive pair of studded white heels

Reality stars: The girls gained a high profile after appearing on Love Island, Francesca in 2019 and Georgia the year before

The girls looked ready for a night of good food and company as they linked arms walking down the street.

Francesca gave her almost 500,000 Instagram followers a peek of their evening via her story.

Snapping a content-looking Georgia enjoying her meal, Francesca penned: 'My girl I missed you!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's been soaking up the sunshine in Spain with his new girlfriend Lilian de Carvalho.

And Boris Becker faced a potentially awkward conversation on Friday as he showed his support for son Noah, 27, at his art exhibition in Palma de Mallorca.

The tennis ace, 53, and his stylish new partner, who is in her 40s, were seen chatting to his ex-wife and Noah's mother Barbara, 54, while mingling at the event.

Family event! Boris Becker faced a potentially awkward conversation with his new partner Lilian de Carvalho and ex-wife Barbara (right) on Friday as he showed his support for son Noah, 27, at his art exhibition in Palma de Mallorca

During the evening the women were spotted speaking to each other, with Boris reaching out to hold onto Lilian's arm at one point.

While in other snaps the couple are seen looking towards Barbara as she struts away from them.

Friendly exes Boris and Barbara, who have both attended events supporting their sons Noah and Elias before, were married from 1993 to 2001.

All good? Lilian flicked her hair while speaking with Barbara and another woman at the show

Big night: During the evening the women were seen speaking to each other, with Boris reaching out to hold onto Lilian's arm at one point

Boris is also father to Anna Ermakova, 21, from a fling with Angela [Ermakova] and also has son, Amadeus, 11, from his marriage to Lilly - whom he married in 2009.

Ensuring to look her best for the exhibition, Lilian put on a leggy display in a silk playsuit and added to her toned frame in a pair of red heels.

The beauty accessorised with a small top-handle handbag and completed her look with a slick of red lipstick to complement her shoes.

Barbara also looked sensational for her son's big night in an animal-print slip dress which she paired with a colourful jacket.

Artist: Noah, Boris' eldest son, proudly posed with some of the artwork on display

Style: The women looked sensational in stylish prints, with Lilian opting for a floral playsuit and Barbara a colourful jacket

Something she said? Lilian looked a little puzzled as Barbara walked away from her

Former flames: Friendly exes Boris and Barbara, who have been seen together at events supporting their sons Noah and Elias before, were married from 1993 to 2001

While Boris swapped his swimming shorts for a smart ensemble, donning a long-sleeved black top and black trousers.

Proving it really was a family affair, Boris and Barbara's other son Elias, 21, also made an appearance.

He showcased his fashion credentials in an oversized white vest and sported a camera around his neck.

Looking good: Lilian put on a leggy display in a silk playsuit and added to her toned frame in a pair of red heels

Supportive: Boris' son Elias, 21, also made an appearance to celebrate his older brother's work

Chatting: Boris and Lilian shared a few words as they enjoyed the night and looked at the art

Working the crowd: The former athlete seemed relaxed while chatting to others at the event

Had enough? Smartly-dressed Boris walked away from the women's conversation

Leggy: The beauty flaunted her toned pins, adding some extra height to her frame in heels

Couple: Boris and Lilian arrived holding hands and flashed some smiles for the cameras

Although now being in Spain, Boris and Lilian, who have been linked since June 2020, have also spent time together in London as well as being seen in Dubai back in January during the third UK lockdown.

London-based Lilian is a political risk analyst and has three degrees, including a masters in African studies from the School of Oriental and African Studies, and speaks five languages.

The holiday comes after Boris' ex-wife Lilly, 45, spoke out about their 2018 split after nine years of marriage. The couple share their son Amadeus.

Fashion: Barbara looked sensational for her son's big night in an animal-print slip dress which she paired with a colourful jacket

Mother and son: Barbara and Elias arrived hand-in-hand

Glamorous: The beauty looked radiant in her slinky animal print dress

Work it: She posed up a storm and worked all her angles for the camera

All in the details: Barbara completed her look with two colourful beaded bracelets

In a new interview with Hello!, Lilly revealed how she and Boris 'truly tried' to make their relationship work, and how, three years after their split, she is ready to find love again.

Reflecting on her marriage breakdown, the Dutch model said: 'Sadly, Boris and I cannot make it work – that is the reality, we have truly tried.

'I am not full of regrets as he gave me so many wonderful memories and also our incredible son. For that alone I will be truly grateful – you learn and move on. Take the chapter and use it.'

Group: Artist Noah arrived at his show with pals as well as his mother Barbara and brother Elias

Group: Noah (second left) and his mother Barbara (right) joined other friends for some snaps

Toned: Lilian highlighted her svelte figure in the tight ensemble which cinched at the waist

Lilly added that she would like to find love again. 'I am emotionally ready, so it's just trying to find the right one. Don't we all long for that fairytale ending?', she revealed.

The model also spoke proudly about their son Amadeus as she revealed he 'definitely has his father's genes' and is 'very interested in running and tennis'.

The former Wimbledon champion split from model Lilly in 2018 after a 13-year relationship and nine years of marriage, and it is understood that they are still in the 'final stages' of divorcing.

In May 2019, the pair reached an agreement after becoming embroiled in a family court dispute over their son.

Laughing away: Boris was all smiles as he and Lilian mingled with the other guests

Impressive: Several large artworks were on display, with proud dad Boris looking delighted

In demand: Noah looked every inch the professional artist as he showed off his collection and answered questions

Dapper: The father-of-four looked suave in an all-black ensemble and toted a grey blazer

Night out: Boris and Lilian have been soaking up the sun during their time in Spain by relaxing on a boat

Skill: The huge paintings on display boasted lots of bright colours

Centre of attention: Everyone looked engrossed in whatever Boris was saying

Lilly reflected on 2018 after parting ways from her husband of nine years during an interview with Günther Jauch on Germany's RTL.

She admitted the couple will never rekindle their relationship, insisting: 'It's really over between us. 2018 was the worst time of my 42 years. He so grossly disappointed me.'

Speaking on the negative effects of being in the limelight, she went on: 'What makes it so bad is that everything is happening in public now. But I married a public man, maybe it's part of it.'

'Unfortunately, [a reunion would] not work anymore. Too much has happened. I do not want to, he does not, and that's fine. It's really over between us.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Friday night's Love Island episode saw Jake Cornish finally tell Liberty Poole he loved her after she confronted him over his true feelings for her.

In recent days, Liberty has questioned Jake's genuineness over their romance, with her doubts heightened in the latest challenge in which they were voted the couple with the most one-sided relationship.

And after a candid make-or-break conversation, Jake finally said those three little words four weeks after Liberty first uttered them, but viewers at home were not convinced and accused him of saying 'what she wants to hear'.

Declaration: Friday night's Love Island episode saw Jake Cornish finally tell Liberty Poole he loved her after she confronted him over his true feelings for her

Sitting him down on the roof terrace, Liberty was determined to hear Jake's real feelings for her once and for all and questioned him on why he hadn't said 'I love you' despite her saying it a month previously.

She also confronted him on how much he actually liked her and how much was him playing up to the cameras, while she claimed she didn't want to feel like a 'mug' if their relationship was one-sided.

Arguing his point, Jake said that he didn't want to 'throw out' the words 'I love you' and said that making her his girlfriend meant more than him saying it.

Not convinced: After a candid make-or-break conversation, Jake finally said those three little words four weeks after Liberty first uttered them, but viewers at home were not convinced and accused him of saying 'what she wants to hear'

He also said that he didn't want to make the grand declaration after his return from Casa Amor as it didn't 'feel right'.

On whether their relationship was genuine, he told her that he'd never said anything that implied she had doubts, while he asked her to directly tell him if she didn't feel OK and for him not to have to hear it from other people.

And after Liberty said how she felt about him, he finally told her the words that she longed to hear.

He said: 'I don’t feel like I’m going to get hurt from you but I haven’t told you how I feel... we are well suited and made for each other…you are a part of me, I feel like I’ve found what Iv’e been looking for because I love you.

Tough: In recent days, Liberty has questioned Jake's genuineness over their romance, with her doubts heightened in the latest challenge in which they were voted the couple with the most one-sided relationship

Showdown: Sitting him down on the roof terrace, Liberty was determined to hear Jake's real feelings for her once and for all and questioned him on why he hadn't said 'I love you' despite her saying it a month previously

Tense: She also confronted him on how much he actually liked her and how much was him playing up to the cameras, while she claimed she didn't want to feel like a 'mug' if their relationship was one-sided

'I love you for you, it’s scary to say but I love you.. Liberty Amor Poole I love you, you make me so happy.'

At this the couple leaned in for a passionate kiss, with Liberty overwhelmed by her boyfriend's declaration.

However, despite the sweet moment, viewers at home were not convinced by his words, with some accusing him of saying only what she wanted to hear.

Defence: Arguing his point, Jake said that he didn't want to 'throw out' the words 'I love you' and said that making her his girlfriend meant more than him saying it

Finally! And after Liberty said how she felt about him, he finally told her the words that she longed to hear

Happy? At this the couple leaned in for a passionate kiss, with Liberty overwhelmed by her boyfriend's declaration

One person tweeted: 'Liberty coerced again with three little words that she wants to hear, while Jake was choking on them.'

While another shared: 'Liberty he’s bulls***ting you hun!!! Only telling you what you want to hear other wise he would of said it 4 weeks ago too.'

'Love Island play JoJo - Too Little Too Late because this confession is 4 weeks overdue' tweeted a third.

Reaction: However, despite the sweet moment, viewers at home were not convinced by his words, with some accusing him of saying only what she wanted to hear

While a fourth simply put: 'that whole speech was planned out.'

'Liberty if you have to ask for someone to say they love you, THEY DON’T!' said another, with a different viewer sharing: 'All that stuttering and giggling because he was nervous because he knew he was about to tell a lie.'

With another adding: 'Hmmmm is he saying love you now just because He’s been called out or is he lying.'

Earlier in the show, Liberty was left disturbed as she and Jake were voted as having the most one-sided relationship, as well as the couple most likely to split when they leave the villa.

Uh oh: Earlier in the show, Liberty was left disturbed as she and Jake were voted as having the most one-sided relationship, as well as the couple most likely to split when they leave the villa

Stunned: In the beach hut she expressed her shock, remarking: 'Never in a million years I expected us to be up there, at all, it's mind-blowing. I'm really confused'

As the other islanders were shocked into silence amid the one-sided vote, Liberty tried to brush off their viewer vote as she said 'not cool' and joked it was' savage'.

But in the beach hut she expressed her shock, remarking: 'Never in a million years I expected us to be up there, at all, it's mind-blowing. I'm really confused.'

Elsewhere, other islanders began to question their relationship, with Faye telling beau Teddy that she believed the water engineer was a 'showman'.

She told him that he only did the whole 'girlfriend thing' because 'he's a showman', before telling Teddy: 'I promise that they won’t work on the outside’.

Opinion: Elsewhere, other islanders began to question their relationship, with Faye telling beau Teddy that she believed the water engineer was a 'showman'

Later on, Kaz, Chloe and Millie also shared their doubts over Jake, with Chloe remarking that he's 'very aware he's on a TV programme' and that his 'intentions are not what Lib deserves.'

While Millie suggested his actions were 'calculated', and Kaz admitted that she's 'starting to see' what others may see.

Following the declarations of love, Sunday night's teaser clip sees all the girls hold an intervention with Liberty as they urge her to think about her romance with Jake.

The tense scene sees Liberty ask the girls if they think she was an 'idiot' for believing Jake's words to her, before the screen cuts away.

Love Island continued Sunday at 9pm on ITV and ITV Hub.

Doubts: Later on, Kaz, Chloe and Millie also shared their doubts over Jake, with Chloe remarking that he's 'very aware he's on a TV programme' and that his 'intentions are not what Lib deserves'

Questions: Following the declarations of love, Sunday night's teaser clip sees all the girls hold an intervention with Liberty as they urge her to think about her romance with Jake
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Their romance first blossomed during the winter version of Love Island in 2020.

And Nas Majeed, 25, and Eva Zapico, 23, packed on the PDA in Manchester on Friday as they headed for a meal at Rosso.

The smitten couple, who became official last summer, couldn't keep their hands off each other as they shared a kiss in front of the cameras.

Smitten: Love Island's Nas Majeed and Eva Zapico packed on the PDA in Manchester on Friday after revealing the winners of their I Saw It First competition

The recruitment consultant paraded her slender frame in a lilac blazer and short co-ord, which she wore with a white bandeau.

Her dark waves falling behind her shoulders, Eva beamed widely as she held her beau's hand.

She boosted her height in a glitzy pair of strappy heels and applied natural makeup, most notably a slick of nude lipstick.

Pucker up: Nas stopped to plant a kiss on his stunning's girlfriend's lips before the pair sat down to dine in the Italian eatery Rosso

Presenter Nas opted for an all-black look - a spruce shirt and ripped jeans, finalising the attire with white trainers.

He stopped to plant a kiss on his stunning's girlfriend's lips before the pair sat down to dine in the Italian eatery.

Eva shared a sweet selfie of them on her Instagram Story, Nas' arm wrapped round her as he flashed a peace sign.

Hand-holding: The recruitment consultant paraded her slender frame in a lilac blazer and short co-ord, which she accompanied with a white bandeau

Cosy: Eva shared a sweet selfie of them on her Instagram Story, Nas' arm wrapped round her as he flashed a peace sign

Contest: The pair didn't just stop to eat at Rosso during their Manchester outing, as earlier in the day they met their I Saw It First competition winners

The pair didn't just stop to eat at Rosso during their Manchester outing, as earlier in the day they met their I Saw It First competition winners.

The prize included a photo shoot, an 'I Saw It First' wardrobe - and getting to spend the day with the two Love Island stars.

Nas showcased some of their train journey to the north-western city, where they both looked in great spirits.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is celebrating her hen party in sunny Ibiza ahead of wedding to fiancé William Lee-Kemp, 38.

And Jess Wright, 35, stepped out wearing a wedding veil on Friday after spending the afternoon partying with a group of her nearest and dearest at Nikki Beach.

The former TOWIE star looked a vision in a satin cream two-piece which accentuated her sensational figure.

Bride-to-be: Jess Wright continued the glam hen party festivities in Ibiza on Saturday as she stepped out wearing a wedding veil

Jess added to her height in a pair of jewel-studded sandals, which were perfectly paired with the top and skirt co-ord.

Putting on a leggy display, the television personality accessorised with a small cross-body bag and chic black shades.

The star wore a full-face of makeup during the second day of her hen-do, a sweep of bronzer defining her cheekbones.

Hen do: The 35-year-old spent the afternoon partying with a group of her nearest and dearest at Nikki Beach

Glam: The former TOWIE star looked a vision in a satin cream two-piece

Leggy: Jess added to her height in a pair of jewel-studded sandals, which were perfectly paired with the top and skirt co-ord

Spanish getaway: The television personality accessorised with a small cross-body bag and chic black shades

Go get em! Jess also documented highlights of her fun day for her Instagram followers

For the fun-filled day, the brunette beauty slicked back her tresses into a low bun.

She documented snippets from day two of her hen party on her Instagram Story, looking a vision as she had copious glitter applied to her face.

Jess was forced to postpone her June dream wedding in Mallorca to William due to the pandemic.

The reality star recently revealed she will now walk down the aisle with William in September.

Jam-packed trip: The star wore a full-face of makeup during the second day of her hen-do, a sweep of bronzer defining her cheekbones

Stunning: For the fun-filled day, the brunette beauty also slicked back her tresses into a low bun

In an interview with Hello! Magazine she admitted she and William had considered scrapping plans to exchange nuptials in Mallorca and have a smaller ceremony in England, as pandemic regulations affect travel.

Noting that she's far from alone in her dilemma, Jessica told the publication: 'I really feel for all brides out there. Every day, we have been back and forth trying to decide what to do – I've been driving myself insane with it.'

She continued: 'We always wanted to get wed abroad with all our family and friends, but we have explored every option, different dates, different places. A few weeks ago I said to Will: "Shall we have a smaller wedding here in England?"

Tying the knot: Jess was forced to postpone her June dream wedding in Mallorca to William due to the pandemic

Of their autumn wedding, she explained: 'It gives more time for things to get back to normal and for all our nearest and dearest to be there. I have definitely relaxed since setting the new date. I can't wait to wear my dress – I just want to do it now.'

William popped the question on the snow capped peaks of Courchevel, France, in February 2020 after 13 months of dating.

Jess previously told Hello! that her sister-in-law Michelle Keegan, the actress wife of her brother Mark, would be one of bridal party, as well as her sister Natalya.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@DJ Khaled informed his Instagram following on Friday that he and his family have fully recovered after contracting the coronavirus.

'Thank you grateful for all the love grateful for everyone checking in on my family and I!' captioned the 45-year-old music producer, adding that they are 'all good now.'

The hitmaker included a series of sweet family photos and videos of himself playing with his sons to illustrate how everyone appeared to be in tip-top shape.

On the other side: DJ Khaled, 45, revealed that he and his family had contracted Covid-19 on Saturday, only to reveal in the same Instagram post that they had already recovered and were doing well.

Khaled urged his 25.6 million Instagram followers to 'Please be safe out there' and to 'take care of yourself' in his caption.

He included jubilant thanks to 'DOCTORS'

'Thank you to DOCTORS ,thank you Dovi thank you to my Queen thank you Rosa,' he continued, while also adding praise for his management company.

'THANK YOU GOD! GOD LOVE US! WE LOVE GOD! GOD IS THE GREATEST!' he continued, capping off the post with, 'WE THE BEST! LOVE AND BLESSINGS!'

In his text post, he thanked his fans for their 'calls and prayers.'

'My family and I recovered from Covid and we're all good now!!' he wrote.

Doing better: 'Thank you grateful for all the love grateful for everyone checking in on my family and I!' captioned the music producer, adding that they are 'all good now'

Stay safe: Khaled urged his 25.6 million Instagram followers to 'Please be safe out there' and to 'take care of yourself'

Silent: Notably, Khaled didn't specify if he or his wife had received the Covid-19 vaccine, and he doesn't appear to have previously encourage his fans to get inoculated. The vaccines aren't currently authorized for children younger than 12 in the US

The hype man didn't specify which members of his family had been stricken with Covid-19.

He and his wife Nicole Tuck share two young boys, Asahd, four, and Aalam, one.

Notably, Khaled didn't specify if he or his wife had received the Covid-19 vaccine, and he doesn't appear to have previously stated his vaccination status or encouraged his enormous social media following to get the jab.

The doses currently available in the United States are not authorized for children younger than 12, so neither of his boys would have been eligible to receive it.

Although the more-contagious Delta variant of the novel coronavirus has shown the ability to bypass the vaccine and cause breakthrough infections in rare circumstances, the vast majority of vaccinated people will be protected against it.

Even though who experience a very rare breakthrough infection tend to have much milder symptoms than unvaccinated people.

Mystery: He also didn't share who in his family was sick. Although the new Delta variant of Covid-19 can very rarely sicken vaccinated people, their symptoms tend to be much milder than unvaccinated people's, and they rarely require hospitalization or die

Although hospitals across the country are again filling up with Covid-19 patients due to the Delta variant, the vast majority of hospitalized people are unvaccinated.

Included in the producer's post were cute family photos. One set of outdoor images showed him in a shirt covered in pink flamingos with zebra-stripe trim as he leaned down to give Asahd a sweet kiss.

The little boy and his younger brother held hands in another adorable snap.

The parents appeared to be celebrating in another photo of them dressed casually next to a set of letter-shaped golden balloons.

Asahd shared that LeBron James and Michael Jordan were among his favorite basketball players after watching both Space Jam movies in a short video before he dunked on a child-sized basketball hoop.

It had previously been two weeks since DJ Khaled's last Instagram post
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She appeared to celebrate the news that her father had agreed to step down as her conservator with a high-energy dance video posted earlier in the day.

And Britney Spears was spotted again later on Friday as she relaxed while lighting up a cigarette.

The 39-year-old pop superstar was behind the wheel for a drive near her Thousand Oaks home.

On the road: Britney Spears, 39, took a relaxing drive near her home in Thousand Oaks, California, on Friday afternoon while lighting up a cigarette

Britney appeared to be dressed casually and had sunglasses on to block out the piercing sun.

She was spotted flicking ash from her cigarette out the window.

While she was out and about, the Womanizer singer dropped by a convenience store to pick up a soda.

Although Britney doesn't appear to publicize her smoking on her social media accounts, she admitted as early as 2002 that she sometimes smokes cigarettes in an interview with People.

Quick trip: Britney was dressed casually and wore sunglasses. She was spotted stopping by a convenience store to pick up a soda

Earlier in the day, Britney referenced her cryptic Project Rose photos on Instagram while savoring the scent of a lovely pink flower.

The singer's latest posts arrive just days after lawyers for her father Jamie Spears announced that he planned to step down from his position as her conservator.

Britney's super-short video featured her in a tightly pleated white patterned peasant top that she appears to have worn previously.

As with many of her posts, it's unclear if she filmed the clip recently or was reusing it from a previous session, but she appears to have worn the same outfit at least a year earlier.

A thick strand of Britney's long blond hair fell down the front of her shoulder, and she paired the top with brilliant white cut-off jeans.

She was seen sniffing the flower in the photo, which only lasted about a second.

Smelling the roses: Earlier, she sniffed a pink flower in another Instagram entry from for her series Project Rose, which she hasn't explained so far

Going strong: 'Project Rose is a year old and 9 days old!!!!' she gushed in her caption. 'Why does this project smell so f***ing good still today????'

'Project Rose is a year old and 9 days old!!!!' she gushed in her caption. 'Why does this project smell so f***ing good still today???? Psss if you look closely the mood ring I’m wearing was for my song MOOD RING!!!!'

Although Britney doesn't appear to have explicitly stated what Project Rose or her other color-coded projects entail, they appear to simply refer to a series of coordinated photos featuring recurring colors or objects.

In the case of Project Rose, which she sometimes refers to as Project Red, she seems to pose with either a red flower or other red items or clothing.

However, the cryptic nature of the Toxic singer's posts has led many fans to craft conspiracy theories about the projects.

Old school: Britney's super-short video featured her in a tightly pleated white patterned peasant top and white cut-offs that she appears to have worn previously

Easter egg: The makers of the documentary Framing Britney Spears revealed in February that they used roses as an allusion to Britney's posts, according to Glamour

Some have speculated that the posts were coded messages to her fans about the state of her conservatorship, though there's little evidence to support those assertions.

In February, eagle-eyed fans noted that the New York Times Present documentary Framing Britney Spears featured outdoor interviews conducted in front of an ivy-covered wall decorated with roses, which led some to speculate that the filmmakers were collaborating with their subject.

However, director Samantha Stark and New York Times Senior Editor Liz Day told Glamour later in February that they had noticed Britney's use of roses and opted to include them on their set as a reference to her posts.

Later on Friday, Britney shared two extreme closeups of her face as she documented her recent weight-loss attempt.

She didn't appear to be wearing a shirt and was lit similarly to a topless post from July 30.

Slimming down: Later on Friday, Britney shared two extreme closeups of her face as she documented her recent weight-loss attempt

A slightly zoomed-out second photo appeared to show her covering her bust with her hands.

'It’s really weird whenever I try to slim down it usually starts with my legs first ... then my stomach ... then my face … and that's when I know I’ve actually lost weight!!!!' she explained.

Although she sounded excited at getting results, the hitmaker wasn't totally sold on her slimmer figure and seemed to miss some of her curves.

'When you swipe to the second pic you can actually really see how slim my face is but I’m not so sure I like it… In the old days when women were heavier they were considered more attractive to men because it was a sign of wealth!!!!' she continued.

'I have a couple of throwback dances from this summer where I looked heavier but it's weird cause I think I was happier!!!! Oh well ... sorry for my shallow talk of weight … but it is what it is you know!!!! GOD BLESS YOU ALL ☀️!!!!!'

Mixed feelings: 'I’m not so sure I like it,' Britney said of her weight loss and added that she was happier in dancing videos where she was heavier

Earlier this year Britney highlighted her weight loss in a dancing video after sharing that she had taken up portion control to lose weight.

The entertainer's weight was featured in a widely publicized anecdote from a lengthy report published by The New Yorker in July.

According to writers Ronan Farrow and Jia Tolentino, former Spears family friend Jacqueline Butcher claimed that she saw Jamie say: 'Baby, you’re fat. Daddy’s gonna get you on a diet and a trainer, and you’re gonna get back in shape.'

Britney's latest posts following a joyous dancing video from earlier on Friday.

She put on a high-energy display in black lace catsuit while striking a number of poses, captioning the post simply with three kiss emojis.

It follows Thursday's court filing by Jamie, 69, who is finally relinquishing control of his daughter's estate, marking a huge victory for the singer as she battles to end a 13-year conservatorship - even though he did not immediately resign.

Freedom: Britney dances in lace bodysuit in an Instagram video from earlier on Friday... just a day after father Jamie agreed to step down as conservator of her estate

Britney has been known to share a wealth of content for her fans on social media, and has made more than a few pointed digs at her family members and her current situation.

Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Jamie has been paying himself $16,000 a month since 2008 to manage his daughter's estimated $60million fortune.

He announced Thursday that he would stepping down, as his daughter has long demanded, provided Judge Brenda Penny asked him to and there was a plan in place for Britney's care.

The 39-year-old pop star put on a high-energy display in black lace catsuit while striking a number of poses, captioning the post simply with three kiss emojis.

Moving on: It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators

Pointed: Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Busting a move: The singer delights her fans with her social media content

Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, said it was 'a vindication for Britney'.

'We are pleased that Mr. Spears and his lawyer have today conceded in a filing that he must be removed,' he said. 'It is vindication for Britney.'

In the court documents, obtained by TMZ, his lawyers write: 'There are, in fact, no actual grounds for suspending or removing Mr. Spears as the Conservator of the Estate ... and it is highly debatable whether a change in conservator at this time would be in Ms. Spears' best interests.

'Nevertheless, even as Mr. Spears is the unremitting target of unjustified attacks, he does not believe that a public battle with his daughter over his continuing service as her conservator would be in her best interests.'

Jamie Spears, pictured with Britney in 2015, on Thursday resigned as her conservator. He said that he was stepping down because he did not feel the continued public battle was in her best interests

It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators.

Meanwhile, Britney appears to be free to continue to post as she pleases on her Instagram account.

Her friend, Paris Hilton took to Twitter yesterday, to express her relief that Britney is a a step closer to her freedom.

'I’m so happy to hear this news,' the socialite, 40, wrote with emojis of clapping hands and a heart. 'It’s been so long overdue but I’m so glad that Britney is on her way to finally being free.'

Ecstatic: Britney certainly looks upbeat after the news of her father Jamie stepping down

Twists and turns: Fans have been glued to her Instagram account amid the ongoing drama

Not so mellow yellow: The star put on an energetic display in the latest Instagram video

Happy: Britney appeared to be in a good mood in her latest video

The hotel heiress added, 'Sending so much love!' adding the now-ubiquitous hashtag #FreeBritney.

Rosie O'Donnell also took to Instagram to comment on the latest development in the case, sending her well-wishes to the pop star, as she said: 'That's right, he's stepping down, all the pressure worked, good for you Britney, being brave - tick tock you don't stop!'

Jamie, who has always insisted he was acting in the best interests of his superstar daughter, said that he will work with the legal teams to bring the complex case to an end.

'So, even though he must contest this unjustified Petition for his removal, Mr. Spears intends to work with the Court and his daughter's new attorney to prepare for an orderly transition to a new conservator,' his lawyers wrote.

Jamie, who is not believed to have spoken to his daughter since before Christmas, said that he will continue to look out for his daughter's best interests.

Jamie, 69, is pictured in 2008 leaving Los Angeles County Superior Courthouse - when her conservatorship was introduced. After 13 years, it now finally seems to be coming to an end

Mathew Rosengart, Britney Spears's lawyer, was appointed on July 14 to represent her - replacing the court-appointed Sam Ingham

'Regardless of his formal title, Mr. Spears will always be Ms. Spears' father, he will always love her unconditionally, and he will always look out for her best interests,' the lawyers said.

'If the public knew all the facts of Ms. Spears' personal life, not only her highs but also her lows, all of the addiction and mental health issues that she has struggled with, and all of the challenges of the Conservatorship, they would praise Mr. Spears for the job he has done, not vilify him.'

He said that the arrangement 'has worked as intended' and it was not surprising that Britney had felt 'constrained'.

The lawyers wrote: 'The Conservatorship has provided Ms. Spears with a structure to help her navigate the daily challenges of her personal life, family matters, medical issues, and career.

'By nature, the structure includes safeguards to protect the Conservatee from self-harm or harm from others.

'It is not surprising that Ms. Spears has often felt constrained or subject to excessive supervision.

'But, at least for the greater part of the past thirteen years, the Conservatorship has worked as intended.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ashley Benson was spotted spending time on the red carpet at Outfest Los Angeles on Friday evening.

The 31-year-old performer sported an eye-catching outfit while arriving at a showing of Everybody's Talking About Jamie, which had its world premiere earlier this year.

The Pretty Little Liars star was joined by numerous other entertainment industry figures on the festival's step-and-repeat photo op.

Basking in the spotlight: Ashley Benson was spotted spending time at a showing of Everybody's Talking About Jamie at 2021 Outfest Los Angeles LGBTQ Film Festival in Los Angeles on Friday evening

Benson was dressed in an open-faced white jacket that featured contrasting black velvet lapels.

Layered beneath was a black mesh bra, which coordinated with her semi-sheer tights.

The Spring Breakers actress completed the look with some high-waisted black shorts and some sky-high heels.

She accessorized with several articles of jewelry, including layered chain necklaces and various rings.

Contrasting: Benson was dressed in an open-faced white jacket that featured contrasting black velvet lapels

Her gorgeous brunette-to-blonde locks gracefully cascaded onto her shoulders and contrasted beautifully with the neutral tones of her outfit.

At one point, Benson was seen posing with Everybody's Talking About Jamie's star, Max Harwood.

The 23-year-old wore an eye-catching patterned blouse with puffed sleeves and a pair of matching bellbottoms.

The actor's blouse featured several buttons that ran up his chest - adding a bit of shine to his dual-toned look.

Hanging out: At one point, Benson was seen posing for a photo with the film's star, Max Harwood

Eye-catching: The 23-year-old wore an eye-catching patterned blouse with puffed sleeves and a pair of matching bellbottoms

Harwood later posed for a photo with Jonathan Butterell, Lauren Patel and Bianca Del Rio as he made his way along the red carpet.

The 46-year-old drag performer showcased her toned legs in a floral-print mini dress.

Del Rio also sported a matching hairband that held her voluminous locks back while she posed for a few shots.

She modeled a pair of tinted sunglasses and strutted down the carpet in some beige high-heeled shoes.

Quality time: Harwood was later seen posing for a group photo with Jonathan Butterell, Lauren Patel and Bianca Del Rio

Looking good! Del Rio sported a floral-printed dress and a matching hairband while posing for a snap

Garrett Clayton made quite an appearance at the showing, as he wore a tattered pink t-shirt and a pair of matching platform boots.

The Disney Channel alum, 30, layered a leather jacket with yellow lining and a single patch over his purposely tattered top.

The Teen Beach Movie star completed the ensemble with a pair of black skinny jeans.

Evan Ross showcased his edgy aesthetic as he spent time on the event's red carpet with wife Ashlee Simpson.

Wow! Garrett Clayton made quite an appearance at the showing, as he wore a tattered pink t-shirt layered beneath a leather jacket with yellow lining and a single patch

Striking a pose! Garrett strolled the carpet in a pair of pink and white platform heels

Finishing touches: The Teen Beach Movie star completed the ensemble with a pair of black skinny jeans

The 32-year-old actor threw on a roughed up motorcycle jacket that proved to be the perfect contrast to his plain blue t-shirt.

He finished off the ensemble with some high-water pants, as well as a set of leather shoes.

Simpson dazzled in a slinky black slip dress and a mesh cardigan with trendy faux fur detailing.

The 36-year-old singer's gorgeous blonde hair flowed onto her shoulders in loose waves.

Rain Valdez kept it simple in a black sleeveless top that was paired with a wide-legged pair of high-waisted pink pants.

Edgy: Evan Ross showcased his edgy aesthetic as he spent time on the event's red carpet with wife Ashlee Simpson

Dazzling: Simpson dazzled in a slinky black slip dress and a mesh cardigan with trendy faux fur detailing

The actress wore a set of snakeskin shoes and carried a sizable purse.

Shaina Mikee Keiths rocked a leopard-printed top worn above a striped shirt as well as a black vest.

The drummer contrasted her tops with a pair of dual-shade jeans and a set of striped leather shoes and wore a blue-tinted pair of aviator-style sunglasses.

Kelen Coleman cut an eye-catching figure in a denim jumpsuit and brown boots.

The Big Little Lies actress' dark brunette hair contrasted perfectly with the lighter shades of her outfit.

Contrast: Rain Valdez sported a black sleeveless top and a pair of wide-legged pink pants during the event. Shaina Mikee Keiths was seen wearing several articles of clothing with radically different patterns

Easygoing: Kelen Coleman took it easy in a denim jumpsuit and brown leather boots

August Getty sported a partially ripped white t-shirt and a pearl necklace as he posed for a snap.

The designer, 27, also wore a light white long skirt and kept a brooch pinned to the upper left corner of his top on the red carpet.

Sherry Cola opted for a mainly black-and-white ensemble that consisted of a reflective shirt and a matching pair of pants that were contrasted by a bright t-shirt.

The actress contrasted the neutral tones of her outfit with a multicolored set of Nike sneakers.

Mary Mouser sported an intricately designed dress and a set of high-heeled shoes.

Doing his thing: August Getty wore a partially ripped t-shirt and a long skirt to the showing.

Keeping it consistent: Sherry Cola wore a mostly black-and-white outfit as she spent time on the red carpet. Mary Mouser donned a reflective and multicolored dress, as well as a pair of high-heeled shoes

The Cobra Kai actress, 25, kept her gorgeous brunette locks tied back for the duration of the showing.

Cherie Corinne donned a beautiful marigold-yellow dress and a slightly brighter pair of high-heeled shoes.

Fawzia Mirza wore a denim jacket and a pair of olive-green cargo pants, while adding elements of brightness to her ensemble with a white shirt, yellow shoes, and orange-framed glasses.

Fin Argus sported a blue velour dress and kept a black jacket around his elbows.

The Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. performer, 22, also wore fishnet leggings, leather boots and a bolo tie while making his way along the red carpet.

Dressed for the occasion: Cherie Corinne wore a beautiful marigold-yellow dress and slightly lighter heels. Fawzia Mirza was dressed in a denim jacket and olive-green cargo pants

Tally T wore a sequined white sleeveless top that was paired with a fringed pink jacket as she posed for a shot.

The musician also wore a pair of blue jeans, high-heeled shoes and numerous articles of jewelry.

Bamby Salcedo put on an eye-an attention-grabbing red-and-gold outfit.

She also sported a pair of thigh-high heeled boots that matched the vibrant color of her top.

Her blonde hair was styled into a messy mohawk that contrasted beautifully with the rest of her clothing ensemble.

Turning heads: Fin Argus sported a blue velour dress that was complimented by a black jacket. Tally T wore a fringed pink jacket and a sequined white top as she spent time in front of the cameras
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has been sharing more details about the making of her grandiose music video for Rumors, her brand new collab with Cardi B.

And Lizzo looked sensational on Friday, when she was spotted cruising around in a black convertible Bentley, blasting the track on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, California.

The Tempo songstress, 33, wore an eye-catching one shouldered black leather minidress, featuring the Lakers logo and the number 8, which was the late basketball legend Kobe Bryant‘s player number.

Gorgeous and happy: Lizzo looked sensational on Friday, when she was spotted cruising around in a black convertible Bentley, blasting her new track Rumors in Beverly Hills

Lizzo‘s garment featured yellow piping and a matching Nike swoosh on the shoulder.

The statement piece also had black lacing up both sides, giving even more of a revealing peek at the Grammy winner’s figure.

The Fitness hitmaker accessorized with large hoop earrings, a sparkly cuff bracelet, star ring, Valentino sunglasses and a glittery face mask.

She held onto a metallic gold Fendi purse in one shot.

Tribute: The Tempo songstress, 33, wore an eye-catching one shouldered black leather minidress, featuring the Lakers logo and the number 8, which was Kobe Bryant‘s number

Lizzo also donned shiny black sneakers, which she informed her 11.1 million followers were from Cardi’s collaboration with Reebok.

Her hair was put up into a long and sleek high ponytail.

Rumors is the star singer’s first new music in two years, following her Grammy-winning album from 2019 Cuz I Love You.

On social: Lizzo also donned shiny black sneakers, which she informed her 11.1 million followers were from Cardi’s collaboration with Reebok

Seen having fun with an outdoor band on Instagram: Her hair was put up into a long and sleek high ponytail and her garment had lacing up the sides

The new single features Bodak Yellow rapper Cardi B.

Lizzo also shared some major love for Cardi on Friday, sharing a screenshot of the pair FaceTiming.

She wrote in the caption, 'Most special thank you to @IamCardiB for joining me on this journey – you are so supportive and giving and smart and funny and talented and literally all the things an icon & legend are… Thank you thank you thank you we did it girl!!! Now stream Rrumors for a fat a** & a clear mind'

Lizzo also shared some major love for Rumors collaborator Cardi on Friday: She shared a screenshot of the pair FaceTiming along with a sweet caption

Lizzo also recently discussed how Kobe‘s tragic death affected her in January 2020, which ironically occurred the day she won her three Grammys.

She also opened the awards show that evening, and recently told Zane Lowe on New Music Daily on Apple Music 1 how she incorporated a brief tribute to Bryant at the last minute.

She shared: '[It was] one of the most bittersweet days. I just felt like everyone was so sad and mourning, and losing an icon the same day as that day in the same venue, I was like, "This whole night is dedicated to Kobe."

'Tonight is for Kobe': Lizzo also recently discussed how Kobe‘s tragic death affected her in January 2020, which ironically occurred the day she opened the Grammys... and then won three awards

'I wasn’t watching TV, I didn’t have my phone on me, and my very close friend, I got to hear it from her. I had to hear it from her,' Lizzo continued. 'I’m on the carpet, and I was just numb. With no personal connection to this person, except for my heart and my childhood and my life.

'I’m opening the show, so I get back and I’m like, "Okay." I say, "Please give me 60 extra seconds to just dedicate this performance," and they were like, "We can’t really give you too much time." But then turns out we had built in the track. After the orchestra played, there was an extended break. It was too long in rehearsal and I was like, "This is a little too long, but let’s keep it that way. I might get nervous." And then I was like, "You know what? Don’t even worry about it. I’m going to say it right here," and I said, "Tonight is for Kobe."

Bryant lost his life at 41 years of age along with his 13-year-old daughter Gigi and seven other people in a helicopter crash in Calabasas on the morning of January 26th, 2020.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She just dropped an eye-popping music video that was the ultimate in opulence, featuring one of the hottest fellow rappers of the day.

And Lizzo showed exactly to what lengths – 43 and a half feet, to be exact – she would go to create the wow effect in her new Rumors music video, when she shared an amazing behind-the-scenes clip to her Instagram on Friday.

The snippet showed the Good As Hell performer, 33, exiting her trailer in a totally sheer all-white outfit, trailed by am elaborate braided hair extensions that required four separate people to carry behind her.

Wow: Lizzo showed exactly to what lengths – 43 and a half feet, to be exact – she would go to create the wow effect in her new Rumors music video, when she shared an amazing behind-the-scenes clip to her Instagram on Friday

Soon after Lizzo — born Melissa Viviane Jefferson — exited the trailer with the help of a security guard, the four assistants came out behind her holding the hair overhead and off the ground.

Then, one attendant called out to the Grammy winner to wait 'one second' as she made her way to set so they could catch up.

In the caption, the Truth Hurts hitmaker shared that the extensions, by stylist Shelby Swain, were 'literally the longest braids in the world', and tagged the Guinness Book of World Records.

Entourage: The snippet showed the performer exiting her trailer, followed by elaborate braided hair extensions that required four separate people to carry behind her

Goddess: The star was in a totally sheer all-white outfit seen in the video for Rumors

The hirsute piece was featured in the Grecian goddess-themed video for Rumors, which showed Lizzo at one point descending a long suspended staircase with her literally endless hair trailing behind her.

Rumors is the star singer’s first new music in two years, following her Grammy-winning album from 2019 Cuz I Love You.

The new single features Bodak Yellow rapper Cardi B.

Soon after Lizzo exited the trailer with the help of a security guard: The four assistants came out behind her holding the hair overhead and off the ground

Magic: The hirsute piece was featured in the Grecian goddess-themed video for Rumors, which showed Lizzo descending a long suspended staircase with her literally endless hair trailing behind her

Lizzo also shared some major love for Cardi on Friday, uploading a screenshot of the pair face-timing.

She wrote in the caption, 'Most special thank you to @IamCardiB for joining me on this journey – you are so supportive and giving and smart and funny and talented and literally all the things an icon & legend are… Thank you thank you thank you we did it girl!!! Now stream Rrumors for a fat a** & a clear mind'

Lizzo also recently discussed how some of the lyrics in her new single caused actual events to manifest in her life.

Rumors is the star singer’s first new music in two years, following her Grammy-winning album from 2019 Cuz I Love You: The new single features Bodak Yellow rapper Cardi B

Lizzo also shared some major love for her Rumors collaborator on Friday: She shared a screenshot of the pair FaceTiming along with a sweet caption

Of the first verse of Rumors, Lizzo shared with Zane Lowe on New Music Daily on Apple Music 1: 'Here’s the Apple exclusive. I said "my ex, he blew it." Now, the tea is, I wrote that. I’m almost a self-fulfilling prophecy sometimes because I was in a relationship during the quarantine and that person, I was with that person when I wrote it. It wasn’t even about him.

'It was a reference back to "Truth Hurts" and then we broke up,' she continued, laughing. 'It’s not funny. It’s not funny. What is life? That first verse of "Rumors," I’ve been worried about it. A lot of the things that I say did happen, but not before I wrote them. They were maybe on the way to happening. Then, after I wrote them, all those things really happened. They were all references to things that happened to me in the last two or three years, but then after I wrote it, literally I wrote the song in February, the breakup, losing good friends in my life, all of that really came to a head afterwards. I was like, "What the…"'

Meanwhile, the Tempo songstress also found time on Friday to promote her new track out in the real world.

She was seen cruising around in a black convertible Bentley on Friday, blasting Rumors on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, California.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Iliza Shlesinger gave her fans a special treat on Friday night when she revealed that she was pregnant.

The 38-year-old comedian was overcome with emotion as she made her announcement in front of a packed crowd at a standup show in San Antonio, Texas.

This will be the first child for Iliza and her husband Noah Galuten, whom she married in 2018.

Surprise! Comedian Iliza Shlesinger, 38, revealed on stage in San Antonio, Texas, on Friday that she's expecting her first child with her husband Noah Galuten.

'I was so glad to be able to do this show tonight,' she says in the clip, which was posted to her social media accounts shortly after the show.

After mentioning that she had to shuffle tickets around due to the ongoing coronavirus pandemic and an upcoming 'scheduling conflict.'

'I just wanted to say that it's because I've been working on a really big project... and you'll be able to see it in January!' she shouted to instant cheers from the audience.

The comedian raised her black T-shirt to show off her burgeoning tummy for the crowd and pumped her fist in the air triumphantly.

Taking the next step: The Confirmed Kills comic met Noah, a chef and food blogger, on an app in 2016, before tying the knot in 2018; seen together in February 2020

Big news: Iliza said she had to shuffle show dates because she was 'working on a really big project' before saying fans would 'be able to see it in January!' to instant cheers

Showing off: The comedian raised her black T-shirt to show off her burgeoning tummy for the crowd and pumped her fist in the air triumphantly

Whoops! In an email to People, Iliza joked that her assistant found out before her husband. 'We found out from a test and my assistant was in the room before my husband got there,' she explained. 'So technically she found out first. It was uncomfortable for everyone!'

In an email to People, Iliza joked that she was already beset by intense cravings and had discovered a new 'super power.'

'I can unhinge my jaw and eat an entire cantaloupe in one breath,' she joked.

The Spenser Confidential actress added that she was feeling 'excited and open minded' about her pregnancy journey.

She shared that she learned she was pregnant under less-than-ideal circumstances without her husband by her side.

'We found out from a test and my assistant was in the room before my husband got there,' she explained. 'So technically she found out first. It was uncomfortable for everyone!'

She and Noah were so excited by the news that they wanted to know as much as possible about their upcoming baby.

'We found out it was a girl immediately. We didn't want to do a gender reveal and accidentally kill people,' she joked, referencing a series of over-the-top gender reveal parties involving explosives that have led to deaths and devastating wildfires.

She added that they'll meet their daughter 'sometime within the next year, for sure.'

Saving lives: 'We found out it was a girl immediately. We didn't want to do a gender reveal and accidentally kill people,' she joked; seen August 3 in Los Angeles

The Confirmed Kills comic met Noah, who's a chef and food blogger, on an app in 2016, before tying the knot in 2018.

Throughout the pandemic they've been posting the low-key Instagram cooking show Don't Panic Pantry.

Since establishing herself as an in-demand comedian, Iliza has lately been expanding into acting roles.

In June, her semi-autobiographical film Good On Paper was released on Netflix.

She wrote, produced, and stars in the film, which tells a fictionalized version of a true-life incident in which she dated a man who lied to her repeatedly about his job, wealth, education and even his mother's cancer diagnosis.

Autobiographical: She stars in, wrote and produced the Netflix film Good On Paper, about a real-life ex-boyfriend who lied about every aspect of her life to her; seen July 10 in NYC

In a 2015 standup routine dubbed Lying Brian, which was broadcast on a Comedy Central special, Shlesinger recounted meeting a man named Brian Murphy on an airplane.

He claimed to be a Yale graduate and said he worked at a hedge fund during the flight.

In a June interview for NPR's Weekend Edition Saturday, she claimed to never have found him attractive, but the two nonetheless started dating after he phoned her up out of the blue to say his mother had been diagnosed with cancer.

But Iliza later discovered that he had been lying about which college he graduated from and lived in a duplex with friends instead of a house in Beverly Hills, and his mother wasn't even sick with cancer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alessandra Ambrosio showcased her runway-worthy figure on Friday after her morning yoga class in Brentwood.

The 40-year-old supermodel rocked a pale blue crop top and matching leggings that exposed her enviably taut tummy.

After getting in her fitness session, Ambrosio was seen riding down the sidewalk on an electric scooter.

Spotted: Alessandra Ambrosio showcased her runway-worthy figure on Friday after her morning yoga class in Brentwood

The former Victoria's Secret Angel wore her brunette hair in a ponytail that was secured with a scrunchie.

She shielded her eyes from the sun with a pair of gold framed shades and appeared to be wearing little to no makeup.

Alessandra completed her look with some beige flip flop sandals and a brown crossbody bag.

Ambrosio has been getting back into the swing of things since returning to Los Angeles after vacationing in her native Brazil.

Zoom zoom: After getting in her fitness session, Ambrosio was seen riding down the sidewalk on an electric scooter

The runway maven was joined on the getaway by her boyfriend Richard Lee, a fellow model who she has been romantically linked to since February.

Giving her followers a peek at their antics, Ambrosio uploaded a sweet snapshot that showed her and Richard sharing a kiss outdoors.

She was previously involved with Italian fashion designer Nicolo Oddi who founded the brand Alanui with his sister Carlotta.

Getaway: Ambrosio has been getting back into the swing of things since returning to Los Angeles after vacationing in her native Brazil

Romantic: The runway maven was joined on the getaway by her boyfriend Richard Lee, a fellow model who she has been romantically linked to since February

Meanwhile, Alessandra shares her two children Anja and Noah with her ex-fiance Jamie Mazur who co-founded RE/DONE.

Alessandra herself started her own swimwear company GAL Floripa with her sister Aline and their friend Gisele Coria over two years ago.

Her brand is named partly after Florianopolis which is the city in southern Brazil where she gave birth to both of her children.

Last year Alessandra was spotted emerging from an immigration office in Los Angeles reportedly having just become a U.S. citizen.

Sweet: Giving her followers a peek at their antics, Ambrosio uploaded a sweet snapshot that showed her and Richard sharing a kiss outdoors
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arnold Schwarzenegger was pictured leaving a hair salon with two of his friends in Beverly Hills on Friday afternoon.

The 74-year-old actor appeared to be living the high life as he kept a cigar in his mouth while chatting with his pals before hopping into the driver's seat of his custom-made Hummer.

The Terminator star's outing comes not long after he penned an essay to express his views about wearing a mask amid the ongoing state of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Enjoying himself: Arnold Schwarzenegger was seen spending time with his friends while leaving a hair salon in Beverly Hills on Friday afternoon

Schwarzenegger was seen wearing a gray graphic-printed t-shirt while spending time with his friends.

The former governor of California sported a pair of black shorts that showed off his still-impressively chiseled legs during the outing.

He also wore a set of gray slip-on shoes, as well as stylish tinted aviator-style sunglasses.

At one point, the Predator star donned a cowboy hat after exiting his Hummer.

Dressed down: The performer was seen wearing a graphic-printed t-shirt and a pair of shorts during his outing

Earlier this week, Schwarzenegger shared a video to his Instagram account to express his views about the ongoing state of the pandemic.

In the clip, he criticized those who refused to wear a mask, as he felt that said individuals only served to keep the current state of affairs regarding the coronavirus going on for longer.

The actor went on to pen an essay for The Atlantic, where he began by making his views about not wearing facial coverings known very early on in the piece.

'You have the freedom to wear no mask. But if you exercise that freedom, you're a schmuck—because you're supposed to protect your fellow Americans,' he wrote.

Living the high life: The Terminator star kept a cigar in his mouth as he spent time with his pals

Making his views known: Schwarzenegger recently penned an essay for The Atlantic where he expressed his opinions about the pandemic publicly

Schwarzenegger also spoke about the comments that he received regarding his opinions and noted that he felt as if many individuals were misinterpreting a basic tenet of American democracy.

He noted: 'some of the responses really worried me. Many people told me that the Constitution gives them rights, but not responsibilities. They feel no duty to protect their fellow citizens.'

'Our country became great because every generation before us knew that liberty and duty go hand in hand. I am worried that many of my fellow Americans have now lost sight of that,' he added.

The True Lies star also remarked that he had begun to hold pessimistic views about the country as a result of the actions of anti-maskers.

Worried: The Kindergarten Cop star wrote that he was afraid that many Americans felt 'no duty to protect their fellow citizens'

Feeling down: The performer also wrote that he had begun to 'really worry about the future of our country'

Looking forward: Schwarzenegger concluded by writing that Americans 'need to prove to ourselves and to the world that we can unite to defeat a common enemy'

'When I look at the response to this pandemic, I really worry about the future of our country. We have lost more than 600,000 Americans to COVID-19,' he noted.

Schwarzenegger was very open about his disappointment, and contrasted the actions taken by the public during World War II and the opinions of modern citizens.

He asked: 'Americans lived through four years of brutal sacrifice, and we're going to throw fits about putting a mask over our mouth and nose?'

The Kindergarten Cop star expressed that he wanted to see more people adjusting to the pandemic and taking care of their fellow citizens.

Unity: 'We need to prove to ourselves and to the world that we can unite to defeat a common enemy, because, trust me, the coronavirus is not the biggest challenge we will face this century,' he wrote; Arnold pictured in July

'We need to protect ourselves and win this war. We don't need to close our economies again. We just need to come together like the generations of Americans who came before us, and to give just a tiny fraction of what they gave,' he noted.

Schwarzenegger concluded by writing that he wanted more people to serve as role models for others in terms of responding to the conditions set by the pandemic.

'We need to prove to ourselves and to the world that we can unite to defeat a common enemy, because, trust me, the coronavirus is not the biggest challenge we will face this century,' he wrote.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's puzzled fans and commentators with her repeated photo sets.

And Britney Spears again referenced her cryptic Project Rose photos on Instagram on Friday while savoring the scent of a lovely pink flower.

The 39-year-old pop superstar's latest posts arrive just days after lawyers for her father Jamie Spears announced that he planned to step down from his position as her conservator.

Smelling the roses: Britney Spears, 39, sniffed a pink flower in another Instagram entry from Friday for her series Project Rose, which she hasn't explained so far

Britney's super-short video featured her in a tightly pleated white patterned peasant top that she appears to have worn previously.

As with many of her posts, it's unclear if she filmed the clip recently or was reusing it from a previous session, but she appears to have worn the same outfit at least a year earlier.

A thick strand of Britney's long blond hair fell down the front of her shoulder, and she paired the top with brilliant white cut-off jeans.

She was seen sniffing the flower in the photo, which only lasted about a second.

Going strong: 'Project Rose is a year old and 9 days old!!!!' she gushed in her caption. 'Why does this project smell so f***ing good still today????'

'Project Rose is a year old and 9 days old!!!!' she gushed in her caption. 'Why does this project smell so f***ing good still today???? Psss if you look closely the mood ring I’m wearing was for my song MOOD RING!!!!'

Although Britney doesn't appear to have explicitly stated what Project Rose or her other color-coded projects entail, they appear to simply refer to a series of coordinated photos featuring recurring colors or objects.

In the case of Project Rose, which she sometimes refers to as Project Red, she seems to pose with either a red flower or other red items or clothing.

However, the cryptic nature of the Toxic singer's posts has led many fans to craft conspiracy theories about the projects.

Old school: Britney's super-short video featured her in a tightly pleated white patterned peasant top and white cut-offs that she appears to have worn previously

Easter egg: The makers of the documentary Framing Britney Spears revealed in February that they used roses as an allusion to Britney's posts, according to Glamour

Some have speculated that the posts were coded messages to her fans about the state of her conservatorship, though there's little evidence to support those assertions.

In February, eagle-eyed fans noted that the New York Times Present documentary Framing Britney Spears featured outdoor interviews conducted in front of an ivy-covered wall decorated with roses, which led some to speculate that the filmmakers were collaborating with their subject.

However, director Samantha Stark and New York Times Senior Editor Liz Day told Glamour later in February that they had noticed Britney's use of roses and opted to include them on their set as a reference to her posts.

Later on Friday, Britney shared two extreme closeups of her face as she documented her recent weight-loss attempt.

She didn't appear to be wearing a shirt and was lit similarly to a topless post from July 30.

Slimming down: Later on Friday, Britney shared two extreme closeups of her face as she documented her recent weight-loss attempt

A slightly zoomed-out second photo appeared to show her covering her bust with her hands.

'It’s really weird whenever I try to slim down it usually starts with my legs first ... then my stomach ... then my face … and that's when I know I’ve actually lost weight!!!!' she explained.

Although she sounded excited at getting results, the hitmaker wasn't totally sold on her slimmer figure and seemed to miss some of her curves.

'When you swipe to the second pic you can actually really see how slim my face is but I’m not so sure I like it… In the old days when women were heavier they were considered more attractive to men because it was a sign of wealth!!!!' she continued.

'I have a couple of throwback dances from this summer where I looked heavier but it's weird cause I think I was happier!!!! Oh well ... sorry for my shallow talk of weight … but it is what it is you know!!!! GOD BLESS YOU ALL ☀️!!!!!'

Mixed feelings: 'I’m not so sure I like it,' Britney said of her weight loss and added that she was happier in dancing videos where she was heavier

Earlier this year Britney highlighted her weight loss in a dancing video after sharing that she had taken up portion control to lose weight.

The entertainer's weight was featured in a widely publicized anecdote from a lengthy report published by The New Yorker in July.

According to writers Ronan Farrow and Jia Tolentino, former Spears family friend Jacqueline Butcher claimed that she saw Jamie say: 'Baby, you’re fat. Daddy’s gonna get you on a diet and a trainer, and you’re gonna get back in shape.'

Britney's latest posts following a joyous dancing video from earlier on Friday.

She put on a high-energy display in black lace catsuit while striking a number of poses, captioning the post simply with three kiss emojis.

It follows Thursday's court filing by Jamie, 69, who is finally relinquishing control of his daughter's estate, marking a huge victory for the singer as she battles to end a 13-year conservatorship - even though he did not immediately resign.

Freedom: Britney dances in lace bodysuit in an Instagram video from earlier on Friday... just a day after father Jamie agreed to step down as conservator of her estate

Britney has been known to share a wealth of content for her fans on social media, and has made more than a few pointed digs at her family members and her current situation.

Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Jamie has been paying himself $16,000 a month since 2008 to manage his daughter's estimated $60million fortune.

He announced Thursday that he would stepping down, as his daughter has long demanded, provided Judge Brenda Penny asked him to and there was a plan in place for Britney's care.

The 39-year-old pop star put on a high-energy display in black lace catsuit while striking a number of poses, captioning the post simply with three kiss emojis.

Moving on: It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators

Pointed: Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Busting a move: The singer delights her fans with her social media content

Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, said it was 'a vindication for Britney'.

'We are pleased that Mr. Spears and his lawyer have today conceded in a filing that he must be removed,' he said. 'It is vindication for Britney.'

In the court documents, obtained by TMZ, his lawyers write: 'There are, in fact, no actual grounds for suspending or removing Mr. Spears as the Conservator of the Estate ... and it is highly debatable whether a change in conservator at this time would be in Ms. Spears' best interests.

'Nevertheless, even as Mr. Spears is the unremitting target of unjustified attacks, he does not believe that a public battle with his daughter over his continuing service as her conservator would be in her best interests.'

Jamie Spears, pictured with Britney in 2015, on Thursday resigned as her conservator. He said that he was stepping down because he did not feel the continued public battle was in her best interests

It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators.

Meanwhile, Britney appears to be free to continue to post as she pleases on her Instagram account.

Her friend, Paris Hilton took to Twitter yesterday, to express her relief that Britney is a a step closer to her freedom.

'I’m so happy to hear this news,' the socialite, 40, wrote with emojis of clapping hands and a heart. 'It’s been so long overdue but I’m so glad that Britney is on her way to finally being free.'

Ecstatic: Britney certainly looks upbeat after the news of her father Jamie stepping down

Twists and turns: Fans have been glued to her Instagram account amid the ongoing drama

Not so mellow yellow: The star put on an energetic display in the latest Instagram video

Happy: Britney appeared to be in a good mood in her latest video

The hotel heiress added, 'Sending so much love!' adding the now-ubiquitous hashtag #FreeBritney.

Rosie O'Donnell also took to Instagram to comment on the latest development in the case, sending her well-wishes to the pop star, as she said: 'That's right, he's stepping down, all the pressure worked, good for you Britney, being brave - tick tock you don't stop!'

Jamie, who has always insisted he was acting in the best interests of his superstar daughter, said that he will work with the legal teams to bring the complex case to an end.

'So, even though he must contest this unjustified Petition for his removal, Mr. Spears intends to work with the Court and his daughter's new attorney to prepare for an orderly transition to a new conservator,' his lawyers wrote.

Jamie, who is not believed to have spoken to his daughter since before Christmas, said that he will continue to look out for his daughter's best interests.

Jamie, 69, is pictured in 2008 leaving Los Angeles County Superior Courthouse - when her conservatorship was introduced. After 13 years, it now finally seems to be coming to an end

Mathew Rosengart, Britney Spears's lawyer, was appointed on July 14 to represent her - replacing the court-appointed Sam Ingham

'Regardless of his formal title, Mr. Spears will always be Ms. Spears' father, he will always love her unconditionally, and he will always look out for her best interests,' the lawyers said.

'If the public knew all the facts of Ms. Spears' personal life, not only her highs but also her lows, all of the addiction and mental health issues that she has struggled with, and all of the challenges of the Conservatorship, they would praise Mr. Spears for the job he has done, not vilify him.'

He said that the arrangement 'has worked as intended' and it was not surprising that Britney had felt 'constrained'.

The lawyers wrote: 'The Conservatorship has provided Ms. Spears with a structure to help her navigate the daily challenges of her personal life, family matters, medical issues, and career.

'By nature, the structure includes safeguards to protect the Conservatee from self-harm or harm from others.

'It is not surprising that Ms. Spears has often felt constrained or subject to excessive supervision.

'But, at least for the greater part of the past thirteen years, the Conservatorship has worked as intended.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He is an Olympic level swimmer with a dozen medals to his name.

But it seems that a children's inflatable waterslide proved to be too much for Ryan Lochte, as he and his wife Kayla revealed on Friday that he just underwent surgery to repair his meniscus after an accident involving the toy.

The athlete, 37, uploaded a selfie to his Instagram Stories from the hospital bed in which he was giving the thumbs up, underneath the caption which read, 'Surgery was a success!'

It seems that a children's inflatable waterslide proved too much for Ryan Lochte: He revealed Friday that he underwent surgery to repair his meniscus after an accident involving the toy

Kayla, 30, shared a similar picture to her feed, alongside a caption which stated, 'A legend of lessons… don’t race down an inflatable kids water slide folks!'

She tagged Ryan and included emoticons for an old man as well as a black heart, geolocating the post to the Orthopaedic Surgery Center outside of Gainesville, Florida.

The accident surely occurred while Ryan was playing with his two young children he shares with Kayla, son Caiden Zane, four, and daughter Liv Rae, two.

Thumbs up: The athlete uploaded a selfie to his Instagram from the hospital bed in which he was giving the thumbs up, and his wife Kayla shared a similar shot

Athletic dad: The accident surely occurred while Ryan was playing with his two young children he shares with Kayla, son Caiden Zane, four, and daughter Liv Rae, two; seen on Instagram

Kayla also took to her Stories to briefly describe the circumstances surrounding the accident, whilst also giving a snapshot of her hectic 'mom life' day.

The knee accident and ensuing orthopedic procedure comes just two months after Lochte was unable to qualify for the 2021 Tokyo Summer Olympic Games.

It also happens to be almost exactly a year after Ryan went under the knife for a different reason – appendicitis in August 2020.

The gold medalist took to Instagram Stories at the time with selfies and a montage of clips documenting his experience as he underwent the operation, which he said 'went amazing'.

Sharing: Kayla also took to her Stories to briefly describe the circumstances surrounding the accident, whilst also giving a snapshot of her hectic 'mom life' day

The Dancing With the Stars alum was supported by his spouse of three years amid the medical procedure, as both were clad in face masks as the coronavirus pandemic was already in full tilt.

'Hey everyone, surgery went amazing, I'm all good - I feel great right now,' Lochte said as he had breathing tubes in his nose.

Lochte was ensnared in controversy at the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, after he and teammates Gunnar Bentz, Jack Conger and James Feigen claimed they had been robbed.

After authorities found major credibility issues with his story - and Lochte told NBC he 'over-exaggerated' things - he was hit with a 10-month ban from organized swimming by the US Olympic Committee and USA Swimming.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is known for showing off her flawless physique on screen and on her Instagram account alike.

And on Friday afternoon, Eiza Gonzalez was spotted cutting a very sporty figure as she took a solo stroll after meeting her friends for lunch in the Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles.

The 31-year-old performer was seen wearing an all-athleisure outfit while checking her phone as she walked along one of the city's sunlit sidewalks.

Hanging out: Eiza Gonzalez was seen taking a solo stroll after meeting a group of her friends for lunch in the Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles on Friday afternoon

Gonzalez wore a sleeveless burgundy athletic top that showed off a slight portion of her sculpted stomach during her solo outing.

The Godzilla Vs. Kong actress paired her top with a matching set of athletic leggings that conformed tightly to her curvy thighs and chiseled legs.

She contrasted the predominant color of her outfit with white sneakers and kept a red-and-white windbreaker tied around her waist.

Gonzalez accessorized with a stylish pair of sunglasses and wore a blue cap that obscured the top portion of her gorgeous brunette locks.

Dressed to impress: The performer was seen wearing a sleeveless burgundy top and a matching pair of athletic leggings during the outing

The performer kept a light brown purse slung over her left shoulder and carried a gray facial covering in case she needed to interact with anyone unfamiliar during her outing.

The actress is currently awaiting the release of the upcoming action-thriller film, Ambulance.

The Michael Bay-directed movie will serve as a remake of the 2005 flick of the same name, which was helmed by Laurits Munch-Petersen.

The movie is centered around a pair of brothers who hijack an ambulance and must deal with a paramedic and a patient in dire need of medical assistance.

Future project: Gonzalez is currently awaiting the release of the upcoming action-thriller feature Ambulance; she is seen on its set with Jake Gyllenhaal and Michael Bay in February

Doing it again: The feature will serve as a remake of the 2005 film of the same name, which was directed by Laurits Munch-Petersen

In addition to Gonzalez, the feature will star Jake Gyllenhaal, Yahya Abdul-Mateen II and Garrett Dillahunt.

The project previously had several directors attached to it before Bay signed on to helm the movie last November.

The actress was notably added to Ambulance's cast this past December.

Moving around: Several potential directors were attached to the project before Bay signed on this past December

Production on the feature began in January, with the cast being spotted at various locations around Los Angeles.

The cast continued working for the next few months before filming eventually wrapped in March.

Ambulance is currently set to be released on February 18th, 2022.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her boyfriend Devin Booker won a gold medal at the Tokyo Olympics earlier this month.

And on Friday, Kendall Jenner had all eyes on her when she shared a stunning snap of herself while in a very revealing bikini.

The model, 25, showcased her perky backside in a thong bikini while rocking a backwards cap.

Stunner: Her boyfriend Devin Booker won a gold medal at the Tokyo Olympics earlier this month. And on Friday, Kendall Jenner had all eyes on her when she shared a stunning snap of herself while in a very revealing bikini

Kendall chose a green and blue bikini set, featuring thong bottoms and a coordinating top.

She put her derriere on display in the racy look while posing with her back to the camera, turning around to give a smile to the camera.

The stunner paired it with a backwards green baseball cap and her brunette locks loose around her.

She opted to go makeup free for the stunning snap, while posing in front of a pool and beach.

Views: The model, 25, showcased her perky backside in a thong bikini while rocking a backwards cap

Last week, Kendall shared a snap of herself watching boyfriend Devin Booker, 24, on TV as he won a gold medal at the Tokyo Olympics.

Devin, who plays for the Phoenix Suns, and the USA Men's Basketball team defeated France at the Saitama Super Arena.

She snapped a picture of Devin standing next to a teammate wrapped up in an American flag with a simple gold medal emoji on top of the story.

Gold: Kendall Jenner was proud to add another Olympian to the family as she congratulated boyfriend Devin Booker for winning a gold medal at the Tokyo Olympics

During the game, Devin scored two free throws and played for 22 minutes while captain Kevin Durant led the team in scoring with 29 points.

Kendall and Devin have been dating for a year, recently celebrating their one year anniversary.

She is reportedly 'crazy' about her boyfriend, according to People's insider.

'She has never looked happier. Her whole family loves Devin too. Devin is such a cool guy. He is very low-key and doesn't want to be a celebrity. He is very sweet to Kendall.'

The lovebirds were first linked together in April 2020, making their Instagram debut on Valentine's Day 2021.

Champion: Booker scored two free throws and played for 22 minutes, while captain Kevin Durant led the team in scoring with 29 points
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Taylor Swift dealt with a stalking scare on Friday after a man was arrested for trying to enter her apartment in New York City.

Patrick Nissen, 28, entered the vestibule of Swift's apartment building before police were called to the scene, TMZ reported.

'I was doing what felt comfortable,' Nissen told the New York Daily News on Saturday as he left Manhattan Criminal Court.

Nissen was initially charged with criminal trespassing but pleaded guilty to a violation of disorderly conduct and was sentenced to community service.

The Daily News asked Nissen about his fascination with the Love Story singer and he replied: 'What, you don't know about her?'

'I love her,' Nissen told the outlet.

Stalker scare: Taylor Swift, 31, dealt with another stalker after a 28-year-old man from Nebraska was arrested on Friday after entering her New York City apartment building, according to TMZ; seen in May in London

Luckily, the 31-year-old pop superstar wasn't in her apartment when Nissen entered the building, law enforcement sources told TMZ.

The sources claimed that the intruder gained access to the building's vestibule via an unlocked door.

However, a security guard for the building spotted him and called the police after they recognized that he wasn't authorized to be there.

Once police arrived, Nissen reportedly told them that he was 'in love' with the Shake It Off hitmaker.

Close call: Law enforcement sources named the man as Patrick Nissen. He allegedly entered Swift's building's vestibule via an unlocked door, before a security guard called 911; seen in 2019

He also reportedly had photos of the singer on his Instagram account.

An account for a person with the same name includes mention of Swift in a nonsensical account bio, as well as a post featuring the cover to her Reputation album.

Since he's not based in New York, he reportedly took a bus across state lines to find the songstress' apartment.

This apparently isn't the first time that someone tried to gain access to Swift's apartment, according to police.

Back in April, a 52-year-old man named Hanks Johnson was arrested after trying to force his way into Taylor's Tribeca apartment building, according to the New York Daily News.

Long distance: Nissen took a bus across state lines to get to Swift's apartment. He reportedly told police he was 'in love' with her and mentioned her on his Instagram; Swift pictured in March in LA

It was part of a pattern with the man, who reportedly had showed up to her apartment building at least five times in the the six months leading up to that incident.

In 2018, Page Six reported that Roger Alvarado, a 22-year-old man from Florida, had tried to break into her townhouse.

Police sources said at the time that he had managed to enter after using a ladder to climb up to a window and breaking it.

While in her home he reportedly took a shower and then went to sleep in one of her beds.

Several other men have also been arrested for stalking the singer and trespassing in recent years.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Emma Stone has inked a deal to appear in a sequel to the recently released film, Cruella.

The news about the 32-year-old performer's venture was first reported on by Deadline, who noted that the forthcoming feature would likely premiere in the near future.

The La La Land star's signing comes amid an ongoing controversy regarding Disney's decision to dual-release its movies in theaters and on the Disney+ streaming service.

Back at it: Emma Stone has inked a deal to reprise her role as Cruella in a sequel to the recently released film; she is seen at its May premiere

Cruella was released this past May and was based on the character of the same name from Dodie Smith's 1956 book The Hundred and One Dalmatians.

The feature followed the prodigy as she made her way throughout the world of fashion while adopting a radical new persona.

In addition to Stone, the film also starred performers such as Emma Thompson, Joel Fry and Emily Beecham, among others.

Upon the flick's release, it was met with positive reviews from critics and audiences alike.

Source material: The film was centered around its titular character, who first appeared in Dodie Smith's 1956 book The Hundred and One Dalmatians

Stacked cast: In addition to stone, Cruella starred performers such as Emma Thompson and Joel Fry

Cruella notably brought in a gross total of $222 million in ticket sales worldwide.

The feature was also released on the Disney+ streaming service with Premier Access and experienced a healthy turnout from viewers.

Both Stone and Thompson expressed their desire to appear in a sequel to Cruella shortly after its initial debut.

This past June, it was announced that a follow-up feature was officially in development, with director Craig Gillespie set to return to his role.

Ready to go again: Development on a sequel began not long after Cruella's initial release, and its director has signed on to perform in the same capacity for the follow-up

Endeavor executive chairman Patrick Whitesell, whose agency represents Stone, gave a statement to the media outlet regarding Disney's recent business practices.

The media giant was recently sued by Scarlett Johansson, who argues that her salary for the recently-premiered film Black Widow was negatively affected by the company's decision to dual-release the feature in theaters and digitally.

The chairman expressed that, although the global pandemic has affected the way that films are shown, performers have to be treated with respect.

'While the media landscape has been disrupted in a meaningful way for all distributors, their creative partners cannot be left on the sidelines to carry a disproportionate amount of the downside without the potential for upside,' he said.

Risky business: Stone's signing comes amid an ongoing controversy regarding Disney's business practices with its streaming service, Disney+

Whitesell also noted that Stone's deal with Disney meant that future improvements could be made regarding the relationship between performers and companies.

'This agreement demonstrates that there can be an equitable path forward that protects artists and aligns studios' interests with talent,' he expressed.

The chairman specifically pointed out that the media giant was particularly generous in negotiating with the actress and hammering out a deal that satisfied all parties.

Setting an example: Whitesell expressed that Stone's deal proved that 'there can be an equitable path forward that protects artists and aligns studios' interests with talent'

He remarked: 'We are proud to work alongside Emma and Disney, and appreciate the studio's willingness to recognize her contributions as a creative partner.'

Whitesell concluded by expressing hope for any future business decisions made with streaming services in mind.

'We are hopeful that this will open the door for more members of the creative community to participate in the success of new platforms,' he noted.

A potential release date for Cruella's sequel has not been announced as of yet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She recently reached the coveted status of billionaire, and had her first-ever fragrance sell out in a matter of hours.

And this month, Rihanna is continuing to go from success to success, as she launched an attention-getting new campaign from her lingerie line Savage X Fenty.

The new line, titled Savage X Caramel Curves, is a size-inclusive collection of formfitting lingerie featuring the famous all-black female biker gang Caramel Curves from New Orleans, Louisiana.

This month: Rihanna is continuing to go from success to success, as she launched an attention-getting and very welcome new campaign titled Savage X Caramel Curves

Made with the curvier customer in mind, the sexy undergarments were seen over the last week on the social media accounts for Rihanna, 33, her Savage X Fenty account, as well as that of the Caramel Curves.

The ladies were also featured in the pages of Vogue and Glamour magazines dressed in Rihanna‘s sexy underthings.

At the beginning of this month, the SOS hitmaker posted an enticing video of the gang of biker chicks to her Instagram, as they perched on their motorcycles in the lingerie and spun their wheels while kicking up clouds of pink dust.

Fierce females: The new line is a size-inclusive collection of formfitting lingerie featuring the famous all-black female biker gang Caramel Curves from New Orleans

She's got the Midas touch: Rihanna recently reached the coveted status of billionaire, and had her first-ever fragrance sell out in a matter of hours; seen here in NYC on Friday

The caption for the video read, 'Behind every Savage, there’s a story… And who more savage than my @Caramelcurvesmc!!! We don’t just sell panties over here @savageXFenty, we represent the culture!'

The video then went on to feature interviews with each of the women in the Caramel Curves gang, as they discussed what they loved most about themselves and more.

As reported by nola.com, the Caramel Curves were founded about 12 years ago and soon became a flashy addition to the second-line parades and other events New Orleans is famous for.

Made with the curvier customer in mind: The sexy models were seen over the last week on the social media accounts for Rihanna, Savage X Fenty, as well as that of the Caramel Curves

Killin' it: The ladies have also been featured in the pages of Vogue and Glamour magazines dressed in Rihanna‘s sexy underthings

In 2019, they were even featured on the city’s official tourism website.

The Savage X Caramel Curves collection, launching this month, will include 100 separate pieces available in sizes 30A to 42H and XS to 3XL.

The line is just the latest in a banner year for Savage X Fenty, which earlier this summer launched the Savage X Pride collection with the LGBTQ+ community in mind.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vincent Kartheiser was reportedly the subject of two internal investigations after he joined the DC series Titans for its third season.

The 42-year-old Mad Men star isn't actively involved in any of the promotion for the series' third season after at least two complaints were made about his conduct on set, Deadline reported on Friday.

A representative for Kartheiser 'vehemently' denied the accusations made in the complaints in a statement shared with the publication on the same day.

On-set troubles: Vincent Kartheiser, 42, was twice investigated on the set of DC's Titans series for 'disruptive, juvenile behavior and offensive comments,' Deadline reported on Friday; seen in 2018 in NYC

Kartheiser first joined Titans for its third season, which began airing on WarnerMedia's HBO Max streaming service on Thursday.

He plays the villain Scarecrow, who is usually paired up against Batman and was played by Cillian Murphy in Christopher Nolan's Batman trilogy.

The complaints made against him were allegedly for 'disruptive, juvenile behavior and inappropriate comments' and were investigated by WBTV's Labor Relations department.

The series is filmed in Toronto, but due to Covid-19 protocols, the Burbank-based investigators were forced to speak to people on set virtually.

Kartheiser joined Titans' third season as a series regular to play the Batman villain Scarecrow (pictured). At least two complaints were allegedly made against him and led to investigations

Not in person: Burbank-based investigators looked into the allegations virtually, as Covid protocols prevented them from visiting the Toronto set; a publicity image for Titans is pictured that excludes Kartheiser

Sources on set claimed that the first complaint was filed in response to 'verbal comments and outbursts' from Kartheiser, but investigators determined that the complaints weren't severe enough to lead to his firing.

Instead, he was given a verbal warning for the alleged behavior.

A second complaint was reportedly filed weeks later, just as production was nearing the send for the season.

Sources said that Kartheiser was assigned an on-set monitor to document his behavior as a result.

Deadline also reports that sources claimed other misconduct allegations were made against the actor that were looked into, but investigators weren't able to corroborate the claims.

'Vincent Kartheiser vehemently denies the allegations,' his spokesperson said in a statement to the publication that was sent Friday. 'Warner Bros investigated this matter and made clear to Mr. Kartheiser its expectations for behavior on the set, and he agreed to comply with their directives.'

Escalation: Sources said Kartheiser was given a verbal warning after the first investigation and assigned an on-set monitor after the second investigation. He reportedly won't return for season four; seen in 2019 in Monte-Carlo

It was announced in April that Kartheiser was joining the series as a main cast member to play Jonathan Crane, better known by his villainous alias Scarecrow.

He reportedly won't be back for the fourth season, though it's unclear if that was always intended to be a one-season stint.

Kartheiser is best known for appearing as one of the leads on AMC's acclaimed period drama Mad Men throughout its seven-season run from 2007 to 2015.

He played Pete Campbell, an advertising executive at the fictional firm Sterling Cooper.

The actor was also featured in the Buffy The Vampire Slayer spinoff Angel and in the German television adaptation of Das Boot.

He has been married to Gilmore Girls star Alexis Bledel since 2014.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lily-Rose Depp was spotted making her way along the sidewalks of New York City on Friday afternoon.

The 22-year-old actress was first seen FaceTiming a friend after finishing up a shopping trip at a local Whole Foods before she met up with another pal and subsequently took a stroll.

The performer's outing comes before the premiere of two major film projects in which she is currently set to appear.

Heading out: Lily-Rose Depp was spotted cutting a very chic figure while stepping out on a solo shopping trip in New York City on Friday

Depp was dressed in a light pink tank top that fell to just above her belly button during her shopping trip.

The actress also sported a pair of blue-and-white patterned basketball shorts by designer Eric Emanuel that showed off her sculpted legs.

The Yoga Hosers rounded out the look with a set of white sneakers and matching ankle socks.

She accessorized with a single gold necklace and a stylish pair of sunglasses and kept a leather bag slung over her right shoulder.

Taking it easy: The performer sported a light pink tank top that exposed her toned tummy as she made her way along the city's walkways

Dressing well: The actress contrasted her top with a pair of blue-and-white shorts. She accessorized with a gold necklace and a pair of sunglasses

Depp's typically flowing blonde locks were tied into a loose bun for the length of her time outside.

She recently caused a media frenzy after she was spotted kissing actor Austin Butler during a recent trip to London.

The daughter of Vanessa Paradis and Johnny Depp and the 29-year-old actor were pictured making out after they finished up a dinner date.

The two had previously been chauffeured to a restaurant with a friend and were also seen waving at their pal after they left the pair's company.

Future appearance: Depp will be seen in the upcoming Christmas-themed comedy film, Silent Night

Story: The film will be centered around a family coming together for a dinner in the countryside. Camille Griffin directed the film and wrote its screenplay

Neither of the two has made any public comments regarding the steamy makeout session as of yet.

As for her professional like, Lily-Rose is currently set to appear in the forthcoming Christmas-themed comedy feature, Silent Night.

The upcoming film will be centered around an extended family coming together for a holiday dinner in the countryside.

Camille Griffin, who is making her directorial debut with the feature, also wrote its screenplay.

Moving quickly: Development on the project was first announced last January and production began the following month

Big release: Silent Night will make its debut at the upcoming Toronto International Film Festival

Silent Night will feature the talents of several performers, including Keira Knightley, Kirby Howell-Baptiste and Lucy Punch, among others.

Development on the film was first reported in January of last year, and principal photography began the following month.

The forthcoming flick is currently set to make its wide debut at the Toronto International Film Festival, which will occur next month.

Staying occupied: Depp is also set to appear as one of the main characters in the forthcoming drama film Wolf

Going double: Nathalie Biancheri wrote the forthcoming film's screenplay and also served as its director

Depp will also appear in the upcoming drama feature, Wolf.

The storyline of the film will be centered around an individual named Jacob, who believes that he is actually a wolf, living in a facility with other people who do not identify as human.

When the character comes into contact with a romantic interest, he is forced to make a decision between his personal conviction and potential future as a human.

In addition to the actress, the motion picture will star George MacKay, Paddy Considine and Fionn O'Shea.

Nathalie Biancheri wrote Wolf's screenplay and served as its director.

Making adjustments: Production on the film was supposed to begin last spring but was delayed due to the onset of the global pandemic

Letting everyone see: Wolf is currently scheduled to be made available to the general public on December 3rd

Although shooting was supposed to begin last spring, it was delayed as a result of the onset of the global pandemic.

The feature's cast later convened in the summer, and filming was eventually completed by October.

According to Deadline, Focus Features picked up the flick's distribution rights for several countries that same month.

Wolf will have its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival, and it will be made available to the general public on December 3rd.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is currently in the midst of wrapping up two film projects, including one that she produced, wrote, directed and is starring in herself.

But Katie Holmes was focused on family time on Friday, when she was seen out on the streets of New York City with her daughter Suri Cruise, 15.

The Dawson’s Creek star, 42, wore a lovely all-white ensemble, consisting of a simple T-shirt and crisp slacks that were rolled up at the cuffs.

Playing with her daughter's hair: Katie Holmes was focused on family time on Friday, when she was seen out on the streets of New York City with her daughter Suri Cruise

She shouldered a black leather tote bag, and walked along in fashionable black slides adorned with large gold buckles.

Katie also wore a white face covering along with dark hexagonal sunshades perched on top.

Her brown hair was tied back in a casual knot.

Gorgeous pair: The Dawson’s Creek star, 42, wore a lovely all-white ensemble, while Suri, Katie’s 15-year-old daughter with ex husband Tom Cruise, looked like a little lady in maroon shorts and a pale aqua tank top

Suri, Katie’s 15-year-old daughter with ex husband Tom Cruise, sported casual maroon shorts and a pale aqua tank top layered over gray heather.

She walked along in thin flip-flops, and had her long brown hair hanging down her back and over her shoulders.

Holmes momentarily played with the tips of her daughter’s long mane of hair as they crossed the street.

On their way: Cruise walked along in thin flip-flops, and had her long brown hair hanging down her back and over her shoulders

Like her mother, Cruise wore a white face covering.

Katie has recently completed work on a yet-to-be-titled TV movie from writers Ilene Chaiken and Melissa Scrivner-Love.

The story will follow an FBI special agent who tries to rebuild her career after an illicit affair damages her professional reputation.

Busy filmmaker: Katie is currently in the midst of wrapping up two untitled film projects, including one that she produced, wrote, directed and stars in herself; seen earlier this month

Her other project, also still untitled, is a romantic drama following two strangers both in bad relationships who end up at the same Airbnb in upstate New York.

Written, produced, directed by and starring Holmes, the movie will also star Jim Sturgess, Derek Luke, Melissa Leo, Zosia Mamet and Becky Ann Baker.

While the new film serves as Katie's feature film writing debut, she has previously helmed one other movie – the 2016 drama All We Had.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Khloe Kardashian and Tristan Thompson looked like a happy couple on Thursday even though they have recently split up over allegations he cheated on the star again.

The 37-year-old Good American designer and the 30-year-old basketball star walked in step as they left a special screening of Paw Patrol, which Kim Kardashian has a voice role in, in Calabasas, California.

Then on Friday, the athlete left heart emojis on his baby mama Khloe's sexy Instagrams where her hair was worn in natural curls.

Happy exes: Khloe Kardashian and Tristan Thompson reunited on Thursday for a screening of Kim Kardashian's new Paw Patrol movie

Proud mommy: The 37-year-old Good American designer held on to her girl True, age three

At the screening, Khloe looked to be in a serious mood as she held on to their daughter True, aged three.

The Keeping Up With The Kardashians had on an athletic black outfit that made the most of her toned 5ft10in frame, adding black and white lace-up sneakers.

Her hair was pulled back into a tight bun, a big change from her loose curls that could be seen earlier in the day on Instagram.

Tristan was just as casual with his clothes that consisted of a black Tupac Shakur top and matching shorts with white socks and black sneakers.

The Canadian-American held a Paw Patrol bag and other goodies.

Checking out auntie K's film: Khloe was with the 30-year-old basketball star walked in step as they left the special screening

Casual lady: The Keeping Up With The Kardashians had on an athletic black outfit that made the most of her toned 5ft10in frame, adding black and white lace-up sneakers

Little True stuck with a white outfit with white sneakers as her hair was pulled back into a top knot.

While mom and dad had on face masks, little True did not.

On Friday, Khloe shared an image to Instagram where she was showing off her natural curls as she wore a lilac colored workout outfit.

She said she had been straightening her hair for the past 20 years but when COVID hit, she stopped doing this.

Sporty style: Her hair was pulled back into a tight bun, a big change from her loose curls that could be seen earlier in the day on Instagram

TT is a fan of TS: Tristan was just as casual with his clothes that consisted of a black Tupac Shakur - who died in 1996 - top and matching shorts with white socks and black sneakers

Tristan was quick to add several heart emojis in the comment box, revealing he still likes to flirt with his pretty ex.

Last week it was announced Thompson has been traded to the Sacramento Kings.

Soon after the star shared a glowing shot of herself in a nude bodysuit to Instagram before going on to post several mindful quotes to her Story.

'Every situation in life is temporary. So, when life is good, make sure you enjoy and receive it fully,' one powerful quote read.

Family time: Little True stuck with a white outfit with white sneakers as her hair was pulled back into a top knot. While mom and dad had on face masks, little True did not

She got some goodies at the movie: True held on to a stuffed toy that looked like one of the characters in Paw Patrol

On her Instagram Story, Khloe got more personal.

The reality star, who is fond of sharing inspirational quotes on her account, nodded towards change by posting: 'Every situation in life is temporary. So, when life is good, make sure you enjoy and receive it fully.

'And when life is not so good, remember that it will not last forever, and better days are on the way.'

Another quote attributed to Yung Pueblo read, 'Happiness is not fulfilling every pleasure or getting every outcome you desire.

Kardashian kurls: On Friday, Khloe shared an image to Instagram where she was showing off her natural curls as she wore a lilac colored workout outfit. She said she had been straightening her hair for the past 20 years but when COVID hit, she stopped doing this

Flirty: Tristan was quick to add several heart emojis in the comment box, revealing he still likes to flirt with his pretty ex

'Happiness is being able to enjoy life with a peaceful mind that is not constantly craving for more. It is the Inner peace that comes with embracing change.'

Tristan is moving to the West coast after one season playing for the Boston Celtics.

Instead of being across the country, Thompson will now be in Sacramento, California, about a six-hour drive from Kardashian's native Calabasas.

Last year Kardashian had to contend with the distance.

'I'm not opposed to Boston, but once you have kids, it's different,' Kardashian explained in an episode of Keeping Up With the Kardashians, which aired in June.

'True has her whole life in L.A. — her cousins, I have preschool class at my house,' she said.

Coast to coast: Thompson has been traded to the Sacramento Kings from the Boston Celtics

'It's COVID, so I can't just take her to Boston and go find classes there. Everything's shut down.

'I think if it was a different year, maybe I'd be more open to uprooting her. But what am I going to do? Takeher there to be in a condo there and stay inside some walls?'

The Sacramento Kings reportedly acquired Thompson from the Boston Celtics on Friday in a three-team trade that also included the Atlanta Hawks.

In addition to True, Thompson is father to Prince, four, whom he shares with his ex-girlfriend, model Jordy Craig.

Kardashian and the professional basketball player were first linked in 2016 when they were spotted spending time together at a nightclub, and they later took a vacation in Mexico.

Advice: On her Instagram Story, Khloe got more personal saying life is good more or less

The two confirmed that they were dating that same year and remained very close through much of 2017.

The reality television personality eventually confirmed that she was pregnant with the athlete's child that December through a post made to her Instagram account.

Kardashian revealed that she was expecting a girl during an episode of Keeping Up With The Kardashians that aired the following year.

In 2018, it was reported that Thompson was spotted kissing multiple women in several locations, which surprised the clothing designer.

That year, she gave birth to True, and the parents later reconciled following the child's birth.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's currently in Toronto with boyfriend Shawn Mendes as they spend time in his hometown.

And on Friday, Camila Cabello was spotted enjoying a solo outing without her boyfriend.

The 24-year-old popstar cut a casual figure while going on her coffee run with her adorable pup Tarzan.

Casual: She's currently in Toronto with boyfriend Shawn Mendes as they spend time in his hometown. And on Friday, Camila Cabello was spotted enjoying a solo outing without her boyfriend

Camila opted for gray leggings with a matching crop top, adding white sneakers and an orange crossbody house. She is wearing the Alo Yoga high-waisted airlift leggings in the color gravel with the brand's wellness bra, also in gravel.

The Havana artist also wore bag around her waist for her pup.

Camila carried a book and a small iced coffee for walk with her sweet pup; she rocked

The stunner wore her brunette locks loose while opting to go makeup free.

Low key day: The 24-year-old popstar cut a casual figure while going on her coffee run with her adorable pup Tarzan

Fresh air: The stunner wore her brunette locks loose while opting to go makeup free

Camila has been in Toronto, Canada with Shawn for the past few days, after ringing in his 23rd birthday in New York City.

Prior to their trip to the Big Apple, the power couple relaxed in Mallorca, Spain.

During their European getaway, Camila posed in a black bikini while balancing on a paddle board.

She captioned it: 'Nothin to do nowhere to be.'

The swim session came after Camila's viral Tik Tok about body confidence.

Looking incredible: During their European getaway, Camila posed in a black bikini while balancing on a paddle board

She said in the video that 'being at war with your body is so last season.'

Camila and Shawn have been in a relationship for two years.

They met in 2014 while they were both opening acts for Austin Mahone's tour, Camila there with her then-bandmates from Fifth Harmony.

Over the years, the singers continued to spark romance rumors, although they consistently claimed they were just friends.

However in July 2019, they finally confirmed their romance after they were seen holding hands and kissing - the lovebirds have been going strong since.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@90 Day Fiancé alumni Russ and Paola Mayfield, 34, have announced that they're taking a break from their eight-year marriage.

This comes after Paola turned to social media the last couple days to get some things off her chest.

On Wednesday the red-headed TV personality tweeted, 'Part of the reason why relationships end is that we get caught up in other things, forget to appreciate one another, and sadly, marriage isn't a priority anymore.'

On the rocks: 90 Day Fiancé alumni Russ and Paola Mayfield have announced, via Paola's manager Dominique Enchinton, that they're taking a break from their eight-year marriage

'People asked me why I don't take pictures with my husband, and my answer is... I just don't like to pretend #youareguessingright,' she wrote in another tweet before doubling down and reposting it on Instagram.

She also shared a cryptic TikTok video in her Instagram stories of a man preaching in Spanish. 'No curve is more important than the curve of her smile,' the man says.

'Sometimes that smile is so big it's intimidating, making a person say, "Wow, she can do it alone. She doesn't need me ."

Transparency: 'People asked me why I don't take pictures with my husband, and my answer is... I just don't like to pretend #youareguessingright,' she wrote in another tweet before doubling down and reposting it on Instagram

Her husband Russ, on the other hand, has given no hints at trouble.

His Instagram profile reads, 'Proud husband of Paola Mayfield' and his most recent posts paint a portrait of a united family life.

The last one, shared July 2, is a photo of him holding their two-year-old son Axel. He tagged wrestler wife Paola and she commented, 'Aww wearing the shirt I made for both of you,' with three heart eye emoji.

Two different stories: Russ's Instagram profile reads, 'Proud husband of Paola Mayfield' and his most recent posts paint a portrait of a united family life

'During this pandemic, it's hit everyone very hard, especially couples who have had to stay indoors with each other 24/7,' Paola's manager Dominique Enchinton said in a statement on Friday, August 13.

She continued, 'Russ has lost his job during the pandemic, so Paola was the sole breadwinner for the past year. With all of that, it's definitely taken a toll on both of them being in each other's faces, so they are going to be taking a break for a little bit.'

She added that a divorce is not being planned at the moment and that the couple will go to therapy first.

The couple was introduced to the world in 2014 when they appeared on the first season of the TLC reality TV show 90 Day Fiancé. They married in 2013.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Billy Joel shared a sweet tribute to celebrate his daughter Della Rose's six birthday.

The 72-year-old Piano Man singer posted a series of cute photos on his Instagram page that featured his little girl.

'Happy 6th Birthday Della Rose!' Billy wrote in the caption of the photo set that he shared on Friday.

Happy Birthday! Billy Joel shared a sweet tribute to celebrate his daughter Della Rose's six birthday

Proud dad: The 72-year-old Piano Man singer posted a series of cute photos on his Instagram page that featured his little girl. Seen in 2018

'On your birthday it reminds us of how grateful we are to have you in our lives, ' he continued.

'You and your sister have been our quarantine entertainment. There are no other people we would want to be stuck with at home!!! We love you more every day and year.'

Joel's youngest daughter Remy Anne, three, also figured prominently in the snaps. Della and Remy were seen smiling broadly as they held dolls in the first image.

Cute: In the second photo, Della, who was clad in riding attire, beamed as she posted in a stable with a horse resting its muzzle on top of her head

In the second photo, Della, who was clad in riding attire, beamed as she posted in a stable with a horse resting its muzzle on top of her head.

The Uptown Girl hitmaker shares Della and Remy with his wife Alexis Roderick, 39, who is an equestrian and former Morgan Stanley executive. The pair began dating in 2009 and tied the knot on July 4, 2015.

Joel included two snaps that were taken at the chocolate-themed family theme park, Hersheypark. In one photo, Della wore a green M&M t-shirt and grinned as she posed with a Hershey Bar character.

Fun: Joel included two snaps that were taken at the chocolate-themed family theme park, Hersheypark. In one photo, Della wore a green M&M t-shirt and grinned as she posed with a Hershey Bar character

Sisters: In another snap, Della stood at a ride exit with her younger sister, who was clad in a a bright blue M&M t-shirt. Both girls also donned white shorts and white sneakers

In another snap, Della stood at a ride exit with her younger sister, who was clad in a a bright blue M&M t-shirt. Both girls also donned white shorts and white sneakers.

The last photo featured the family gathered together in casual pool attire before table covered with sweet treats and a three-tiered birthday cake with blue and purple icing.

A birthday banner decorated with characters from the animated children's show Bluey and adorned with a gold number 6 balloon hung behind them.

Joel, who has been married four times, also has an older daughter, Alexa Ray, 35, whom he shares with his ex-wife Christie Brinkley, 67.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ryan Murphy is already setting his sights on his next dramatizations.

The television show creator, 55, has received the green light from FX to helm two new shows in its American Story franchise: American Sports Story and American Love Story.

American Sports Story will focus on the tragic tale of Aaron Hernandez, the former New England Patriots tight end who was convicted of murder and killed himself in prison.

Meanwhile, American Love Story will follow the triumphs and tribulations in the doomed marriage of John F. Kennedy Jr. and Carolyn Bessette-Kennedy, including the plane crash which claimed both their lives.

Can't help but create: Ryan Murphy will soon add two more shows, American Sports Story and American Love Story, to his already prolific body of work

The embattled NFL star's murder trial, conviction and prison suicide is set to be a main feature in Murphy's first foray into a sports drama.

Hernandez, who was drafted into the NFL at the age of 20, had just inked a five-year, $40 million contract with the New England Patriots when he was arrested in 2013 for the murder of semi-professional football player Odin Lloyd.

Hernandez was convicted in 2015 of killing Lloyd.

A sure-fire touchdown: The first season of American Sports Story will focus on Aaron Hernandez, the former New England Patriots tight end who was convicted of murder and killed himself in prison

Two years later, the 27-year-old killed himself in his prison cell just days after being acquitted of most charges in a separate double-murder case.

American Love Story will delve into the tragic case of

The American Story franchise currently consists of three shows: American Horror Story, American Crime Story and American Horror Stories which premiered in July of this year.

A fourth season to American Crime Story was also announced.

American Crime Story season 4 will follow Steve Rubell and Ian Schrager as the duo create one of the most legendary nightclubs that has ever existed – Studio 54.

Gone too son: American Love Story will focus on the triumphs and tribulations in the relationship between John F. Kennedy Jr. and Carolyn Bessette-Kennedy including the tragic plane crash which claimed both their lives

Awards galore: Murphy, a six-time Emmy Winner, pictured here with actor Darren Criss in 2018 holding trophies they won for season 2 of American Crime Story, The Assassination of Gianni Versace

Season 3 of American Crime Story hasn't even aired yet but will this September. The show's third outing will tell the story of President Bill Clinton and Monica Lewinsky's relationship as well as the resulting impeachment trial.

In a statement released Friday, FX Chairman John Landgraf said, 'When Ryan Murphy came to us with these two spinoffs and the stories for American Sports Story and American Love Story, we immediately jumped at the opportunity.

'What began with American Horror Story has spawned some of the best and most indelible programs of our generation, most notably American Crime Story which created a beautiful partnership between Ryan, Brad, Nina and Brad.'

'Their alchemy and the way in which they construct these stories is done with such care, such clarity and such dimensionality that creates the magnificence that is The People v. O.J. Simpson, The Assassination of Gianni Versace and Impeachment. We can’t wait to see what comes next.'

Murphy left 20th Television in 2018 and signed a five-year, $300 million deal to develop shows for Netflix. He has produced content such as The Prom, The Politician, Ratched and much more for the streaming giant.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has earned massive praise for her portrayal of Margaret Thatcher on the hit Netflix series The Crown.

And on Thursday, Gillian Anderson gave fans a first look at an upcoming role, as another notable female historical political figure — none other than former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt.

The X-Files actress, who turned 53 earlier this week, shared a smiling selfie to her Instagram from Atlanta, Georgia, where she was being fit for a wavy brown wig similar to the style of Eleanor.

On Thursday: Crown star Gillian Anderson gave fans a first look at an upcoming role, as another notable female political figure — none other than former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt

She then included a snapshot of the name Eleanor on her trailer door, followed by an insightful quote from the longest-serving first lady in US history.

The quote read: 'A woman is like a teabag; you never know how strong it is until it’s in hot water.'

Anderson is slated to appear in all 10 episodes of the first season of the series, which will costar Kiefer Sutherland as her husband Franklin D Roosevelt.

Good hair recreation: The X-Files actress shared a smiling selfie to her Instagram from Atlanta, Georgia, where she was being fit for a wavy brown wig similar to the style of Eleanor

Truth: She then included an insightful quote from the longest-serving first lady in US history

The show, from creator Aaron Cooley, features a fabulous extended cast, including Viola Davis as Michelle Obama, Michelle Pfeiffer as Betty Ford and Ellen Burstyn as Sarah Delano Roosevelt.

Other notable stars in the show include Little Women’s Eliza Scanlen as a younger Eleanor Roosevelt, the Handmaid‘s Tale‘s O-T Fagbenle as Barack Obama, Aaron Eckhart as Gerald Ford and Dakota Fanning as Susan Elizabeth Ford.

The First Lady looks to be an interesting concept, as it seems the show will intersperse various characters and time periods throughout each episode, as opposed to concentrating on one era or presidential term at a time.

A longtime respected actress: Gillian is currently nominated for a Primetime Emmy for her role as Margaret Thatcher this year for The Crown

A longtime respected television and film actress, Gillian is currently nominated for a Primetime Emmy in the Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series category for her role as Iron Lady Thatcher this year for The Crown.

She has previously been nominated five times, winning once in 1997 for her portrayal of skeptic special agent Dana Scully in The X-Files opposite David Duchovny.

The First Lady is set to premiere later this year on Showtime.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ariana Grande was spotted arriving at a friend's home on Friday with a box of treats in tow.

The singer was seen wearing her preferred uniform of straight leg mom jeans, a crop top, and booties, with a tall water bottle tucked under her arm.

Her outfit featured a beige, shrunken, two-button cardigan and white boots with a chunky heel.

She was also armed with goodies from fōnuts - a trendy LA bakery that offers what they call 'enlightened donuts' which are baked, gluten-free and vegan.

Generous guest: Ariana Grande was spotted arriving at a friend's home on Friday as she carried a box of Fonuts donuts

The petite performer had her long, brown tresses parted in the middle and swooped up into a luscious ponytail.

She had a full face of glam on under her soft pink disposable face mask. In one shot she carried a matching pink reusable water bottle. The dainty star rocked golden eyeshadow and a flawless cat eye.

Her jewelry choice was incongruent — two small hoops in one ear, and a small lobe-hugging piece in the other.

Consistent fashion: She was seen wearing her uniform of straight leg mom jeans, a crop top, and booties

Coordination: She had a full face of glam on under her soft pink disposable face mask, and in one shot she carried a matching pink reusable water bottle

The seasoned songstress will serve as a coach on NBC's singing competition The Voice, premiering this fall. It's been reported that the gig came with a $20million paycheck.

This past spring Ari wed real estate mogul Dalton Gomez. The two, who began dating early last year, honeymooned in Amsterdam.

They were seen together a few weeks ago at Christina Aguilera's two-night show with Los Angeles Philharmonic in Hollywood.

Date night: Ari and her new husband Dalton Gomez were seen together a few weeks ago at Christina Aguilera's two-night show with Los Angeles Philharmonic

The gorgeous star, who once dated Mac Miller and later Pete Davidson, has been vocal about her thoughts regarding the 18-month-long pandemic.

She's taken to social media to encourage fans to get vaccinated and wear masks. 'Please get your vaccines if you are eligible! This thing is not over yet,' she advised in a recent post.

On Monday the singer-songwriter shared a sweet side by side photo of herself with a brown dog. There was no caption, but the post racked up almost 10 million likes from her colossal following of 259 million.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jeopardy! host Mayim Bialik says she's NOT an anti-vaxxer (Pictured, 2019)

Jeopardy! host Mayim Bialik is denying claims that she is an anti-vaxxer.

Since it was revealed that executive producer Mike Richards and The Big Bang Theory actress would be taking over from the late Alex Trebek - both have been facing criticism and backlash.

For Bialik, it was her previously discussed hesitancy over vaccines in her 2012 parenting book Beyond the Sling, where she admitted to not having her children vaccinated.

However, in statement to The Wrap issued on Wednesday, a rep for Bialik, 45, said: 'She has been fully vaccinated for the COVID-19 virus and is not at all an anti-vaxxer.'

The Big Bang Theory star has two children with her ex-husband Michael Stone: sons Frederick, 12, and Miles, 15.

Bialik had stated previously in her book: 'We made an informed decision not to vaccinate our children.'

Tough crowd: Since it was revealed that Mike Richards and Mayim Bialik would be taking over from the late Alex Trebek - both have been facing criticism and backlash

The actress added: 'but this is a very personal decision that should be made only after sufficient research, which today is within reach of every parent who seeks to learn about their child's health regardless of their medical knowledge or educational status.'

She also hit back against the claims in a 2015 tweet, where she wrote: 'dispelling rumors abt my stance on vaccines. i'm not anti. my kids are vaccinated. so much anger and hysteria. i hope this clears things up.'

The heated criticism comes after TMZ reported that Bialik was actually the top choice for the Jeopardy! gig over Richards.

The report claims that Bialik tested higher than Richards in focus groups, and the crew loved working with her - however, the actress was too busy with other commitments to make it work full-time.

Backlash: Meanwhile, exec producer Mike Richards has also faced criticism from fans of the quiz show (Pictured, last month)

TMZ adds that the negotiations went on for six weeks where the actress reached a multi-year, multi-million-dollar deal to do just the primetime versions of the show as well as pin-off sessions.

Meanwhile, fans took to Twitter earlier this week to air their grievances at the host choices, with many left disappointed that it wasn't fan-favorite LeVar Burton, or star player Ken Jennings, instead of Richards.

Even celebrities including Meghan McCain, Ava DuVernay, and Oscar-winning director Matthew A. Cherry voiced their opinion on the announcement as backlash against the two new hosts mounted.

Fan favourite: Guest host LeVar Burton was also in the running to be named as the new host, and angry fans hit out on Wednesday when he wasn't picked

Selma director DuVernay used a Schitt's Creek meme to show her disappointment, writing: 'Me trying to create a show right in this moment for @levarburton to host and make an international hit.'

Former host of The View McCain wrote: 'Why couldn't they just give it to @levarburton like literally everyone on the planet wanted?'

The New York Times reporter Anstead W. Herndon said: 'after all that... the jeopardy exec producer just chose.... himself lmaooo,' referencing the fact that Richards has served as executive producer on the quiz show.

Herndon added with a meme: 'jeopardy producer watching all those little guest hosts knowing he was choosing himself the whole time.'

Iconic: Longtime host Alex Trebek - who died after battling cancer in November last year - was at the helm of the quiz show for 36 years

'So basically he's still giving himself the job but throwing Bailik out there to distract from his past connections to sexual harassment and a hostile work environment on the Price is Right,' tweeted Dr. Jason Johnson.

Earlier this week, Mike Richards reportedly addressed recently resurfaced sexual harassment and discrimination lawsuits from his time producing The Price is Right in a memo to Jeopardy staff.

Writer Aidan Moher tweeted: 'The worst thing (okay, maybe not the WORST thing, but...) is that you know Mike Richards is gonna leave Jeopardy in, like, three years because he's a self serving egotist.'

Longtime host Alex Trebek - who died aged 80 after battling cancer in November last year - was at the helm of the iconic show for 36 years, and there has been a series of guest hosts since his departure.

Still, Richards kept upbeat as he said in a statement about his confirmed gig: 'I am deeply honored to have the opportunity to host the syndicated version of Jeopardy! Never in my wildest dreams could I have imagined being chosen to step into a role of this magnitude.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Macaulay Culkin made his debut in the upcoming season of American Horror Story in the creepy new trailer - appropriately released on Friday the 13th.

The 40-year-old Home Alone star did not get any dialogue in the promo clip but the video provided a first look at the new season with Culkin seen brooding along to disturbing music.

Season 10 of the bizarre anthology series, titled AHS: Double Feature, stars Culkin with Sarah Paulson, Evan Peters, Kathy Bates, Leslie Grossman and Billie Lourd.

Chilling! Macaulay Culkin made his debut in the upcoming season of American Horror Story in the creepy new trailer for AHS: Double Feature - appropriately released on Friday the 13th

'I think this is going to be the perfect place to work without distraction,' the trailer begins as viewers seen a family moving into a new home.

Part one of the two-part season sees 'a struggling writer, his pregnant wife and their daughter move to an isolated beach town for the winter,' according to the official logline. Needless to say, things don't go as planned for the family.

'I could really use some of the inspiration you guys have on tap,' the unsuspecting writer tells a group of family AHS stars. 'I'm facing some serious writers block.'

Yikes: Part one of the two-part season sees 'a struggling writer, his pregnant wife and their daughter move to an isolated beach town for the winter,' according to the official logline

'I could really use some of the inspiration you guys have on tap,' the unsuspecting writer tells a group of family AHS stars. 'I'm facing some serious writers block.'

'That won't last long, trust me,' actor Evan Peters devilishly replies.

Veterans: Season 10 of the bizarre anthology series, titled AHS: Double Feature, stars Culkin with Sarah Paulson, Evan Peters, Kathy Bates, Leslie Grossman and Billie Lourd

'That won't last long, trust me,' actor Evan Peters devilishly replies.

It seems inspiration strikes as scenes flash of feverish typing at the computer but it is clearly coming at a cost.

'There's nothing more addictive than success,' Frances Conroy says.

Spotted! Billie Lourd is seen only briefly in the short trailer

Something is wrong: It seems inspiration strikes the writer as scenes flash of feverish typing at the computer but it is clearly coming at a cost

What is happening? Various severed limbs wash up on the shore in one scene

She adds ominously: 'You've tasted it now you're never going to be able to live without it.'

American Horror Story: Double Feature is the tenth overall run of episodes in the long-running anthology series, which was co-created by Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk.

The forthcoming episodes would feature two separate storylines, 'one by the sea' and 'one by the sand,' according to Murphy.

'There's nothing more addictive than success,' Frances Conroy says.

She adds ominously: 'You've tasted it now you're never going to be able to live without it.'

Fan favorite: American Horror Story: Double Feature is the tenth overall run of episodes in the long-running anthology series, which was co-created by Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk

The show's co-creator later clarified that two separate seasons of the show would premiere under the Double Feature name.

Production on the new season of the FX she was halted last month due to COVID-19 after an actor on the show tested positive for the coronavirus, Variety reported.

Filming had previously been to begin in the early part of 2020, but was cancelled due to the onset of the global pandemic.

More to come: The show's co-creator later clarified that two separate seasons of the show would premiere under the Double Feature name

Issues: Production on the new season of the FX she was halted last month due to COVID-19 after an actor on the show tested positive for the coronavirus, Variety reported

Terrifying: Sarah Paulson is unrecognizable in the trailer

After principal photography was pushed back from its scheduled October start time, shooting finally began in December of last year.

Production eventually moved to Provincetown, Massachusetts, where the crew worked for roughly a month before heading back to Los Angeles.

American Horror Story: Double Feature premieres August 25.

On location: Production eventually moved to Provincetown, Massachusetts, where the crew worked for roughly a month before heading back to Los Angeles
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She revealed she has always designed her future wedding dress in her head, based on 'Vivienne Westwood's work.'

And on Friday, Bella Hadid opted for a more low key look, rocking a bold red bikini.

The 24-year-old model showcased her toned abs in the racy look, adding red eye glasses and a chunky necklace.

Beauty: She revealed she has always designed her future wedding dress in her head, based on 'Vivienne Westwood's work.' And on Friday, Bella Hadid opted for a more low key look, rocking a bold red bikini

The brunette beauty wowed in the revealing swimsuit, which featured a low cut ruched bikini top, complete with gold chain accents.

Bella put her toned midsection on full display, as well as her long legs.

She sported the high cut, gold chain accented bottoms; they had cut out details along the sides and a string detail across her stomach.

Bella styled the bold look with a chunky gold necklace, rings, heart earrings and a bracelet, adding red eyeglasses.

Wow factor: The 24-year-old model showcased her toned abs in the racy look, adding red eye glasses and a chunky necklace

Lovely: The brunette beauty wowed in the revealing swimsuit, which featured a low cut ruched bikini top, complete with gold chain accents

The younger sister of Gigi posed outside on grass for several snaps as well as in a pool too.

She tagged the bikini brand - Dilara Findikoglu; the name of the bikini is called the 'Belly Dancer Bikini Top' and retails for $235 USD. The bottoms are called 'Belly Dancer Bikini Bottom' and retails for $214 USD.

The entire look costs $449 for both pieces.

Stunner: Bella put her toned midsection on full display, as well as her long legs

A vision: The entire look costs $449 for both pieces

Toned: She sported the high cut, gold chain accented bottoms; they had cut out details along the sides and a string detail across her stomach

Cool girl: Bella styled the bold look with a chunky gold necklace, rings, heart earrings and a bracelet, adding red eyeglasses

Bella sat down for Vogue magazine to talk about her past fashion looks for their series 'Life in Looks.'

When she came across an image of her in a sheer white Vivienne Westwood dress, she said she hopes the designer will make her wedding dress one day.

Explaining that she 'always, like, in my heart manifest her making my wedding dress.'

Hadid also said: 'I hope one day when I get married she can make it, I mean it would be a literal honor for me, I don't know if that would even be a possibility, but if so it's me and you Vivienne, dagger included.'

Trendsetter: Bella sat down for Vogue magazine to talk about her past fashion looks for their series 'Life in Looks'

Earlier she said of the image of her modeling a Westwood gown: 'This show I was able to take out my dagger and kind of like again be a character.'

Her comments come weeks after she went Instagram official with boyfriend Marc Kalman.

They have reportedly been together for one year.

Prior to Marc, Bella was in an on/off relationship with The Weeknd, born Abel Makkonen Tesfaye.

So cute: Last month, Bella went official with her boyfriend Mark Kalman during her summer break in Europe

All in the family: Her mom Yolanda shared behind the scenes snaps of her and Bella while doing a campaign for Michael Kors

Another one: Bella pictured getting a touch up during the Kors shoot
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Grammy-winning folk singer-songwriter Nanci Griffith has died at the age of 68.

Her management company, Gold Mountain Entertainment, said Griffith passed away on Friday but did not provide a cause of death.

'It was Nanci's wish that no further formal statement or press release happen for a week following her passing,' Gold Mountain Entertainment said in a statement.

The Texas native was known for her literary songs like Love At The Five And Dime, Once in a Very Blue Moon and It's A Hard Life Wherever You Go.

Sad loss for the US: The Grammy-winning folk singer-songwriter Nanci Griffith has died at the age of 68. Seen in 2004 in New York

Griffith worked closely with other folk singers, helping the early careers of artists like Lyle Lovett and Emmylou Harris.

She had a high-pitched voice, and her singing was effortlessly smooth with a twangy Texas accent.

The star sang about Dust Bowl farmers and empty Woolworth general stores.

Griffith was also known for her recording of From A Distance, which would later become a well-known Bette Midler tune.

Hard to say goodbye to this icon: Her management company, Gold Mountain Entertainment, said Griffith passed away on Friday but did not provide a cause of death; seen in 2009 with John Prine in Nashville

The song appeared on Griffith's first major label release, Lone Star State of Mind, in 1987.

Her 1993 album Other Voices, Other Rooms, earned a Grammy for best contemporary folk album.

Named after a Truman Capote novel, the album features Griffith singing with Harris, John Prine, Arlo Guthrie and Guy Clark on classic folk songs.

In 2008, Griffith won the Lifetime Achievement Trailblazer Award from the Americana Music Association.

A loved folk singer: In 2008, Griffith won the Lifetime Achievement Trailblazer Award from the Americana Music Association. Seen in 2011 in Nashville

She was born in Seguin, Texas, and raised in Austin where she performed as a young lady.

Nanci wrote her first song, A New Generation, and played her first show at age 12, according to Texas Monthly.

After attending University of Texas she hoped to become a teacher. But then in the late Seventies she gave a career as a musician a try. In 1978 came There’s a Light Beyond These Woods.

Keeping in line with the tradition of folk music, Griffith often wrote social commentary into her songs, such as the anti-racist ode It's a Hard Life Wherever You Go, and the economic impact on rural farmers in the 1980s on Trouble In The Fields.

'I wrote it because my family were farmers in West Texas during the Great Depression,' Griffith told the Los Angeles Times in a 1990 interview. 'It was written basically as a show of support for my generation of farmers.'

Her early days: Keeping in line with the tradition of folk music, Griffith often wrote social commentary into her songs, such as the anti-racist ode It's a Hard Life Wherever You Go, and the economic impact on rural farmers in the 1980s on Trouble In The Fields. Seen in 1989

Country singer Suzy Bogguss, who had a Top 10 hit with Griffith's song Outbound Plane, posted a remembrance to her friend on Instagram.

'I feel blessed to have many memories of our times together along with most everything she ever recorded. I'm going to spend the day reveling in the articulate masterful legacy she' left us,' Bogguss wrote.

Darius Rucker called Griffith one of his idols and why he moved to Nashville.

'Today i am just sad man. I lost one of my idols. One of the reasons I am in Nashville. She blew my mind the first time I heard [Mary &] Omie. And singing with her was my favorite things to do,' he wrote.

She gained many fans in Ireland and Northern Ireland, where she would often tour.

Griffith was married to performer Eric Taylor from 1976 until their divorce in 1982.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An interview clip between comedian Kevin Hart, 42, and actor Don Cheadle has gone viral.

In the funny exchange featured on the new Peacock show Hart To Heart, Kevin lets out a visceral, 'Damn!' when Don mentions that he's 56-years-old.

The snippet has been heavily shared on social media since Thursday.

EPIC: An interview clip between comedian Kevin Hart, 42, and actor Don Cheadle, 56, has gone viral

During the 43-minute unscripted chat, the two friends catch up with each other, letting the conversation go where it may.

As the Black Monday actor discusses generational wealth, he casually notes his age.

That's when Kevin, fourteen years his junior, blurts out the unfiltered reaction.

The older friend pauses for a moment, seemingly disappointed in the father-of-four's reaction. 'I'm sorry,' Kevin says. 'It was a thought and I blurted it out.'

On set: It's a hilarious display of two seasoned performers riffing off each other, delighting millions of fans

It's a hilarious display of two seasoned performers riffing off each other while delighting millions of fans.

The stand-up-comedian promoted his new project on Instagram Friday, sharing the now infamous video excerpt. 'You have to see my new interview with @DonCheadle...it is EPIC!!!!' he wrote in his caption.

'The beauty of Hart to Heart is that it's unscripted...these conversations are real and authentic...there is NO PREP!!!!' he assured his 119 million Instagram followers.

Now streaming: The stand-up-comedian promoted his new project on Instagram Friday, sharing the now infamous video excerpt

His counterpart also took to the social media site today to share a post of his own. Cheadle posted a photo of his feet on a table in a dressing room trailer.

The veteran actor included the hashtags '#hurryupandwaithurryup' and '#setlife' in his caption.

Hart to Heart is catching the internet's attention as the star-studded series features Cameron Diaz, Taraji P Henson, Miley Cyrus, and more.

Hardly working: Cheadle posted a photo to Instagram of his feet on a table in a dressing room trailer

Kev was recently spotted shooting a scene for the revived show The Real Husbands of Hollywood in Los Angeles.

In the scene he hits a bear cub with his car, then gets attacked by the bear while filming the incident on his cell phone.

BET announced on July 29 that the show, which was cancelled in 2016, would receive a limited series comprised of six episodes. It will air on the channel's streaming service, BET+.

Internet sensation: Pictures of Kevin and Snoop Dogg recently went viral because the Secret Life of Pets actor's feet didn't touch the ground

Hart's return to the show is a bit surprising given how in-demand he is. The Central Intelligence actor has three movies coming out next year, including a voice acting role in DC League of Super-Pets which is currently in production.

Additionally, the father of four finished shooting Borderlands, a science-fiction action comedy, in June.

The film will star Cate Blanchett as an infamous outlaw who returns to her home planet to find a client's daughter. Hart will star opposite Blanchett as Roland, a mercenary looking for redemption.

The movie star also took some time to provide commentary for some Olympic events alongside Soul Plane co-star Snoop Dogg. Pictures of the two went viral because the Secret Life of Pets actor's feet didn't touch the ground.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jared Leto looked incredibly youthful as he stepped out in New York City this week after setting social media alight with his shock appearance in the House of Gucci trailer.

The actor, 49, seemed wrinkle free and he had a full head on long auburn hair.

The My So-Called Life vet showed off his big biceps in a blue tank top, black jeans and black shoes. A bag hung from his broad shoulders.

The magic of prosthetic makeup: Jared Leto looked youthful while stepping out in New York City this week after setting Twitter alight with his transformation in the House of Gucci trailer

That's Jared Leto? The actor plays Paolo Gucci in the highly-anticipated film

The actor looked completely unrecognizable when compared to his much heavier and baling character, Paolo Gucci, from the House of Gucci trailer.

The House of Gucci centers around the family that built the internationally know fashion company. In particular, the film will tell the story of Patrizia Reggiani who hired a hitman to kill her ex-husband Maurizio Gucci, who ran the Gucci empire.

Paolo Gucci, the character Leto plays, was Maurizio's cousin and the chief designer for the brand in the late 1960s. He later turned against the family and tried to start a clothing company of his own.

The film boasts a star-studded cast including Lady Gaga, Al Pacino, Adam Driver, Jeremy Irons and Salma Hayek and is slated for a November release date.

Fans on Twitter were shocked when they saw the Thirty Seconds to Mars vocalist in the trailer.

Totally unrecognizable: The actor underwent a dramatic transformation for the role. He is seen right on set in Rome back in April

One Twitter user wrote, 'How is this Jared Leto bro' followed by two skull emojis.

Another focused on the quality of the makeup job in their tweet, writing, 'And here we have the front runner for hair and makeup #Oscars #Jared Leto.'

Other Twitter users took a more humorous look at the actor's transformation, and one even compared him to a beloved video game character.

'Oh man I can't wait to see Jared Leto in this gritty Super Mario Bros reboot,' the social media user posted.

'How is this even Jared Leto bro': One Twitter user asked the question on everyone's mind when they asked how this could be the Dallas Buyers Club star

Someone in the makeup department deserves a raise: Other Twitter users complimented the hair and makeup team on making the well-known actor look nothing like himself

Super Jared Leto: Another Twitter user compared the Fight Club actor to video game character Mario

Leto has been dating model Valery Kaufman.

The actor and the 27-year-old have been on-again, off-again for year according to a what an inside source told People.

'Over the years, things seem to have turned romantic. They have been off and on now for a few years, but seem to spend more time together lately,' the source told the publication.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cynthia Nixon has been busy filming scenes for the upcoming Sex and the City reboot series but she took a break to video chat her wife.

The 55-year-old Emmy Award winner shared a screenshot on Friday in which she was seen having a conversation with her wife Christine Marinoni.

'Some FaceTime with Miranda #AndJustLikeThat,' Cynthia wrote in the caption.

Chatting it up: Cynthia Nixon has been busy filming scenes for the upcoming Sex and the City reboot series but she took a break to FaceTime her wife Christine Marinoni

Nixon donned a chic orange top as she leaned her chin on her hand and gave smiled softly at her activist wife.

For the reboot, Cynthia switched up her hairstyle, opting for a gray bob in lieu of her trademark red pixie cut. Co-star Sarah Jessica Parker has also let her gray roots grow in for the revival as the characters embrace middle-age.

The star also showed off her character Miranda Hobbes' bold stye as she rocked a chunky silver ring.

Finding love: The two met in 2001 when Nixon campaigned for an education non-profit that Christine helped fund. They began dating in 2004 and tied the knot in 2012. Seen in 2008

Marinoni was seen laying in bed and grinning back at her spouse. The two met in 2001 when Nixon campaigned for an education non-profit that Christine helped fund. They began dating in 2004 and tied the knot in 2012.

Christine gave birth to their son Max Ellington Nixon-Marinoni in 2011. Cynthia was previously in a 15-year relationship with schoolteacher Danny Mozes, with whom she shares sons Samuel, 24, and Charles, 18. Samuel was born Samantha but Cynthia revealed he was transgender in 2018.

Nixon has frequently been spotted on set as she films the upcoming series with Parker, 56 and co-star Kristin Davis, 56, who returned to reprise their iconic roles.

Reboot: In January 2021, HBO confirmed that it was producing a revival of the beloved series. Pictured in 2005

Back together: Nixon has frequently been spotted on set as she films the upcoming series with Parker, 56 and co-star Kristin Davis, 56, who returned to reprise their iconic roles

Sarah plays writer-turned-podcaster Carrie Bradshaw and Davis is back as gallerist Charlotte York-Goldenblatt.

Recently, fans made the mind-blowing realization that Cynthia and SJP first worked together all the way back in 1982 - 16 years before Sex And The City.

The pair played sisters in the 1982 TV movie, My Body, My Child, starring Vanessa Redgrave.

In the film, they played the daughters of Vanessa's Catholic character, who became pregnant again and was debating whether to have an abortion after learning her unborn child will have disabilities.

A screenshot from the movie reappeared on fan account, Every Outfit on Sex & the City', as they quipped: 'Be nice to your colleagues, people. You may still be working with them 39 years later…⁣'

Way back when! The ladies were back on set after fans made the mind-blowing realization that Cynthia and SJP first worked together all the way back in 1982 - 16 years before Sex And The City. (Pictured in 1982)

Now: SJP (middle) and Cynthia (left) are renowned for playing Carrie Bradshaw and Miranda Hobbs in Sex And The City (pictured above with Kristin Davis, right) who starred as Charlotte York-Goldblatt

With diehard fans of the pair only knowing Sarah and Cynthia for their roles as Carrie and Miranda, they went into meltdown in the comments.

Shocked fans penned: 'This has literally blown my mind'; 'Omgggg'; 'Wow! Too cool.'; 'So sweet❤️'; 'Whhaaaaat' [sic].

However, Cynthia herself first brought up the fact back in 2018, when a Brazilian fan site tweeted a picture of the fresh-faced pair on screen.

Cynthia playfully responded: 'Yes that's me on the right @brasil_nixon, age 15, but can anyone guess who the girl in the middle is playing my sister?

'Another fun fact--Vanessa Redgrave played our mother!'

Meltdown: With diehard fans of the pair only knowing Sarah and Cynthia for their roles as Carrie and Miranda, they went into meltdown

Throwback: Cynthia herself first brought up the fact back in 2018, when a Brazilian fan site tweeted a picture of the fresh-faced pair on screen

One to watch: The pair played the daughters of Vanessa Redgraves' catholic character in the movie, who fell pregnant again and was debating whether to have an abortion a

Running from 1998 to 2004, Sex And The City was an immensely popular series focusing on the love and sex lives of four 30-something New York City women.

Along with Cynthia, Sarah and Kristin, Kim Cattrall starred as promiscuous PR agent Samantha Jones.

The women have been filming And Just Like That in New York, with the exception of Kim - who chose not to join the project.

Kim, 64, made it clear that she had no intention of coming back to any new iteration of the franchise, after a highly publicised and long-standing feud between herself and Sarah.

The new incarnation of the show will run for ten episodes on HBO.

Famous four...no more: The women have been filming the upcoming SATC revival And Just Like That in New York, but absent from the proceedings is Kim Cattrall (second right)

The network's chief content officer, Casey Bloys, reflected on Samantha's exit, saying: 'Just as in real life, people come into your life, people leave. Friendships fade and new friendships start.'

For Kim and Sarah, it seems the friendship did not fade but was never there to begin with.

Explaining why she would not return, Kim said in 2019: 'It's a "no" from me. You learn lessons in life and my lesson is to do work with good people and try and make it fun.'

The previous year, their frosty relationship played out on social media after the death of Kim's brother Chris.

When SJP sent her condolences online, Golden-Globe winner Kim thought the sentiment was disingenuous and posted: 'My mom asked me today, "when will that Sarah Jessica Parker . . . leave you alone?"

'Your continuous reaching out is a painful reminder of how cruel you really were then and now.'

SJP has denied a feud, saying she had 'never uttered an unkind, unsupportive, unfriendly word'.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sofia Richie and her boyfriend Elliot Grainge masked up while leaving a restaurant in the Los Angeles city of Santa Monica.

The model, 22, wore a fashionable floral ensemble while her beau wore a less colorful outfit, sticking to a black t-shirt underneath a white button-down, jeans and white shoes.

The two ate at Giorgio Baldi, an upscale Italian restaurant just steps from the beach. Rihanna, Reese Witherspoon and Gwyneth Paltrow often dine there.

Using protection: Sofia Richie wore a mask after having dinner in an Italian restaurant with her boyfriend, Elliott Grainge, on Thursday

Recently, Los Angeles County reinstated mask mandates for all people, regardless of vaccination status, while indoors.

The daughter of Lionel Richie started dating her current man earlier this year but is no stranger to courting in the spotlight. She had an infamous on-again, off-again relationship with Scott Disick, the longtime partner of Kourtney Kardashian.

Like her, Richie's current squeeze comes from a family experienced in the music industry. Grainge, who is the CEO of the independent record company 10K Projects, is the son of Universal Music Group Chairman and CEO Lucian Grainge.

His father has worked with legendary artists like Elton John, The Rolling Stones and Queen among many others.

Record mogul royalty: Richie's current squeeze comes from a family experienced in the music industry. Grainge, who is the CEO of the independent record company 10K Projects, is the son of Universal Music Group Chairman and CEO Lucian Grainge

Positive personal and professional developments: The Tommy Hilfiger model, seated next to her man after dinner, has experienced as much professional success as personal success recently including two fashion collection releases this year alone

On top of the positives in her personal life, the Tommy Hilfiger model has experienced a run of professional success lately as well.

Michael Jackson's goddaughter has released two fashion lines this year. The first was a clothing collection collaboration with sister Nicole called Sofia Richie x House of Harlow 1960.

The second, released just last month, was a collaboration with the 8 Other Reasons brand. The collection carried 61 pieces including jewelry, bucket hats and a number of other accessories to choose from.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Cindy Crawford and Rande Gerber have sold their flipped Beverly Hills home to WhatsApp co-founder Jan Koum - who also happens to be the couple's neighbor.

The supermodel and the Casamigos co-founder made an impressive $1.8million profit on the sale, after Koum - worth a staggering $10.5 billion - snapped up the neighboring property for $13.5million.

Koum, 45, is now the proud owner of the mid-century modern abode, in the idyllic 90210 neighborhood of Trousdale Estates, the New York Post reports.

Impressive! Cindy Crawford and Rande Gerber have sold their flipped Beverly Hills home to WhatsApp co-founder Jan Koum for $13.5M... making an impressive $1.88M profit

However, Cindy, 55, and Rande, 59, had originally intended to make a slightly bigger profit, having put the home on the market for just under $16million.

That's a difference of a hefty $2.5million, though still small change for billionaire Koum.

Ukrainian-American billionaire entrepreneur Koum was born in Kyiv, Ukraine, then in the Soviet Union. He moved with his mother and grandmother to Mountain View, California in 1992, and became interested in computer programming at the age of 16.

Meanwhile, Cindy is now said to have notched up around $8million in profits over the last six years thanks to her property flipping skills.

Three years ago, the Hollywood power couple purchased the property from New Republic frontman Ryan Tedder for $11.625 million, who extensively renovated and expanded the house.

Exchange: WhatsApp co-founder Jan Koum (left) who is worth a staggering $10.5 billion, is said to have already been a neighbor of Cindy and Rande, so is familiar with the aria

Incredible views: Three years ago, the Hollywood power couple purchased the property from New Republic frontman Ryan Tedder for $11.625 million, who extensively renovated and expanded the late 1950s home

The pair, who reside primarily in their lush compound in Malibu, appeared to make a 'few cosmetic alterations to the interior along with fair number of landscaping changes, especially in the backyard,' as pointed out by Variety.

The couple's five bedroom property is equipped with an impressive outdoor area, pool and a fire pit fit for entertaining guests.

Flooding the neutral toned living quarters with lots of light, the sitting room features a statement stand alone fireplace in the middle of the room which doubles up as a bar.

The 5,386-square-foot home, built in 1959, boasts three living spaces, high ceilings, a media room, tree-shaded deck space, five-and-a-half bathrooms and multiple sliding glass doors.

Welcoming: The pair, who reside primarily in their lush compound in Malibu, appeared to make a 'few cosmetic alterations to the interior along with fair number of landscaping changes, especially in the backyard,' as pointed out by Variety

Cozy: The supermodel and the Casamigos co-founder's five bedroom property is equipped with an impressive outdoor area, pool and a fire pit fit for entertaining guests

While the master suite is something to behold, the pièce de résistance of the home is the chef's kitchen, which features an incredible marble island and stainless steel appliances.

The owner's suite also includes a bathroom with two massive vanities and a glass-enclosed shower.

The property recently hit the market with the asking price of $15.99 million and is 'stylish, chic, and completely private,' according to the listing with Kurt Rappaport of Westside Estate Agency.

Comfy: Flooding the neutral toned living quarters with lots of light, the sitting room features a statement stand alone fireplace in the middle of the room which doubles up as a bar

Living room: The 5,386-square-foot home boasts three living spaces, high ceilings, a media room, tree-shaded deck space, five-and-a-half bathrooms and multiple sliding glass doors

Fire place: The owner's suite also includes a bathroom with two massive vanities and a glass-enclosed shower

Media room: The property recently hit the market with the asking price of $15.99 million and is 'stylish, chic, and completely private,' according to the listing with Kurt Rappaport of Westside Estate Agency

Additionally, the the interiors are open and contain 'meandering paths' and is invisible from the street behind thick foliage and heritage trees.

Positioned on a one-acre lot, the house is surrounded by stunning and luxurious outdoor patios.

Crawford and Gerber have invested heavily in the City of Angeles' luxury real estate market over the years.

Bedroom: While the master suite is something to behold, the pièce de résistance of the home is the chef's kitchen, which features an incredible marble island and stainless steel appliances

Their biggest recent deal was in 2018, when they sold their Malibu beach house for $45 million, after first listing for $60 million in 2016, then $50 million.

Last summer, the savvy pair paid $4.9 million for a home at the Madison Club resort in La Quinta, near Palm Springs.

In a interview with Architectural Digest last April, Cindy, who has been married to Rande since May 1998, revealed that they have multiple homes, to please their kids.

Private: Additionally, the the interiors are open and contain 'meandering paths' and is invisible from the street behind thick foliage and heritage trees

Sliding glass doors: Positioned on a one-acre lot, the house is surrounded by stunning and luxurious outdoor patios

Making money: Crawford and Gerber have invested heavily in the City of Angeles' luxury real estate market over the years

Doing well: Their biggest recent deal was in 2018, when they sold their Malibu beach house for $45 million, after first listing for $60 million in 2016, then $50 million

She revealed: 'We have our main house, in Malibu, which we've had for 15 years, and we have a lake cottage in Canada, which is on the East Coast, outside of Toronto. It's very Ralph Lauren. That's what my husband and I both wanted. We both grew up going to lakes in the summer. He went to summer camp, I just went with my family, but we wanted that experience for our kids. And so we wanted it to feel like almost like a log cabin camp vibe.'

'Then, we just bought a house last year in Beverly Hills, because our kids were getting older. Malibu's great when they're little, but they're starting to be like, "It's so boring here, we wanna be in town." So we got that house.

'It's midcentury modern, so it's been fun putting it through our own filter, because some of the midcentury stuff is too low or it's not comfortable. We make a lot of our upholstery. My husband is very, very picky about the cushion density and seat depth because he's taller. We've got it down now. We know the dimensions we like, so sometimes we just change the body style.'

Investing: Last summer, the savvy pair paid $4.9 million for a home at the Madison Club resort in La Quinta, near Palm Springs (pictured the Beverly Hills home)

Doting mom: In a interview with Architectural Digest last April, Cindy, who has been married to Rande since May 1998, revealed that they have multiple homes, to please their kids

'We have our main house, in Malibu, which we've had for 15 years, and we have a lake cottage in Canada, which is on the East Coast, outside of Toronto. It's very Ralph Lauren. That's what my husband and I both wanted. We both grew up going to lakes in the summer. He went to summer camp, I just went with my family, but we wanted that experience for our kids. And so we wanted it to feel like almost like a log cabin camp vibe,' she revealed

As for her design inspiration, she gets it from her extensive traveling, or occasionally a 'piece of clothing.

'I'm about comfort and the way things feel. My husband, he would sacrifice functionality for the look, and I wouldn't,' she noted. 'I think that's my practical mom brain.'

She joked: 'When my kids were little, I was like, "Can a kid throw up on this?" It had to pass that test.'

She and her husband are the parents of models Kaia, 18, and Presley, 21.

'Then, we just bought a house last year in Beverly Hills, because our kids were getting older. Malibu's great when they're little, but they're starting to be like, 'It's so boring here, we wanna be in town.' So we got that house,' Cindy said last April
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaia Gerber looked great while at a Los Angeles dog park with a male friend on Thursday afternoon.

The slender model, 19, was wearing a white crop top that showed a hint of her belly with black leggings, and matching socks and sneakers.

The daughter of Cindy Crawford protected her eyes with a pair of black sunglasses, and she wore a gold necklace.

Sporty chic: Kaia Gerber looked great while at an LA dog park with a friend on Friday

The budding teen actress was seen holding an orange ball and walking a Golden Retriever on a green leash.

She was accompanied by a friend who was in a white button-down shirt, light blue jeans, and combat boots.

Crawford's Vogue supermodel daughter has been seen out and about around Los Angeles this summer as she films a role on American Horror Story.

Pals: She was accompanied by a friend who was in a white button-down shirt, light blue jeans, and combat boots

Pop a squat: The slender model was wearing a white crop top with black leggings, and matching socks and sneakers

Her career has been heating up this year.

In addition to scoring a role on the television show American Horror Story: Double Feature, the model-turned-actress also appears on Vogue's September Issue cover alongside a group of other models like Bella Hadid and Madonna's daughter Lourdes Leon.

The September Issue is considered one of the most important the magazine puts out because it shares the upcoming fashion trends for the fall.

Seen in green: Crawford's supermodel daughter has been seen out and about around Los Angeles this summer

The budding star keeps things low-key on social media — she doesn't post as often as some of her peers.

But she's taken time out this summer to highlight her work, and give special shout outs to her loved ones, including a couple of posts for boyfriend Jacob Elordi, who she's been dating since last year.

In an interview with Vogue in May, Gerber opened up about their courtship.

In Vogue: The model-turned-actress also appears on Vogue's September Issue cover alongside a group of other models like Bella Hadid and Madonna's daughter Lourdes Leon; Kai is seen far left

Showing love: The budding star keeps things low-key on social media, but she's taken time out to give special shout outs to loved ones, including a couple of posts for boyfriend Jacob Elordi

'Being able to be with someone I trust, where we don't want anything from each other, having a safe, steady relationship like that, has really opened my eyes to the possibilities of love and what it feels like to love without conditions,' she said.

'Lust is touching other people or wanting them, but love is really seeing someone.'

Australian Eldori is best known for his Kissing Booth movies and his role on Euphoria.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pregnant pinup Ashley Graham shared several new images from her new Knix lingerie campaign on Friday.

The Vogue cover girl was seen in pale blue and brown sugar colored bra and panty sets while at a photo studio.

'I'm back with more @knix and this time I’m bringing you sexy lacey realness,' began the mother of one. 'It’s such a great feeling working with inclusive brands like @knix.'

Looking good: Pregnant pinup Ashley Graham shared several new images from her new Knix lingerie campaign on Friday.

And Ashley said she is grateful to be surrounded by a team that makes bras as 'supportive (and sexy) as they are.'

In a video shared to Instagram, Ashley is seen on set. 'We just finished the activewear for Knix,' she said as she introduces one of the team members named Joanna.

The brunette also said that she has been having to go to the bathroom several times a day as she is pregnant with her second child.

She and her husband, film director Justin Ervin, had their son Isaac in January 2020. They have been married since 2010.

Laid back style: The Vogue cover girl was seen in pale blue bra and panty sets while at a photo studio

On the Knix Instagram page they explained the new lingerie designs. 'New In: Lace & Our First-Ever Bralettes✨ Introducing the Lace Racerback Bralette, Lace Deep-V Bralette and the always popular Lace WingWoman Bra in all new colors.

'Get stunning support and definition in our irresistibly soft and delicate. That’s right, new bras. New colors. Same wireless comfort that you know and love.'

Last week Ashley was announced as the Global Brand Ambassador.

'In partnership with our new Global Brand Ambassador @ashleygraham, Knix presents Knix Active— a collection built around the love of movement and the expressions that make us feel free. Today and everyday, we’re celebrating all the ways you move.

She has the right look: Graham smoldered for the camera as she was seen in pink

Stun: 'Get stunning support and definition in our irresistibly soft and delicate. That’s right, new bras. New colors. Same wireless comfort that you know and love,' it was shared

'Supermodel and entrepreneur @ashleygraham has teamed up with us to showcase our full collection of activewear products that support movement of any kind.

'Together, we will work to challenge the stigma that equates physical activity to diet culture. It’s time for a change. We believe that movement should be free from judgement and punishment and instead, a form of self-love and expression. Who’s with us?'

The pregnant model posted a video made by the company to announce both her involvement and the brand's launch of an activewear line.

She wore a salmon-colored sports bra with matching legs, then was later seen in the video wearing a black sports bra and dark blue, patterned leggings while throwing down a medicine ball.

Busy babe: In a video shared to Instagram, Ashley is seen on set. 'We just finished the activewear for Knix,' she said as she introduces one of the team members named Joanna

Potty talk: The brunette also said that she has been having to go to the bathroom several times a day as she is pregnant with her second child. She and her husband, film director Justin Ervin, had their son Isaac in January 2020. They have been married since 2010

The former America's Next Top Model judge wrote a long caption explaining her reasons for attaching her name to the brand.

Graham wrote, 'IT'S A BIG DAY FOR BIG BOOBS (and little ones too)!!! I've teamed up with @knix for a million reasons, but here are just a few. You all know how hard it can be to find workout clothes and bras that are comfy, supportive and fit like they should.

'You also know how much I LOVE supporting badass women, and lemme tell you... @joannaknix? The BADDEST. Her story is so inspirational, and this really is a brand I love and believe in so much.

'AKA that's why I'm so thrilled to share that I am their FIRST EVER global ambassador bringing you all their FIRST EVER activewear collection! BUT THAT'S NOT ALL! I knew I had to do more than just model this collection and decided to invest and watch women take over! so excited for this journey!!'

The Knix video promotes a very body positive message for women throughout.

Working up a sweat: Ashley Graham works out in the video by lifting a medicine ball above her head and throwing it back to the ground

Graham starts the video by saying, 'We don't move to meet standards'. The video then cuts to many different shots of women exercising including running, shadow boxing and climbing among other activities.

At the end of the video, Graham looks directly into the camera and says, 'We move for us'.

The video was clearly filmed some time ago as there is no sign of the model's prominent baby bump in the minute-long advertisement.

Graham recently posted a nude selfie on her Instagram story to show her followers her pregnant stomach.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Old Town Road hitmaker Lil Nas X stopped at a taco truck in Los Angeles on Thursday.

The musician from Lithia Springs, Georgia was almost unrecognizable in a regular black T-shirt and red Nike shorts as he strolled with a male friend.

Often the artist, 22, is seen in eye-popping costumes and bright makeup that goes with his stage persona.

Even superstars need to eat: Old Town Road hitmaker Lil Nas X stopped at a taco truck in Los Angeles on Thursday

Different look: The musician from Lithia Springs, Georgia was almost unrecognizable in a regular black T-shirt and red Nike shorts as he strolled with a male friend. Often the artist, 22, is seen in flashy costumes that go with his stage persona. Seen in June, left

The rapper, 22, grabbed a bite to eat in West Hollywood. He wore Nike shorts and socks, Gucci slides and a sweater which read, 'Tour Lords.'

After grabbing his food, the hitmaker and his security swung by the upscale Luminaire home store to shop for some furniture.

The Industry Baby singer, who real name is Montero Lamar Hill, was called an 'empowered gay man revolutionizing music' in the publication's cover story.

The chart topper has dealt with controversy stemming from his work in recent months.

In March, people criticized the music video for a depiction of the star receiving a lap dance from Satan.

'Empowered gay man revolutionizing music': Variety referred to the Industry Baby singer, who real name is Montero Lamar Hill, as an 'empowered gay man revolutionizing music'

Lil Nas X hasn't given mix signals about how he perceives the world's view of his sexuality.

The Industry Baby music video showed the rapper sentenced to prison because he is gay.

In addition, the rapper refused to talk about homophobia in rap during the interview saying, 'The honest truth is, I don't want to speak on a lot of the homophobia within rap because I feel like this is a very dangerous playing field.

'It's more for my own safety rather than anything else.'

A skyrocketing career: Despite some criticism from the public, the singer has seen continued professional success including becoming the most streamed male rapper on Spotify

Out for a stroll: The rapper walks down the street with his security after picking up food

Despite some criticism from the public and from many of his peers in rap, the Old Town Road singer has seen continued professional success.

Most recently, the superstar dethroned rapper DaBaby as the most streamed male rapper with over 52 million monthly listeners.

The rapper responded to the news on Twitter, writing, 'wow this is insane. this is the most i've ever had in my career. thank u to everybody listening' followed by a gray heart emoji.

'The one': The artist's personal life is also heating up as well. He recently revealed in an interview with Variety that he's dating someone now and that the rapper think this is 'the one'

The artist's personal life is also heating up as well.

He recently revealed in an interview with Variety that he's dating someone now, and he has a very good feeling about this relationship.

'I've found someone special now. I think this is the one. I can't explain it — it's just a feeling,' said Nas.

Lil Nas X also said he's been in relationships before, but many of the people he was with were emotionally unavailable or insecure.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Drake's three-year-old son looked cute in a new photo with his mom, artist Sophie Brussaux, 32, which was shared to Instagram on Friday.

In the sweet photo the mom-of-one lovingly wrapped her arm around her son as they both smiled softly.

The brunette beauty captioned the picture, 'My most precious,' adding three blue emoji hearts, and tagging her baby daddy's handle, @champagnepapi.

Time with mom: Drake's three-year-old son looks super cute in a new photo with his mom, artist Sophie Brussaux, 32, shared to Instagram Friday

She wore pearl earrings and a white tank top, while her tot had on a navy blue Tommy Hilfiger shirt with graphics of athletes. A clear, blue sky was their backdrop.

It's the first image of her son she has posted on her Instagram page since back in May when she shared a Mother's Day message.

'Happy Mother's Day to all the queens taking the best care of their little ones. For creating life and nurturing that precious gift,' she wrote

Flashback: She hadn't posted her son on her Instagram page since back in May when she shared a Mother's Day message

Brussaux and Drake (born Aubrey Graham) have never dated exclusively, but welcomed their blonde-haired baby in 2017.

The French native, 31, is fairly private about her young son with the famous rapper, only selectively posting about their bundle of joy.

Brussaux, a visual artist, has made a name for herself in the art world, and has been featured in some major exhibitions by blending surrealism, symbolism and pop art.

Mom life: 'Happy Mother's Day to all the queens taking the best care of their little ones. For creating life and nurturing that precious gift,' she wrote

Just hangin': Drake and Sophie share three-year-old son, Adonis

The pair reportedly met when they were among a group of friends dining at a Japanese restaurant in Amsterdam in January 2017, according to The Sun.

This was around the time the singer-rapper, born Aubrey Drake Graham, was alleged to have been spending time with Jennifer Lopez.

By May, about four months later, Brussaux went public and claimed she was carrying Drake's baby.

Sharp: Brussaux and Drake (born Aubrey Graham) have never dated exclusively, but welcomed their blonde-haired baby in 2017; Drake appears at the 2013 GRAMMY Awards in LA

He did not acknowledge the existence of his child until the release of his album Scorpion in June 2018.

Since Adonis became public knowledge, Drake has talked about wanting to be on good terms with Sophie, who he claimed to have only met twice before they conceived the child.

Despite initially keeping him out of the public eye, the superstar father has warmed up to regularly sharing outtakes of his life with young Adonis.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Real Housewives of Salt Lake City's second season is delving into the murky legal woes of Jen Shah, who was arrested in March over her alleged involvement in a $5million telemarketing scheme.

A teaser for the new series was unveiled Friday, that sees Jen, 47, sobbing as she admits to being terrified over the prospect of serving jail time - and also wanting to recruit Kim Kardashian to her legal team.

'Do you know how f***ing scared I am?' she tells her husband Sharrieff Shah in the clip, adding that she might not see her two sons Sharrieff Jr. and Omar 'for eight years.'

'Do you know how f***ing scared I am?' Jen Shah SOBS at prospect of jail time over $5M telemarketing scam... as new RHOSLC trailer delves into her legal woes in a Friday teaser

At the end of the clip, Jen's lawyer tells her ominously: 'The U.S. Attorney's Office is no joke.'

However, perhaps not quite grasping the severity of the situation, Jen replies: 'Do we need to add Kim Kardashian to our legal team?'

The Bravo reality star has been accused of allegedly targeting 'vulnerable, often elderly, working-class people' out of money in a wire fraud scam, and actually faces up to 30 years jail time.

As it appears many of the housewives turn against Jen, she is seen having lunch with Heather Gay, telling her: 'I need a friend right now.'

Later in the teaser, Jen - who has a pre-trial conference date set for October 8 - fights with Meredith Marks over the scandal as the housewives try to play the blame game.

Having a ugly cry: A trailer released Friday showed Jen, 47, sobbing as she admits to being terrified over the prospect of serving jail time

Pictured: Jen Shah leaving court in March after being arrested over her alleged involvement in a $5million telemarketing scheme

Blame game: In the new teaser, Jen starts pointing fingers at Meredith after it was suggested she had something to do with Jen's indictment

Really though? Meredith Marks seems unimpressed with Jen's actions

'It looks like you might have something to do with the fact that Jen was indicted,' Whitney Rose says to Meredith.

An angry Jen is then seen screaming in Meredith's face, raging: 'I swear to God, if you have anything to do with the bulls*** charges against me, Meredith, you're f***ing disgusting.'

The pair are seen getting up in one another's faces, as Jen angrily points her finger at Meredith shouting in a very tense exchange between the pair.

Kicking off: Jen loses her cool at dinner when her legal woes are discussed

Making things worse? Jen is seen getting very aggressive with Meredith on camera

Holding back: Jen and Meredith go at it over dinner but fall short of actually brawling

Standing back: Whitney Rose and Heather Gay wisely keep out of the firing line

Whose side are they on? The pair pulled priceless expressions at the dinner from hell

That's rich! Meredith reacts after embattled Jen calls her a fraud

'Get out of my face,' Meredith hits back, adding: 'I'm out, I'm disengaging.'

'You're f***ing fraudulent,' Jen says richly. As Meredith walks away, she quips before slamming the door: 'Who's calling who a fraud? Love you baby, bye.'

The sound effect of the door closing - added by show producers - sounds similar to that of a jail cell being slammed shut.

Jen needs a friend: Shah appears to be worried in the trailer about who is on her side

Loyal: Heather tells Jen she will be there for her over lunch

Carrying on regardless: Elsewhere in the trailer it's business as usual for the RHOSLC cast, as they get up to their usual hijinks

Storylines galore: It is also teased in the clip that housewives believe Mary Cosby could be a cult leader

Deep: Mary says in the clip to Lisa, 'I'm like God, I worship the God in me.'

Earlier this week, Shah filed a motion for the case against her to be dismissed - which was denied by U.S. District Judge Sidney H. Stein.

Shah previously claimed that she was unable to understand her Miranda rights at the time of her arrest because a dry contact lens had caused her to have blurry vision.

But the judge said in response: 'In addition to showing Shah the Miranda waiver form, [officers] read each question aloud.'

Elsewhere in the teaser trailer, we see new housewife Jennie Nguyen proving to be a feisty addition to the show, as Jen Shah describes her as being 'a little firecracker.'

Jennie is then seeing having a conversation with her husband Duy about having more children together.

Here comes trouble: New housewife Jennie Nguyen proving to be a feisty addition to the show, as Jen Shah describes her as being 'a little firecracker'

Classic: Heather is seen joking around as she wears a penis headband

Naughty! Whitney and her husband Justin Rose joke around as they claim to be making a sex tape

After Jennie appears not to be interested, Duy says, 'What if we get a sister wife?' which prompts anger in the reality star who walks away saying 'I'm p****d.'

Tensions are also brewing between Jen and Meredith's son Brooks.

Brooks reveals to his mother: 'Jen continued to like tweets about me. She liked a tweet saying, 'I want Jen to slap Brooks and call him a sissy b****.'

In a separate argument, Meredith raises her voice at Jen, saying: 'I can't listen to the projecting, deflecting and lying anymore,' while Jen yells back: 'I'm trying to defend my f***ing vagina.'

Is she taking it seriously? Jen says to her lawyer in the clip, 'Do we need to add Kim Kardashian to our legal team?'

Party time: Not everyone in the show is getting bogged down with Jen's legal woes

Out out: The cast are seen partying together in another scene promising lots of fun for season two

Not buying it: One housewife not on Jen's side is Meredith (above)

The trailer also reveals the topic of Mary Cosby possible being a cult leader.

'I'm like God, I worship the God in me," Mary says to Lisa Barlow.

Lisa is then speaking with a man who has a conspiracy theory about Mary, saying: 'Is it a cult? Yes. Does she call herself God? Yes.'

Season two of RHOSLC airs on Sep. 12 at 9 p.m. ET on Bravo.

Serving looks: Embattled Jen shows off a number of different hairstyles in the series

Future: Jen admits to being scared about the prospect of going to jail
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dorinda Medley is returning to the Housewives franchise in an upcoming show that will bring together some familiar Bravo faces from over the years, DailyMail.com is exclusively reporting.

The 56-year-old Big Apple fan-favorite will lead the pack for Housewives Mash Up, which is slated to air on NBCUniversal's popular streaming network Peacock, production sources said.

The series will bring together former stars from New York, Atlanta, Beverly Hills and Orange County all under one roof.

They're back! Dorinda Medley is returning to the Housewives franchise in an upcoming show that will bring together some familiar Bravo faces from over the years, DailyMail.com is exclusively reporting

'Viewers love Dorinda and we thought it would be great to have her star in a new show that brings her together with past favorites from other franchises,' a production source exclusively told DailyMail.com.

'The show will see Taylor Armstrong, Jill Zarin, Vicki Gunvalson, Eva Marcille, Brandi Glanville and Phaedra Parks who will hang with Dorinda at a top secret location,' they added.

The transition back in front of the camera should be no issue for Dorobics creator Dorinda who has only been out of the Housewives universe for a single season.

She was let go after season 12 and isn't appearing in the current iteration of RHONY, replaced by Eboni Williams. Medley officially joined the show in 2015 for the show's seventh season.

'The show will see Taylor Armstrong, Jill Zarin, Vicki Gunvalson, Eva Marcille, Brandi Glanville and Phaedra Parks hang who will hang with Dorinda at a top secret location,' they added. (Vicki and Phaedra pictured)

'No doubt the drinks will flow and drama will ensue as the women spend a week together,' the production source said. 'Each one of these women is television gold and they are all Bravo fan favorites.'

Taylor Armstrong and Brandi Glanville both hail from the Real Housewives of Beverly Hills and overlapped on the series officially for one season.

Armstrong, 50, was an original castmate and starred on the show for seasons 1-3. Brandi, 48, first appeared as a 'friend' of the Housewives in season 2 and was upgraded to full fledged cast member from seasons 3-5, returning as a 'guest' in several later seasons.

'No doubt the drinks will flow and drama will ensue as the women spend a week together,' the production source said. 'Each one of these women is television gold and they are all Bravo fan favorites.'

Phaedra Parks and Eva Marcille starred on Real Housewives of Atlanta but missed one another as co-stars by a season.

Phaedra, 47, joined the franchise in season 3 and left after season 9 while Eva came on board in season 10 as a 'friend.'

The former America's Next Top Model winner was a full castmate from seasons 11 and 12, and a guest last season.

Fan favorites: Taylor Armstrong and Brandi Glanville (pictured L- R) both hail from the Real Housewives of Beverly Hills and overlapped on the series officially for one season

Jill Zarin and Dorinda filmed together frequently as the Zarin's Fabric owner appeared as a guest on RHONY during Medley's tenure.

Jill, 57, was an original star of the Manhattan based series and stayed through season four.

Housewives OG from the OC, Vicki Gunvalson, 59, will make her triumphant return to Bravo after starring in 13 seasons of the series which is now heading into its 16th.

Filming on the new Housewives Mash Up is set to begin next month.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@TikTok's biggest influencers came out to play to celebrate the birth of one of their own, Dixie D'Amelio, on Thursday night.

Addison Rae, 20, was spotted in a trend-forward ensemble heading to celebrity hot spot Hyde for Dixie's 20th birthday celebration.

Other party goers included Dixie and her influencer sister Charlie D'Amelio and YouTube star Olivia Jade - who is trying to distance herself from her parents involvement in the college admissions scandal.

Looking good: Addison Rae, 20, was spotted in a trend-forward ensemble heading to celebrity hot spot Hyde for Dixie D'Amelio's 20th birthday celebration on Thursday night

Addison flashed a peace sign to the cameras while enjoying a lollipop during carefree night of partying amid the coronavirus pandemic.

The beauty showcased her curves in black latex pants with platform boots and a blue and grey graphic cropped tee.

Rae, who is a close personal friend of Kourtney Kardashian's is set to star in He's All That - the gender swap redo of the 1999 hit movie She's All That.

Kourtney is set to make a cameo appearance in the upcoming film.

Rising star: Addison was seen enjoying a lollipop during carefree night of partying with all the biggest stars of TikTok before she makes the official switch to movie star with the release of her upcoming Netflix film

Birthday girl Dixie D'Amelio shined in a pastel pink mini dress with rhinestone details on the spaghetti straps.

She matched her makeup to her dress with bold, shimmering pink eyeshadow and had her raven lob braided at the front.

Sister Charli, 17, opted for a little black dress with a large keyhole cutout and strappy black high heels.

The TikTok sensation left her long dark hair down in loose waves.

Star! Birthday girl Dixie D'Amelio shined in a pastel pink mini dress with rhinestone details on the spaghetti straps

Packed house: Despite the pandemic - and the rise in the delta variant - there wasn't a mask in sight as the group of young stars heading inside the club

Pretty in pink: She matched her makeup to her dress with bold, shimmering pink eyeshadow and had her raven lob braided at the front.

Charli D'Amelio boasts the most followed account on TikTok, pal Addison Rae is the third most followed account.

Olivia Jade also went for an edgy look in a patent leather jumpsuit with thick white stitching and a bustier bodice. She paired the look with black sandals and a bubblegum pink purse.

Her sister Isabella, 22, was her date for the night dressed in baggy white jeans and a pale yellow silk top.

Classic: Sister Charli, 17, opted for a little black dress with a large keyhole cutout and strappy black high heels

Digital star: Charli D'Amelio boasts the most followed account on TikTok, pal Addison Rae is the third most followed account

Olivia, 21, revealed on Thursday that she has once again split with boyfriend Jackson Guthy.

The daughter of Lori Loughlin and Mossimo Giannulli confirmed the news when she responded to a fan on Instagram who had asked if she was single.

'I am indeed,' the YouTuber replied.

Night out: Olivia Jade also went for an edgy look in a patent leather jumpsuit with thick white stitching and a bustier bodice

The couple had an on-off relationship, first breaking up after her parents admitted to paying $500,000 to get their two daughters into USC as crew recruits, even though neither girl was a rower.

Lori, 57, and Mossimo, 58, made the payment to Rick Singer and Key Worldwide Foundation to their girls get into the private university.

They each served prison time.

Singer, who is expected to testify against any defendants who go to trial, has not yet been sentenced. More than 40 people have already pleaded guilty.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Coco Austin was spotted leaving a hair salon with her mini-me daughter Chanel as the duo both donned comic book strip-inspired fashion.

The 42-year-old Ice Loves Coco star and her five-year-old little girl struck a pose on Friday in coordinating outfits.

Chanel emulated her model mother as the two stood back to back with their hands on their hips and stared fiercely at the camera.

Twinning: Coco Austin was spotted leaving a hair salon with her mini-me daughter Chanel as the duo both donned comic book strip-inspired fashion

Austin had on retro comic print leggings while Chanel sported a sundress that featured a cartoon Disney princess print.

The Swimsuit Illustrated cover girl rocked a pair of black stiletto heels and oversized silver-rimmed black shades.

Coco's ample cleavage was on full display in a scoop necked black tank top that she tucked into her leggings. The black elastic faux belt on her leggings accentuated her hourglass figure.

Fashionistas: The 42-year-old Ice Loves Coco star and her five-year-old little girl struck a pose on Friday in coordinating outfits

The blonde beauty's freshly blown-out waves cascaded over her shoulders as she pouted her lips, showing off a bold pink lipstick.

Austin accessorized with gold hoop earrings, a silver watch and a thick silver chain necklace that had a round pendant. She carried a large black leather bag adorned with silver hoop hardware.

Chanel proved she was every bit the little fashionista as she wore a pair of sequined rainbow ballet flats and diamond stud earrings. Her long curly brown hair was tied half up with a brightly colored bow.

Eye-catching: Austin had on retro comic print leggings while Chanel sported a sundress that featured a cartoon Disney princess print

The pair held hands as they strolled down the sidewalk. Later, Coco shared an image of the two hugging at the salon to her Instagram Story.

Meanwhile, Austin has said that she won't stop breastfeeding Chanel until she's ready to be weaned off her milk.

The reality star is continuing to nurse her little girl - whom she has with husband Ice-T - because the process is a source of comfort for her daughter, especially amid the current coronavirus crisis, which Coco previously described as feeling like the world is 'coming to an end'.

Sweet: Later, Coco shared an image of the two hugging at the salon to her Instagram story.

Speaking to Us Weekly, she said: 'Chanel still likes my boobs. 'It's a big bonding moment for a mother and your child.'

She added: 'Why take that away from her? … If she doesn't want it, all right, that's where you stop it. But I'm not just going to say no.'

In a previous breastfeeding update last year, Austin said: 'At a time when the world feels like its coming to an end.. suck up as much love as you can!

'I know the moms out there will appreciate this pic! Ive been getting alot of props in the breasfeeding community and get tons of emails from woman/moms appreciating me bringing light to the subject ..

Coping: The reality star is continuing to nurse her little girl - whom she has with husband Ice-T - because the process is a source of comfort for her daughter especially amid the current coronavirus crisis

'I write a baby blog about my journey with Chanel and soon I will write about what it's like to continue boob time with a 4 year old.. I get tons and tons of requests that want me to speak on it! (sic)'

Coco insisted that Chanel does eat 'real food' and doesn't get all her nutrients from breast milk, but nurses her to help her relax.

She added: 'At this point in nursing its just for comfort and believe me the girl loves meat so its not like she isnt eating real food... Thank you to all that understand my view.. i see most of you are so eager to side with me and I too root for you in your journey as well.. Us moms are connected (sic)'

Her way: Austin has said that she won't stop breastfeeding Chanel until she's ready to be weaned off her milk

Coco previously said she would be 'so sad' when she has to stop breastfeeding because she loves the 'special' bond she has with her daughter.

She said: 'A mothers calling.... I'm so blessed to have this unbelievable experience in this thing called Nursing..

'I had a hard time breastfeeding the 1st week of when Chanel was born, I almost gave up but my family told me to hang for another week.

'They told me I dont want to miss this special moment you have with your child.. health wise and bond wise..I hung in there and now almost 4 years later Chanel still wants the boob ..

'Its more of a comfort thing now and of course she eats regular but nap time and night time are our time and I'm lucky she hasn't grown out it yet because when that moment comes I will be so sad..its the best feeling and ALL mothers that nurse know.. (sic)'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Channing Tatum, 41, is feeling 'happy' and 'easy' after completing his latest movie, The Lost City Of D with Sandra Bullock.

Lucky for his nearly 17 million Instagram followers that means they were treated to one of his signature, on-set, shirtless photos.

The first of three black and white iPhone shots shows Tatum staring into a mirror sans shirt as his hair is being cut.

That's a wrap: Channing Tatum, 41, is feeling 'happy' and 'easy' after completing his latest movie, The Lost City of D

The actor had a lot to say in his somewhat poetic caption.

'And just like that...our 1st Charlie yells "and that's a wrap"...and I feel myself coming back and the hair starts coming off,' he started off.

In the photoset his barber can be seen behind him perfecting his famously chopped hair.

Chopped Channing: In the photoset his barber can be seen behind him perfecting his famously cropped hair

The father-of-one sports three small cuts above one of his eyebrows, appearing that his work makeup still hasn't been washed off.

The Magic Mike star continued, 'And now time...time for all the things. Mine time. Getting back to me before the next creative adventure into someone and somewhere else.'

He wrapped it up with 'I'm so happy and easy right now. Breathing and gonna indulge in this life I've been blessed with. Be easy.'

Gratitude: He wrapped up his Instagram caption with 'I'm so happy and easy right now. Breathing and gonna indulge in this life I've been blessed with. Be easy'

That wasn't all the Alabama native had to share. He also headed to Instagram Stories to document a show of fireworks.

'Wrapped!!!' he wrote above the video as the sparks flew and crackled.

Finally, Channing shared some footage of himself indulging in a smoke session as Kanye West's Good Morning played and the lyrics flashed across the screen.

Celebration: He also headed to Instagram Stories to document a show of fireworks

Smoke break: Channing shared some footage of himself indulging in a smoke session as Kanye West's Good Morning played and the lyrics flashed across the screen

The Lost City of D co-stars Bullock and Brad Pitt has a role.

It is a story about a novelist who is stuck on a book tour with her cover star until they are both kidnapped.

The movie will be released April 15, 2022.

Meanwhile, Tatum recently sold the Beverly Hills mansion he once shared with ex-wife Jenna Dewan, 40. The two were married from 2009 to 2019. They share daughter Everly, eight.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Delilah Belle Hamlin is taking a break from the spotlight to focus on her 'physical and mental health', the young star revealed in an Instagram post on Friday.

The 22-year-old model shared a candid post about her health struggles and explained to fans that after not taking her wellness seriously things are 'starting to get a bit scary'.

Hamlin added that while she feels 'weirdly guilty' about stepping back, she understands that this is needed so she can properly 'rest and heal.'

Honesty: Delilah Belle Hamlin is taking a break from the spotlight to focus on her 'physical and mental health', the young star revealed in an Instagram post on Friday

'On social media, we see what people want us to see. I want you to see that I'm not perfect,' the model began.

Delilah shared an image of a sunset to her Instagram grid with a message penned over top; the post had no caption.

'For a long time, for many reasons, I didn't take my physical and mental health seriously,' she said. 'I wasn't taking it seriously as it confuses people and even myself sometimes because I look fine or I look healthy so people don't understand fully when I 'don't feel good.'

While the starlet was open about having issues, he never specified in the post what was ailing her.

Her story: Delilah shared an image of a sunset to her Instagram grid with a message penned over top; the post had no caption

'For a long time, for many reasons, I didn't take my physical and mental health seriously,' she said. 'I wasn't taking it seriously as it confuses people and even myself sometimes because I look fine or I look healthy so people don't understand fully when I 'don't feel good.'

'Right now I must prioritize my physical and mental health although I do feel weirdly guilty doing so,' Delilah continued.

'It's starting to get a bit scary so if I'm not as present on social media, if I don't meet deadlines, if I don't seem myself, if I don't respond to messages, this is why.

'I'm sorry to everyone, but for me, I need to take this break to save my energy and use it to heal.

'I may post when I feel up to it but I may just take time off Instagram to rest and heal. I love you all nd I am so grateful for your continued support!'

'Right now I must prioritize my physical and mental health although I do feel weirdly guilty doing so,' Delilah continued.

Lots of love: Beau Eyal Booker added his support for Delilah in the comments of her post

Hamlin is the daughter of Real Housewives of Beverly Hills star Lisa Rinna and actor Harry Hamlin. Her sister is model and girlfriend to Scott Disick, Amelia Gray Hamlin.

She currently splits her time between living in Los Angeles and the UK with boyfriend Eyal Booker, 26.

Booker commented his support of Delilah on her revealing Insta post writing: 'Proud of you & I love you [star, heart and fire emoji]'

He added what appeared to be an in-joke: 'BooSArooni 4 LyFe'

They first met after Delilah saw him on Love Island and messaged him on social media. Their conversation continued and he eventually hopped on a flight to join her at Coachella in 2019.

'It's starting to get a bit scary so if I'm not as present on social media, if I don't meet deadlines, if I don't seem myself, if I don't respond to messages, this is why.'

On Valentine's Day this year he reminisced on that time, saying: 'I'm so grateful that slid into my DMs and since that day I've never stopped loving or thinking about you. You're my person. I love you.'

The pair shared an insight into their long-distance relationship while speaking to the New York City-based fashion magazine Paper last month.

Eyal admitted: 'COVID was going to either make or break mine and Delilah's relationship, and we weren't always sure if we would be able to see each other and spend time with each other but somehow we managed to get through it, make it work and come out even stronger.'

He continued: 'COVID is not over yet, but we've made it this far and that's pretty special to me considering at the beginning we weren't sure how we would navigate through it.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jon Gosselin revealed on Thursday that he and his girlfriend Colleen Conrad have split after seven years of dating.

The Jon & Kate Plus 8 star told The Sun that breaking up has not been easy.

'It’s really hard to even talk about it,' the former TLC reality TV star shared. 'It's sad.'

Jon has been married only once, to Kate Gosselin, whom he found fame with on Jon & Kate Plus 8. They divorced in 2009 after 10 years of marriage.

This split news comes after Colleen revealed revealed she has been diagnosed with 'stage 2, triple-negative' breast cancer.

They are done: Jon Gosselin revealed on Thursday that he and his girlfriend Colleen Conrad have split after seven years of dating. Jon and Colleen have known each other since their childhood days (Pictured, 2018)

The Pennsylvania resident, who works in IT for Amazon, said he still cares for Colleen. 'When you’re with someone that long, especially in the public eye, and she’s someone private.'

Jon also said that the split is not new as they broke up in February of this year.

He shared that they started to have problems during COVID-19 as he had to be hospitalized when coming down with the virus. 'We had some struggles and we tried to push through them as best we could, but it didn't really work out the way we thought it would.

'I still love and care for Colleen but we've both determined that it’s the natural end.'

And though he is looking forward to a 'fresh start,' he said he is still in pain.

'It's hard, it was a big decision. We have been together for seven years which is a long time, so it's very upsetting,' he explained.

'It's really hard to even talk about it. When you're with someone that long, especially in the public eye and she's someone private.'

Sharing: Conrad reveals she's been diagnosed with breast cancer (the couple pictured on Instagram last year)

The duo tried everything to stay together, even therapy, he told the outlet.

Jon has been married only once, to Kate Gosselin, whom he found fame with on Jon & Kate Plus 8.

In 2000, their twin daughters, Cara Nicole and Madelyn Kate, were born.

In 2004, Kate gave birth to sextuplets: sons Aaden Jonathan, Collin Thomas, and Joel Kevin, and daughters Alexis Faith, Hannah Joy, and Leah Hope.

Jon and Kate divorced in 2009 after 10 years of marriage. Most recently Kate starred in the reality dating series, Kate Plus Date, in 2019.

His old life: Jon has been married only once, to Kate Gosselin, whom he found fame with on Jon & Kate Plus 8. The former couple first welcomed their twins in 2001; the sextuplets followed in 2004. Jon and Kate divorced in 2009 after 10 years of marriage

This split news comes after Colleen revealed revealed she has been diagnosed with 'stage 2, triple-negative' breast cancer.

The mother-of-two told fans in an emotional Instagram post on Saturday that she was diagnosed back in April, and underwent a single a single mastectomy last month.

'I have been putting this off and debated even posting,' she began her post. 'I went for a mammogram on 4/15. I had put it off for almost 2 1/2 yrs due to lack of time and Covid and later got a call that a mass was found in my right breast.'

She continued: 'Everything after that happened so fast. Then on 4/21, I got the call that is confirmed it was cancer. Stage 2, triple-negative breast cancer. I was BRCA1 and 2 negative. Everything seemed so surreal.'

Colleen explained that she is still waiting to see if she needs chemo.

'I had a single mastectomy done on my right breast on 7/14/21 followed by a DIEP Flap procedure on 7/30/21 and I feel good. The DIEP flap was a personal choice for me . I am very happy with the outcome but I also had amazing surgeons at Penn Medicine in Philadelphia.'

Ordeal: Colleen shared her post with fans and included pictures of herself from the hospital

She added: 'After my surgery I found it had not spread to the nodes, thank God, and they were able to downgrade to stage 1. I'm still waiting on the Oncotype number to see if I need chemo. If less than 25 I won't.'

WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS OF BREAST CANCER? Breast cancer can cause a number of symptoms, but the first noticeable symptom is usually a lump or area of thickened breast tissue. Most breast lumps aren't cancerous, but it's always best to have them checked by your doctor. According to NHS Choices you should also see your GP if you notice any of the following: A change in the size or shape of one or both breasts

Discharge from either of your nipples, which may be streaked with blood

A lump or swelling in either of your armpits

Dimpling on the skin of your breasts

A rash on or around your nipple

A change in the appearance of your nipple, such as becoming sunken into your breast Advertisement

Colleen revealed in her emotional post that she 'broke down and cried' after finding a lump while in the shower, telling her followers 'I had not been doing monthly self-breast exams like I should have.'

She went on to say that ultimately the reason why she decided to share the news was to encourage others to get themselves checked.

'Set a monthly alarm if needed. Even men, who can also get breast cancer. Early detection will make the world of difference and give you a better fighting chance,' she advised.

Colleen has one more surgery to go through in the next two months and said that currently she is feeling 'good.'

While she thanked her family for support, Colleen did not mention Jon, 44, in her post - although they still follow each other on Instagram and are believed to be still together.

One fan commented under her post: 'I hope Jon was there for you as well!'

Jon and Colleen have known each other since their childhood days, and the pair have found happiness together after his tumultuous relationship with ex Kate Gosselin.

Last year, Jon was forced to deny reports that he harmed his teenage son, and has also denied that there is any ongoing investigation into such an incident.

According to a magazine report, Collin Gosselin, 17, had supposedly claimed in a now-deleted Instagram post, that his father Jon kicked and punched him during an altercation that is said to have taken place earlier this month.

However, a rep for Jon Gosselin told DailyMail.com at the time last year: 'Jon has never abused Collin. No charges have been filed against him and there's no ongoing CYS investigation.

'Collin has endured severe trauma. Jon is a loving father who has worked hard to ensure that his son gets the support and help he needs,' the statement added.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Supermodel Hailey Bieber has showed off her bottom in a rare move.

The wife of Justin Bieber flashed her pert derriere in bikini bottoms adding a top and boots for a new campaign with fall/winter 2021 Superga. The Fall / Winter 2021 campaign embraces the blonde beauty's 'youthful energy and upbeat personality,' the brand shared.

'Timeless style is something the transcends different generations, something that was popular 10 years ago and is still cool,' said Hailey in a Superga video. 'It can stand the test of time.'

Booty power: Supermodel Hailey Bieber has showed off her bottom in a rare move. The wife of Justin Bieber flashed her pert derriere in bikini bottoms adding a top and boots for a new campaign with fall/winter 2021 Superga

She has a megawatt smile: The blonde beauty looked radiant by the crashing waves

'She remains an ever-present essence of the Superga brand and focuses on the concept of timeless style, which is one of the core values of the brand,' it was added.

The campaign was shot outside of the Tennis and Riding Club in Malibu, California in May 2021.

The all-female team came together to capture the supermodel in a uniquely feminine and intimate setting across the beach sands.

Upbeat: The Fall / Winter 2021 campaign embraces the blonde beauty's 'youthful energy and upbeat personality,' the brand shared

Model moves: 'She remains an ever-present essence of the Superga brand and focuses on the concept of timeless style, which is one of the core values of the brand,' it was added

The campaign was shot by former painter, illustrator, and animal rights activist, Zoey Grossman, who captured the young talent through her signature narrative of dreamy elegance.

New York based stylist and fashion editor, Gabriella Karefa-Johnson, returned to place her unmistakable mark in capturing Hailey in a series of multi-textured cross-era looks around time-honored styles of Superga sneakers.

The campaign features Hailey in class Superga styles, 2750, 'Campionato' 2706 OG, and Alpina Ripstop high top lace-ups, along with 2790 platform, 2630, and the new Rubber boot silhouette.

Details: The campaign features Hailey in class Superga styles, 2750, 'Campionato' 2706 OG, and Alpina Ripstop high top lace-ups, along with 2790 platform, 2630, and the new Rubber boot silhouette

Good times: The campaign was shot outside of the Tennis and Riding Club in Malibu, California in May 2021

Rock on Hailey: The campaign was shot by former painter, illustrator, and animal rights activist, Zoey Grossman, who captured the young talent through her signature narrative of dreamy elegance

The campaign will launch with the classic 2750 on Friday, August 13.

This comes after she wore a skintight blue latex dress as she cozied up to her husband Justin for a loved-up Instagram snap.

The model, 24, made the most of her incredible figure in the sexy dress as she joined the dapper singer for the image, presumably ahead of their latest date night.

Justin took to Instagram to share several snaps from his evening with wife Hailey, including one of his own smart ensemble, consisting of a black pinstripe blazer.

All glammed up: Bieber sent temperatures soaring in a skintight blue latex dress as she cozied up to her husband Justin for a loved-up Instagram snap

Hailey clutched designer Bottega Veneta's popular 'pouch leather clutch' of the same color.

Her pout was painted pink and her nails were the same color. She wore a gold necklace that complemented the gold hardware on the dress's straps.

Justin, who married model Hailey in September 2019, was dressed in a black pinstripe blazer with a silk, button down black shirt underneath. He brightened up the look with a colorful necklace.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Grace And Frankie is back. Netflix surprised fans of the show starring Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin by dropping four new episodes for season seven, which will be its last.

And it has been promised that 12 more episodes of the hit drama from Marta Kauffman and Howard J. Morris will be released sometime in 2022.

The show stopped filming in March of 2020 due to COVID-19 and there is no information about when they will resume shooting to finish the series.

Good news: Grace And Frankie is back. Netflix surprised fans of the show starring Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin by dropping four new episodes for season seven, which will be its last

They missed everyone: Jane and Lily shared a video announcing the four new episodes. 'As you know we have been filming the seventh and final season,' said Jane, before Lily interrupted her to say four episodes are out now

Jane and Lily shared a video announcing the four new episodes. 'As you know we have been filming the seventh and final season,' said Jane, before Lily interrupted her to say four episodes are out now.

Fonda then added: 'But don't worry, there's plenty more to come. We just wanted to give you something special until we finish the rest of the season.'

Grace and Frankie follows Grace, a retired cosmetics mogul, and Frankie, a hippie art teacher, whose husbands, Robert and Sol, are successful divorce lawyers in San Diego.

Grace and Frankie's lives are turned upside down when Robert and Sol announce that they are in love with each other and are leaving their wives.

The women move into a beach house together, and though they could not be any different - Grace is uptight but clever and Frankie is relaxed but ditsy - they end up becoming best friends who balance each other out.

And 12 more to come: And it has been promised that 12 more episodes of the hit drama from Marta Kauffman and Howard J. Morris will be released sometime in 2022

Up in the air: The show stopped filming in March of 2020 due to COVID-19 and there is no information about when they will resume shooting to finish the series

Last fall Fonda said she intends to lose 10 pounds before she returns to filming on her TV show.

The 83-year-old actress and her castmates Tomlin, Martin Sheen and Brooklyn Decker all had to stop work on the seventh and final season of the Netflix series in March when the COVID-19 pandemic began to sweep across the globe in March.

Fonda has gained some weight since whilst isolating at home but she will make sure that she is back to her best shape when the cameras start rolling again.

The set up: Grace and Frankie follows Grace, a retired cosmetics mogul, and Frankie, a hippie art teacher, whose husbands, Robert and Sol, are successful divorce lawyers in San Diego

In an interview with The New York Times, she said: 'There was a time when I was anorexic, but I never got below 112 (pounds). I don't let it get too far out of hand.

'I'm not at my fighting weight right now. I'm 127. My fighting weight is about 119. So, you know, when we get three weeks out from shooting Grace and Frankie, I'll lose 10 pounds.'

The Coming Home star was one of the pioneers of home workouts in the 1980s and her keep-fit videos and books sold by their millions across the world and she stays in great shape now with a personal trainer and following a healthy diet.

Good work: The women move into a beach house together, and though they could not be any different - Grace is uptight but clever and Frankie is relaxed but ditsy - they end up becoming best friends who balance each other out. Fonda with Brooklyn Decker who plays her daughter

At the start of this year, Fonda decided to go grey and stop dying her hair blonde, and she admits the producers on Grace and Frankie supported her decision.

She said: 'I went grey at just the right moment. I didn't know COVID was coming along. I got tired of the chemicals and the time and the money to keep myself this particular colour of blonde, you know - enough already! And so I talked to the producers of 'Grace and Frankie' and I said, 'I want to go grey, but that would mean that Grace is going to have to go grey,' and they were all for it.'

And in May Fonda said she 'doesn't know' if she'll return to movies.

She gets a lot of attention: Fonda as Grace Hanson and Peter Gallagher as Nick season five

The actress enjoyed years of success on the big screen but in recent years has left behind her 'snobbish' attitude to TV and understood her 'future' lies in television because it is a better medium for older women.

She told Harper's Bazaar magazine: 'I was one of those movie people who, for a long time, was snobbish about TV. Aaron Sorkin offered me this ongoing role in The Newsroom and I realized, "This is my future." I'm old. Television is more forgiving for older women, and so I said, "OK, I'm going to start paying attention."

'So I started watching TV and now I don't know if I'm going to go back into movie theatres. I just love television.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bella Hadid talked about her older fashion statements in a video shared on Thursday.

The model sat down for Vogue interview where she glanced at her former designer duds in a book as she made comments for a new episode of Life In Looks.

When the sister of Gigi Hadid focused in on an image of herself in a sheer white dress by Vivienne Westwood, she said she hopes the designer will make her wedding dress one day.

Le look de Bella: Bella Hadid talked about her older fashion statements in a video shared on Thursday. The model sat down for Vogue interview where she glanced at her former designer duds in a book as she made comments for a new episode of Life In Looks

Bella said she has always designed her future wedding dress in her head 'based on Vivienne's work.'

And she 'always, like, in my heart manifest her making my wedding dress.'

Hadid also said: 'I hope one day when I get married she can make it, I mean it would be a literal honor for me, I don't know if that would even be a possibility, but if so it's me and you Vivienne, dagger included.'

Earlier she said of the image of her modeling a Westwood gown: 'This show I was able to take out my dagger and kind of like again be a character.'

Inspired: When the sister of Gigi Hadid focused in on an image of herself in a sheer white dress by Vivienne Westwood, she said she hopes the designer will make her wedding dress one day

It's love: She went public on Instagram with her beau this summer as sources shared that they have been secretly together for one year

Another shot: This image shared this week on Instagram sees her kissing her beau

Bella had an on and off relationship with singer The Weeknd - real name Abel Makkonen Tesfaye - for years; he has since been linked to Angelina Jolie.

Now the catwalk princess is dating Marc Kalman.

She went public on Instagram with her beau this summer as sources shared that they have been secretly together for one year.

Meanwhile, her older sister Gigi Hadid has a baby with One Direction vet Zayn Malik.

Elsewhere in her Vogue interview Bella said she is still the classic 'middle child.' She felt like 'everybody hated' her during quarantine on her family farm in Pennsylvania.

Bella also admitted that she's still embarrassed about one particularly racy ensemble from early in her career because it was the 'opposite' of her own personal style.

Style star: Hadid revealed that she felt like 'everybody hated' her during quarantine on her family farm in Pennsylvania

Bella is seated at a desk with a look book of her style highlights which she fanned through to break down 15 of her fashion looks from 2015 until today.

While no one would ever guess it from her red carpet appearances, Bella admitted to being 'very nervous' as she began her career.

At her first Met Gala appearance in 2015 Bella recalled basically running down the carpet and not spending more than 'four minutes' there because of her nerves. Plus, she added, everyone was waiting for Rihanna.

One of her more iconic looks, a slinky red silk Alexandre Vauthier gown that she wore at Cannes, left her feeling very uncomfortable, the star recalled.

Reflections: In the video, Bella is seated at a desk with a lookbook of her style highlights which she fanned through to break down 15 of her fashion looks from 2015 until today

Way back: While no one would ever guess it from her red carpet appearances, Bella admitted to being 'very nervous' as she began her career

'I kind of get embarrassed about this moment still even though the dress is gorgeous. It just, again, doesn't feel so much like me and I think this was the star of the Bella persona that everyone sees is me,' she revealed.

'I kind of get embarrassed about this moment still even though the dress is gorgeous. It just, again, doesn't feel so much like me and I think this was the star of the Bella persona that everyone sees is me,' she revealed.

Bella said that the high slit, sexy vibe and glamourous makeup made her feel a bit like a fish out of water.

'That's my alter ego. That's Belinda,' Bella laughed. 'I'm just so the opposite of her. She's very va-va-voom. You know, bless her. Love her. She was very nervous.'

'That's my alter ego. That's Belinda,' Bella laughed. 'I'm just so the opposite of her. She's very va-va-voom. You know, bless her. Love her. She was very nervous.'

Newbie: At her first Met Gala appearance in 2015 Bella recalled basically running down the carpet and not spending more than 'four minutes' there because of her nerves

One of the snaps in the book came from a 2020 issue of Vogue that was shot on the Hadid's family farm during the pandemic.

The shot was of Bella and sister Gigi and a cow who has since sadly passed away.

'Being in quarantine with my family - I felt like I was a 16-year-old middle child again,' Bella said.

Family time: One of the snaps in the book came from a 2020 issue of Vogue that was shot on the Hadid's family farm during the pandemic

Sad times: The shot was of Bella and sister Gigi and a cow who has since sadly passed away

'Being in quarantine with my family - I felt like I was a 16-year-old middle child again,' Bella said.

'Any middle children know how it feels to be a middle child. Everybody hates me, no one likes me, I'm the black sheep.'

She continued: 'I'm naturally blonde, I wanted to be the opposite of everyone else in my family. And it was like my brother [Anwar] and my sister [Gigi] buddy-buddying up. And, I just felt like the ostracized one. But, it's okay, I know they love me.'

Hadid laughed about how her mom, Yolanda, put she and her siblings to work in the garden during the pandemic.

'Any middle children know how it feels to be a middle child. Everybody hates me, no one likes me, I'm the black sheep.'

'I'm naturally blonde, I wanted to be the opposite of everyone else in my family. And it was like my brother [Anwar] and my sister [Gigi] buddy-buddying up. And, I just felt like the ostracized one. But, it's okay, I know they love me.'

Looking back at her growth from 2015 to 2021, Bella seemed to marvel at how happy she is these days.

'People used to make fun of me and say that I never smiled,' she said looking at a runway look. 'And it was just because I was in a really bad place physically and mentally. So I look really sad in this picture but I was actually very happy.'

Hadid revealed that she's worked through her dark place and is much happier and grateful to be who she is today.

'People used to make fun of me and say that I never smiled,' she said looking at a runway look. 'And it was just because I was in a really bad place physically and mentally. So I look really sad in this picture but I was actually very happy.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lizzo thinks Cardi B has 'changed the game forever' for female artists.

The 33-year-old singer and the chart-topping rap star have teamed-up to record Rumors together, and Lizzo relished the experience of working with her on the new single.

'Cardi B is the ultimate,' Lizzo explained when asked what she loves about the rapper.

High praise: Lizzo thinks Cardi B has 'changed the game forever' for female artists. Seen in March 2021

'She, to me, has always done it right,' the Juice hitmaker continued.

'Everything that she said, every way that she's reacted because you know why? It's because she was true to herself the whole time. She's a groundbreaker. You can't deny her ability. She's a superstar.'

'She has changed the game forever for a lot of us, a lot of women. I don't even think she realizes she's doing it because it's just like, I'm trying to just be successful. I'm trying to get this money. I want to live a happy life.

Trailblazer: When asked what she loves about the rapper, Lizzo explained, 'Cardi B is the ultimate.' Pictured in March 2021

Creative collaboration: The 33-year-old singer and the chart-topping rap star have teamed-up to record Rumors together, and Lizzo relished the experience of working with her on the new single

'She just follows her heart. That's what I love about her.'

Lizzo was determined to work with Cardi, 28, as soon as the possibility arose.

She told Zane Lowe on Apple Music 1: 'There was no one else for it. There was literally no one else. From the day the ink dried on her Atlantic contract, I said, 'Please get me on a song with Cardi B.'

Dead set: Lizzo was determined to work with Cardi, 28, as soon as the possibility arose

Perfect fit: She told Zane Lowe on Apple Music 1: 'There was no one else for it. There was literally no one else

Groundbreaker: Lizzo said that Cardi B 'has changed the game forever for a lot of us, a lot of women'

'She's just funny. I like funny people and she can rap. You know what I'm saying?'

Lizzo also feels that working with Cardi makes her more 'cool'.

Reflecting on her teenage years, she said: 'I was a nerd. All the people back home in the SWAT and A Leaf who are going to see this music video,

'I'm in a music video with Cardi B. And I was walking through the hallways with sweaty hair, reading fantasy novels. A nerd, a geek, a band nerd. And I cried because I was like, what a full circle moment. I made it.

'I always wanted to be cool. You know what I'm saying?'

It Factor: Lizzo also feels that working with Cardi makes her more 'cool'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Olivia Jade has once again split with boyfriend Jackson Guthy.

The daughter of Lori Loughlin and Mossimo Giannulli confirmed the news on Thursday when she responded to a fan on Instagram who had asked if she was single.

'I am indeed,' the 21-year-old YouTuber replied.

Olivia and Guthy, 25, first broke up in May 2019 amid the college admission scandal, after her parents admitted to paying $500,000 to get their two daughters into the University of Southern California as crew recruits, even though neither girl was a rower.

Over: Olivia Jade confirms she's split once again with boyfriend Jackson Guthy after previously breaking up amid the college admissions scandal

Lori, 57, and Mossimo, 58, made the payment to Rick Singer and Key Worldwide Foundation to help Olivia and older sister Isabella Rose Giannulli, 22, get into the private university.

Olivia and Jackson then got back together in August 2019, and she later shared portraits of herself that were taken by her then-beau.

The social media star made her first public remarks about the college scandal in December 2020 on the series Red Table Talk, saying she didn't want or deserve pity.

Q&A: The YouTuber confirmed her single status during a Thursday chat with fans on her Instagram Stories

She admitted she didn't think there was anything wrong with college bribery but now realizes that it's wrong and that her family 'messed up'.

'We messed up. I just want a second chance to be like, 'I recognize I messed up.' And for so long I wasn't able to talk about this because of the legalities behind it,' she said.

Nearly sixty people have been charged in the scheme led by Rick Singer, who secretly worked with investigators and recorded his conversations with parents and coaches to help build the case against them.

Doing time: Lori Loughlin, pictured with her husband Mossimo Giannulli, left, in August 2019, served two months in jail over the college admissions scandal

Singer, who is expected to testify against any defendants who go to trial, has not yet been sentenced. More than 40 people have already pleaded guilty.

Prison terms for the parents ensnared in the scheme range from nine months to a couple of weeks.

Other parents who've served time behind bars in the case include Desperate Housewives star Felicity Huffman, who pleaded guilty almost immediately and was sentenced to 14 days for paying $15,000 to rig her daughter's SAT score.

The couple admitted in May to paying $500,000 to get their two daughters, pictured, into the University of Southern California as crew recruits even though neither girl was a rower
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He became a father to son Benjamin, born via surrogate, in 2019.

And Bravo's Andy Cohen has revealed that his love life has become more complicated as a result.

The Watch What Happens Live host, 53, told People: 'Now there's an endgame... Are you going to be a good stepfather? It's changed everything.'

Changed priorities: He became a father to son Benjamin, born via surrogate, in 2019. And Bravo's Andy Cohen has revealed that his love life has become more complicated as a result

While he has a different criteria for a potential partner now, Cohen hasn't stopped looking for love.

As for his ideal companion, he told People: 'I like very independent people who have their own things going with their own lives, who are very strong in their belief systems. That's very attractive to me.'

Meanwhile, Cohen stated Tuesday that he and regular Met Gala date Sarah Jessica Parker may skip this year's extravaganza.

Single dad: The Watch What Happens Live host, 53, told People : 'Now there's an endgame... Are you going to be a good stepfather? It's changed everything'

Single: While he has a different criteria for a potential partner, Cohen hasn't stopped looking for love. As for his ideal companion, he told People: 'I like very independent people who have their own things going with their own lives, who are very strong in their belief systems'

The Met Gala 2020 will be held next month in New York City, marking the event's return since being postponed in May 2020 following the breakout of the COVID-19 pandemic.

During an interview on Access Hollywood, he said he wouldn't be attending the gala on September 13 because Parker would be unable to go with him due to filming commitments.

Parker is currently shooting the HBO Max Sex And the City sequel And Just Like That.

Cohen and Parker have walked the red carpet together at the annual benefit for the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Costume Institute in New York City several times - in 2011, 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2018.

The New York fashion event is requiring all guests including the rich and famous to show proof of full vaccination and wear face masks inside while not eating and drinking.

The theme for the event is America: A Lexicon of Fashion, which is named after a new exhibition at the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chrissy Teigen has dedicated a page in her comeback Cravings cookbook to her late son Jack, after her pregnancy loss last year.

In a page with a photograph of cookies, Teigen, 35, captioned the page, 'To Jack,' after she and husband John Legend, 42, tragically suffered a pregnancy loss last September when she was 20 months into her term.

Teigen posted the shot on Instagram Thursday after announcing that she was releasing a third cookbook, Cravings: All Together: Recipes To Love.

The latest: Chrissy Teigen, 35, has dedicated a page in her comeback Cravings cookbook to her late son Jack, after her pregnancy loss last year

Teigen last month took to social media to thank fans who wrote her sympathetic notes about the pregnancy loss that were delayed amid the coronavirus pandemic.

'You guys sent the most amazing condolence letters and cards and books and I just want you to know that we got all of them. All of them. I’m gonna read them all, OK? I love you guys.'

Teigen is seen eating a taco on the cover of her new book, which she said 'quite literally saved' her amid the difficult times.

'Bursting with joy right now, for my third cookbook is finally here!' Chrissy announced on Instagram. 'It is incredibly hard to put into words what this book means to me. How do you come up with a funny, enticing caption for a book that quite literally saved you.

Comeback cookbook! Chrissy Teigen has announced her comeback cookbook, after a tumultuous year that has seen her get cancelled over cyberbullying claims

Back for more! Teigen released her first cookbook, Cravings: Recipes for All of the Food You Want to Eat, in 2016

'I didn't have a theme in mind when we made this book - all I knew was I wanted a bright new energy, but I also needed comfort. I wanted to make recipes that would be timeless, food that brings joy to your belly, your household, those around you.

She continued: 'I wanted people to enjoy not just the outcome, but the process. This book is reflective of everything I wanted and we needed as a family to bring into our home, it is truly a piece of us, and I am so excited to share it with you.

'So get ready for John's thick ass blueberry pancakes - the ones we make every Sunday morning without fail, sticky orange glazed fried chicken sandwiches, luna's unicorn milkshakes, and salty white chocolate chunk cookies so addictive you might as well double the batch. Man.

'I can't believe it is really finally here!!!! Two months from today. I rarely get nerves like this but it is quite an invigorating feeling! AH!!!!! HOW DO I END THIS CAPTION oh god I hope you love it because it's honestly my best f**king cookbook yet, is that okay to say? I said it!!!'

Cravings: All Together: Recipes To Love will be Chrissy's third cookbook, following her 2016 book Cravings: Recipes for All of the Food You Want to Eat and 2018's Cravings: Hungry For More.

Teigen this year has dealt with a career crisis over cyberbullying claims for past toxic social media behavior, leading Macy's to cease selling her kitchen line, and her exit from the Netflix show Never Have I Ever.

Chrissy has been the target of backlash since her abusive tweets originally made in 2011 resurfaced online, including one that urged a then 16-year-old Courtney Stodden to kill themselves.

Open book: Teigen released her second book, Cravings: Hungry For More, in 2018

Difficult year: Teigen, pictured with her husband John Legend, has been accused of cyberbullying this past year

Stodden recently claimed that Teigen has yet to personally apologize for her actions, but Chrissy told TMZ that she 'reached out to' Stodden via text.

During the same interview, Chrissy was asked about Addison Rae's backlash for introducing herself to Donald Trump at a UFC fight, which she replied: 'I have decided I'm not getting involved in anyone's s**t ever again.'

Lindsay Lohan was also the subject of an insensitive post by Teigen, where a tweet from January 2011 read: 'Lindsay adds a few more slits to her wrists when she sees emma stone.'

Strike a pose: Teigen looked fabulous in a recent post shared from Miami

Old tweets from 2013 have also resurfaced in which she described nine-year-old Oscar nominee Wallis as 'cocky' and called Teen Mom star Farrah Abraham, then 21, a 'wh***'.

Michael Costello accused Chrissy and her stylist, Monica Rose, of blacklisting him from the industry which spawned his own suicidal ideations as the pair went 'out of their way to threaten people and brands that if they were in any shape or form associated with me, they would not work with any of them.'

Cameroonian singer Dencia claimed that Chrissy had pushed her twice at the 2016 Grammy Awards after allegedly believing that the singer's assistant had recorded her on his phone.

Chrissy attempted to right a few of her wrongs with an apology shared to Medium in June — which was her first time speaking out since taking a social media hiatus after a host of bullying allegations came to light.

Apology: Chrissy attempted to right a few of her wrongs with an apology shared to Medium in June — which was her first time speaking out since taking a social media hiatus after a host of bullying allegations came to light (pictured 2015)

'Hi all. It has been a VERY humbling few weeks,' she wrote. 'I know I've been quiet, and lord knows you don't want to hear about me, but I want you to know I've been sitting in a hole of deserved global punishment, the ultimate 'sit here and think about what you've done.

She added: 'Not a day, not a single moment has passed where I haven't felt the crushing weight of regret for the things I've said in the past.'

In a July 14 Instagram post, Teigen said she felt 'like utter s–t in real life' amid the scandal.

'Going outside sucks and doesn’t feel right, being at home alone with my mind makes my depressed head race,' she said. 'But I do know that however I’m handling this now isn’t the right answer.

'I feel lost and need to find my place again, I need to snap out of this, I desperately wanna communicate with you guys instead of pretending everything is okay.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Wolfgang Van Halen shared several photos featuring his late father, Eddie, to his Instagram account on Thursday.

The 30-year-old musician was seen spending time with the deceased Van Halen guitarist, who was seen laughing and affectionately kissing his son's cheek in the snaps.

The former Tremonti band member also wrote a brief message in the post's caption to let his followers know about his feelings regarding his father's passing, which occurred last October.

Looking back: Wolfgang Van Halen shared several photos with his late father, Eddie, to his Instagram account on Thursday

Van Halen was very blunt about his still-present disbelief over the fact that his dad had passed away and noted that he was emotionally distraught about his absence.

'I miss the f*** out of him. I can't believe he's not here anymore. Still doesn't feel real,' he wrote.

The musician, who performs under the name Mammoth WVH, also revealed that he has been seeing his father in his sleep in the recent past.

'I've had so many dreams lately where Pop and I are just doing normal things and then I realize it's a dream,' he said.

Disbelief: The musician also wrote a message in the post's caption regarding his father, where he noted that he 'can't believe he's not here anymore. Still doesn't feel real'

Still remembering: The late guitar virtuoso passed away after a battle with cancer last October; the father-son duo is seen performing at the 2015 Billboard Music Awards

The bassist also noted that he would then 'stop whatever I'm doing and hug him for as long as I can until I wake up.'

Van Halen concluded the message by writing: 'I'm doing my best, Pop.'

Many of the guitarists' fans responded in the post's comments section by offering their support and well wishes to the performer.

The late guitar virtuoso would often praise his son's musical abilities in various appearances and interviews.

Making the most of it: The bassist noted that, when he saw his father in his dreams, he would 'hug him for as long as I can'

The two previously played together in Van Halen, with Wolfgang replacing longtime bassist Michael Anthony in 2007.

The father-son duo went on to collaborate on the band's twelfth and final studio album, entitled A Different Kind of Truth, which was released in 2012.

Wolfgang would go on to tour with the band until his father's passing, after which it was dissolved permanently.

The musician was the first to announce Eddie's death, which occurred on October 9th of last year.

Working together: Wolfgang joined Van Halen in 2007 and went on to perform with the group until his father's death; they are seen in 2012

The bassist made the news public on his Twitter account, where he wrote an emotional message regarding the loss.

Wolfgang recently spoke to People and told the media outlet about a bit of advice that his father had passed on to him.

The musician recalled that his father had told him: 'If you ever make a mistake, do it twice so everybody thinks you meant to do it.'

Solid advice: During an interview, Wolfgang recalled that his father had taught him to make mistakes 'twice so everybody thinks you meant to do it'; they are seen in 2012

The performer also spoke about the positive influence that Eddie and his mother, Valerie Bertinelli, had on him and expressed that he looked up to both as role models.

The bassist expressed that his father 'was my biggest champion, other than my mom.'

Wolfgang went on to discuss the more personable elements of his parents' personalities and noted that he took after them in more lighthearted senses.

In speaking about his father, the drummer noted that he 'inherited his sense of humor...a lot of that self-deprecation certainly comes from both of them.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Courier (12A)

Rating:

Verdict: Real-life spy drama

Free Guy (12A)

Rating:

Verdict: Mostly a hoot

Maybe it's time for Benedict Cumberbatch to become a verb. Thus to 'Cumberbatch' a film would mean to add touches of steely authority and velvety class that it might otherwise have lacked.

The same could easily apply to Colin Firth, so that every so often a production featuring both actors, such as the Sam Mendes film 1917, would be both Firthed and Cumberbatched.

The Courier is a fine example of Cumberbatching. In many ways it is an unexceptional spy picture, even a little turgid at times, but his moustachioed presence in the title role adds tremendous heft.

He plays Greville Wynne, the British businessman who in 1960 was recruited by MI6 to smuggle military secrets out of Moscow.

His source was Oleg Penkovsky (Merab Ninidze), a Soviet war hero and colonel in military intelligence, whose motivation for betraying his country was a cocktail of anxiety and altruism: he thought he could help save the world from nuclear destruction and he probably did.

He plays Greville Wynne, the British businessman who in 1960 was recruited by MI6 to smuggle military secrets out of Moscow

The reams of information he passed to Wynne are said to have defused the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis by alerting the West to Soviet limitations, and indeed to have altered the entire course of the Cold War.

Dominic Cooke's film tells this fascinating and important story without frills. In truth, it could probably do with some.

Cooke is an illustrious theatre director with a list of credits as long as your arm — but his only previous film, four years ago, was an adaptation of Ian McEwan's novel On Chesil Beach. About the oppressive relationship between two inexperienced newlyweds, that film, practically a chamber piece, played more obviously to his strengths. But coincidentally it was also set in the early 1960s; and here again, Cooke has got his period detail down pat.

Wynne and his wife Sheila (the excellent Jessie Buckley, rather wasted in a minor supporting role) lead an unremarkable London life with their young son Andrew (Keir Hills), just about managing to overcome a past infidelity of Greville's.

Then, because of his clubbable personality and regular, entirely innocent sales trips to Eastern Europe, he is identified by an MI6 officer (Angus Wright) and a CIA operative (Rachel Brosnahan) as the ideal chap to establish contact with Penkovsky, now working in 'scientific research'. At first he dismisses the idea as preposterous — 'I'm just a salesman' — but he, too, is swayed by the spectre of a nuclear Armageddon.

He duly learns the rudiments of spycraft and builds a genuinely touching friendship with Penkovsky, though his wife, kept entirely in the dark, begins to suspect that he is again being unfaithful.

As far as the ever-watching KGB is concerned, Wynne is feeding Penkovsky useful titbits of information about British industry.

By the time they realise what is really happening, the damage is done. But it's not too late to arrest both men and imprison them in Moscow's dreaded Lubyanka.

The film slightly botches its one action sequence, when Wynne and his handlers try to smuggle out Penkovsky himself; it is regrettably difficult to follow what's going on. But Wynne's capture does at least facilitate some top-class Cumberbatch acting. Gaunt and dead-eyed, he truly looks like someone who has been to hell and back.

While freeing Greville is an entirely sombre business, freeing Guy is mostly a hoot. Director Shawn Levy made the Night At The Museum films and their influence isn't hard to spot in Free Guy, about a background 'non-player character' or NPC in a hit video game called Free City.

Known only as 'Blue-Shirt Guy', he goes rogue and becomes the game's action hero.

He is played by Ryan Reynolds, and it's hard to think of anyone else who could carry the enjoyably daft premise quite so appealingly.

Jodie Comer is nicely cast, too, doubling up as Molotov Girl, the sexy killer in Free City whose fatal attractions have lured Blue-Shirt Guy out of his NPC role, and as Millie, one of the two brilliant programmers whose ideas have been stolen by a villainous video-game tycoon played by Taika Waititi.

There are also vivid echoes of 1998's The Truman Show, as Guy gets to realise that his universe is fake. Free Guy isn't a classic like that film but it does have some worthwhile things to say about Artificial Intelligence, and for that matter about the whole video-game phenomenon.

Above all, though, it's fun.

Both films in cinemas now.

Read the signs: this is no ordinary coming of age story

CODA (15)

Rating:

Minamata (15)

Rating:

The title of CODA is an acronym, meaning Child Of Deaf Adults. Available in some cinemas and on Apple TV+, it's a U.S.-set remake of a French film, about a teenage girl, Ruby (British actress Emilia Jones), who is the only hearing member of her family.

Ruby's father (Troy Kotsur) and brother (Daniel Durant) are fishermen off the Massachusetts coast. Her mother (Marlee Matlin, who apparently insisted that the other deaf characters also had to be played by deaf actors) looks after the books.

Fluent in American sign language, Ruby acts as everyone's ears and works on the boat, but she is also a fine singer and yearns to go to music college.

The juggling of family responsibilities with her personal ambitions gives the film its coming-of-age narrative drive, but there is also a crush on a boy in the school choir and a few bullying issues, all of which open Sian Heder's film to a charge of cliche. Yet I really enjoyed it for its sensitive portrayal of disability, for some genuine laughs, and for one scene near the end that I confess moved me to tears.

Minamata tells a true story and stars a barely recognisable Johnny Depp as a dissolute but brilliant Life magazine photographer who in the early 1970s helped to expose a mercury-poisoning scandal in coastal Japan. Worthy but ponderous.

The title of CODA is an acronym, meaning Child Of Deaf Adults. Available in some cinemas and on Apple TV+, it's a U.S.-set remake of a French film

Tinies' favourite pups to the rescue

Paw Patrol: The Movie (U)

Rating:

The two-year-old daughter of Olympic gymnastics champion Max Whitlock, who can already turn perfect forward rolls, is head-over-heels in love with Paw Patrol. Indeed, he said in Tokyo that little Willow might well prefer to watch that than his final.

Now he's home, I'm sure he'll be taking her to see Paw Patrol: The Movie although the truth is that this big-screen spin-off from the wildly popular TV animation is aimed at slightly older kids.

I saw it at the Odeon Hereford yesterday with my young chum, ten-year-old Pippi, and she really enjoyed it. The story will certainly fly over the heads of toddlers, not least because — almost obligatory these days — it features a mental health issue.

But they will enjoy the vivid colour as our puppy troubleshooters go to the aid of Adventure City, which is in the grip of a Trump-like egomaniac called Mayor Humdinger (who's 'more of a cat person').

The voice cast includes Kim Kardashian as a poodle.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@THE KILLERS: Pressure Machine (EMI)

Verdict: Finely Tuned

Rating:

DAVID CROSBY: For Free (BMG)

Verdict: Sun-kissed harmonies

Rating:

JADE BIRD: Different Kinds Of Light (Glassnote)

Verdict: Radio-friendly Americana

Rating:

Released nearly a year ago, The Killers' last album was the template for a world tour that never took place. Packed with big-hearted stadium anthems, Imploding The Mirage was written to be sung by thousands of fans.

But the pandemic put paid to that — and frontman Brandon Flowers found himself at a loose end for the first time since the band's 2004 breakthrough.

'Everything came to a grinding halt and I was faced with silence,' he says. Out of that stillness, a Killers LP like no other has emerged. With time to reflect, the band have come up with an ambitious concept album of quieter tunes.

Pressure Machine is based around Brandon's childhood in smalltown Utah. The Killers may have formed in Las Vegas and become stars by tapping into the glitz and glam of Sin City but Flowers, 40, grew up hundreds of miles away in Nephi (pop. 6,378), a semi-rural community surrounded by wheatfields and the West Hills. A return to his home town has prompted a burst of fine creativity.

Out of the stillness of the pandemic, a Killers LP like no other has emerged. With time to reflect, the band have come up with an ambitious concept album of quieter tunes

Inspired by frontman Brandon Flowers' teenage memories and local character studies, the songs here are interspersed with spoken-word commentaries from fellow Utahns

Inspired by his teenage memories and local character studies, the songs here are interspersed with spoken-word commentaries from fellow Utahns.

The Killers have touched on this hidden America before, on 2006's Sam's Town, but never with this much emotional punch.

This isn't an unplugged album. There are acoustic hints of Bruce Springsteen's Nebraska, but co-producers Shawn Everett and Jonathan Rado (both retained from Imploding The Mirage) have crafted a series of rich but elegant arrangements in keeping with a more considered approach.

There is another plus in the return of guitarist Dave Keuning. Back after taking a four-year break to spend time with his family, he adds piercing riffs to an album otherwise dominated by piano, strings, pedal steel and harmonica.

In keeping with the restrained mood, even drummer Ronnie Vannucci plays with uncharacteristic economy.

But it's Brandon's stories, hard-bitten but resilient, that carry the day. He addresses dashed hopes on In Another Life and sings of the town's drug problem on West Hills, the tale of a man arrested for possessing enough 'hillbilly heroin' to kill a horse.

Things take an even darker turn on Quiet Town, in which a young couple are wiped out by a Union Pacific Train, and Terrible Thing, in which the singer places himself in the shoes of a suicidal gay teenager tormented by the intolerance of his 'barbed wire town'.

SINGLES Former Led Zeppelin frontman Robert Plant described bluegrass singer Alison Krauss's dulcet tones as 'otherworldly' when the unlikely couple teamed up to make 2007's Grammy-winning Raising Sand, and she provides the perfect foil for Plant once more on new single Can't Let Go — an early taster for the duo's long-awaited follow-up album. First recorded by Lucinda Williams in 1998, it's a finger-popping rockabilly tune. Rather than trade vocal lines, Plant and Krauss sing the whole song softly together. Robert Plant and Alison Krauss have released their long-awaited second album The album Raise The Roof, again produced by T Bone Burnett, follows in November. In a week in which Sweet Child O' Mine reached a billion streams on Spotify, Guns N' Roses are also back with their first new material since 2008. With guitar hero Slash and bassist Duff McKagan alongside vocalist Axl Rose, Absurd is a fast rocker with nods to Queen and Motörhead. Advertisement

More familiar sounds surface. In The Car Outside combines 1980s electronics with Keuning's guitar. Desperate Things, the account of a traffic cop plotting to kill the abusive husband of a woman he pulls over for speeding, is adorned by Ry Cooder-like guitar. It's part love story, part murder ballad.

There's also, on Runaway Horses, a duet with Phoebe Bridgers that brilliantly chronicles a smalltown girl's coming of age while slipping in a sly reference to Radiohead's The Bends.

Hope ultimately prevails, however, and the album ends with an affectionate portrait of the Utahn clan on The Getting By: 'Hold on 'til the getting's good,' concludes Flowers.

Those looking for the razzle-dazzle of hits like Mr. Brightside should wait for next May's stadium tour. For those who might enjoy a different kind of Killers album, this is a record to explore with relish.

DAVID CROSBY, 80 tomorrow, is one of rock's great survivors. A founding member of two seminal bands — The Byrds and Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young — he was a cornerstone of the singer- songwriter scene that flourished in 1970s LA.

He recovered from heart surgery in 2014 and his artistic fires are burning as brightly as ever.

For Free is his fourth album in five years and it continues a late-life renaissance. Unlike fellow Laurel Canyon alumnus Jackson Browne, whose recent Downhill From Everywhere was world-weary, Croz retains a sunny disposition, and For Free is fuelled by his optimistic sense of wonder.

The album, produced by his musician son James Raymond, features cameos from the Doobie Brothers' Michael McDonald, who supplies harmonies on River Rise, and Texan singer Sarah Jarosz, who joins him on the title track, a classic Joni Mitchell song that compares the lifestyle of a bewildered rock star with the simpler life of a New York busker.

There are further nods to Crosby's roots on I Won't Stay For Long, which begins with a count-in from Beach Boy Brian Wilson, and album highlight Rodriguez For A Night, a portrait of a drugstore cowboy written for Crosby by Steely Dan's Donald Fagen, with more than a whiff of that band's brassy jazz- funk sound.

David Crosby is one of rock's great survivors

What is most apparent is the folk-rock legend's ongoing lust for life. 'As the day grows dim, I start to believe always one more try,' he sings.

In March, a deluxe reissue of CSN&Y's Déjà Vu served as a reminder of his talents. For Free confirms he is still thriving.

British singer JADE BIRD flew to Nashville to work with renowned producer Dave Cobb, but her second album edges her away from country — and the simple, acoustic charm of her 2019 debut — towards something more robust.

Made with a full band, Different Kinds Of Light owes as much to alternative rock as it does to Dolly Parton.

Jade Bird is poised to release her second album, Different Kinds Of Light

Born in Northumberland and educated at the BRIT School, 23-year-old Bird has toured the States with Jason Isbell, but it's another American singer, Stevie Nicks, who is her prime influence: the title track is inspired by Fleetwood Mac's Storms.

Over 15 tracks, Different Kinds Of Light loses its early impetus, but it's a polished, radio-friendly return.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@2:22 — A Ghost Story (Noel Coward Theatre, London)

Rating:

Verdict: Smart, funny — and scary

Carousel (Open Air Theatre, Regent's Park)

Rating:

Verdict: It's grim up north

The life of pop star Lily Allen has never been short of drama. In the past, she has been the sort of party animal who likes to eat other party animals for breakfast.

Now, though, she has cleaned up her act and is making her West End debut in a supernatural thriller.

Allen plays Jenny, a typical London yummy mummy who thinks the house she's converting might be haunted.

She hears a man tramping around the stripped floors of her baby's bedroom at exactly 2:22am every night.

Jenny's cynical, glibly self-righteous husband Sam (Hadley Fraser) doesn't believe a word of it. He has an explanation for everything. The lights went out? Yeah right . . . ghosts are scared of electricity — 'just like the Amish!'

Lily Allen is making her West End debut in a supernatural thriller. Allen plays Jenny, a typical London yummy mummy who thinks the house she's converting might be haunted

But Jenny is convinced and persuades their two dinner-party guests to wait up with her and see for themselves.

American shrink friend Lauren (Julia Chan) is sympathetic because she has experienced ghosts in her childhood.

And Lauren's feisty builder boyfriend Ben (Jake Wood from EastEnders) is up for it, too, because he reckons he had a previous life . . . in the French Revolution.This irritates Sam, who notes that people who think they have had past lives always seem to set them somewhere exotic ('never Wolverhampton in the 1980s').

But this is just cover for the fact that Sam still holds a bit of a candle for Lauren . . . who is carefully eyed, during the course of the long evening, by Jenny.

This isn't the hardest role Allen will face, should she tread the boards again. It's a case of following a formula to deliver the goosebumps. But deliver she does.

She has a bone-chilling scream and can go from nought to nuclear in a fraction of a second.

Allen, looking willowy in an hourglass dress, could use a little more modulation in her voice. But there is subtlety in her performance. She has terrific stage presence, pays careful attention to the action and only bumps into the furniture on cue.

Danny Robins's play is cleverly constructed, with a nice sting in the tail. There is perhaps too much debate on the reality of things that go bump in the night and the real reason why tables move around during seances.

But be sure to keep eyes and ears open, because when the play is over you'll realise it is littered with clues. Maybe Matthew Dunster's production lays on a few too many Hammer Horror thunderclaps and overplays the fox screeches between scenes, but he has us screaming and laughing by turns as the clock counts down to 2:22.

Rodgers and Hammerstein's Carousel has been given a new spin in Regent's Park. Gone is the Victorian setting of a fishing community in coastal Maine. Gone is the gorgeous orchestration. And gone are any trappings that sugar a nasty tale of domestic violence.

This latest take is set somewhere in the north of England in the 1960s. Swelling strings are replaced with the jangle of electric guitars and a colliery band. The choreography comes perilously close to the outre Sixties musical Hair. And a spartan set of a wooden ramp with a turntable ensures Timothy Sheader's production is a solemn occasion.

The innovations sit well with a dark story about unemployed circus barker Billy Bigelow (Declan Bennett) who meets, marries and then becomes increasingly violent towards millworker Julie Jordan (Carly Bawden).

But I struggled to believe in the clam festival. In England's culinary wastelands of the Sixties?!

I also missed the townsfolk's god-lovin' American accents.

There is some sweetness in the show's famous anthem You'll Never Walk Alone. And tenderness in Bawden's apple-pie voice, deployed in her melancholy song What's The Use Of Wond'rin'?

Christina Modestou has a lot of fun, too, as Julie's friend, sending herself up as a mother of eight.

But none of that saves us from having to endure a long, dark night. For that, I'm afraid, they'll need another plot.

Outcast's tale is less odyssey, more oddity

Paradise (Olivier, National Theatre, London)

Rating:

Verdict: Paradise lost

Paradise is a new version of Sophocles's tragedy about the Ancient Greek warrior Philoctetes, adapted by performance poet Kae Tempest and performed with an all-female cast directed by Ian Rickson. The new title may have been chosen because 'Philoctetes' is a mouthful.

Our hero is a veteran of the Trojan War abandoned on a remote island by his former commanding officer, Odysseus.

Ten years later, Odysseus wants him back — together with his magical bow — to help in the ongoing war effort.

Normally writers turn to Greek tragedy when they have something big to say, but in Tempest's case I couldn't work out what that something was.

She certainly makes Philoctetes a fascinating outcast; and Lesley Sharp (pictured) plays him as an old-school Cockney rag-and-bone man, akin to Albert Steptoe.

She certainly makes Philoctetes a fascinating outcast; and Lesley Sharp (pictured) plays him as an old-school Cockney rag-and-bone man, akin to Albert Steptoe

He shares the island with a crew of female refugees who serve as a chorus, commenting on the action.

Into their camp strides uniformed Odysseus, played by Anastasia Hille, who has been well drilled in the mannerisms of military top brass. But Gloria Obianyo as Neoptolemus is the most complex character. Under orders to extract Philoctetes from his lair, she grows from obedient squaddie to crafty negotiator.

Jingling with profanities like bells on a goat, Tempest's script nibbles on themes of pride, bitterness, betrayal and lost glory.

I'm not sure what the all-female casting adds — in some ways it makes the story more comic and less tragic. But I'd sit through this long, uninterrupted 110-minute show all over again, just for Odysseus's brilliant pizza gag.

P.M.

It may be elementary, but Holmes versus the Hound is a rip-roaring treat…

Baskerville (Mercury Theatre, Colchester)

Rating:

Verdict: Fast-moving fun

This is the Mercury rising, rebuilt over two years with a cool café and dance studio, modern eco-glazing and, to respect the town's history, a solemn archaeological display of Roman bricks and copper alloy nose-hair tweezers they found underneath.

It's good sense to reopen with a family-friendly lark: Ken Ludwig's take on Sherlock Holmes' adventure with the Hound of the Baskervilles. It helps that many, like me, remember from childhood the atmospheric terror of the Great Grimpen Mire and the dog with shining jaws, while actually forgetting who the killer was.

It's a jokey five-actor show in the tradition of the Reduced Shakespeare Company or National Theatre of Brent, with a great many hats and wigs, but has some impressively detailed sudden costume changes.

There are classily brilliant sets and projections by Amy Jane Cook and Louise Rhoades-Brown, plenty of theatrical smoke and unexpected trapdoor-work.

Richard Ede remains Holmes throughout and Eric Stroud a mournfully nerdish Watson, while the other three whip through 38 parts, from Baker Street to Dartmoor and an opera house finale. Phil Yarrow and Marc Pickering are elegant shape-shifters, Naomi Petersen is all the women and two urchins.

Seasoned Vaudeville jokes abound: fake wind, running-on-the spot, an upright bed, talking portraits and at one point the traditional profile gag: an actor in half a suit and half a beard, changing character by whipping round to face the other way. Never fails, that one.

Fast small-troupe comedies like this always work best with a degree of knowing self-mockery between the players. Yarrow and Petersen are both improv veterans but this element was a bit tentative at first, maybe rusty after the long performance famine which actors, as well as us audiences, have glumly endured.

But it grows in the second act, and their glee will ripen as the run goes on. The new surround-sound system, by the way, does very well indeed by the Dartmoor gales and the virtual Hound. Brrr, Grrr.

Until August 22, mercurytheatre.co.uk

Libby Purves

Warning: This may hurt a bit

Medicine (Edinburgh International Festival @ Traverse)

Rating:

Verdict: Gleeson shines

At the heart of Enda Walsh's play Medicine, which he also directs, is a superb performance by Domhnall Gleeson (General Hux in the Star Wars sequel trilogy).

We are in what looks like a work canteen in Jamie Vartan's evocative set, strewn with the detritus of a party. Yet there is no evidence of alcohol.

Ah, the penny drops: John (Mr Gleeson, below) is in an institution. Walking into the room in his pyjamas, he is agitated about the mess, which he didn't create.

Then a light comes on in a booth; John speaks into a microphone and we hear a man's voice.

'How are you today?' he asks. This, we gather, is John's annual assessment — where he tries to remember why he's in here and why he needs to stay.

John (Mr Gleeson, above) is in an institution. Walking into the room in his pyjamas, he is agitated about the mess, which he didn't create

And so John's story unfolds. We meet two women — both actors, both called Mary (Clare Barrett and Aoife Duffin, on terrific form). One is dressed as a lobster, the other as an elderly man. They help John to remember by playing people from his past.

Soon they are joined by a drummer (Sean Carpio), who underscores much of the action. But are they real? Or simply figures in John's head?

Mr Walsh has some laughs at actors' expense. 'What's the first rule of acting?' Mary 1 asks Mary 2. 'Be important.'

But the gags decrease as shocking details of childhood neglect and teenage humiliation emerge in John's monologues, and absurdist comedy becomes dystopian despair as Mr Gleeson's performance holds us rapt.

Medicine (the highlight of the EIF's programme, presented in collaboration with Landmark Productions and the Galway International Arts Festival) may be a surreal fantasy. But Walsh and Gleeson make John's distress feel frighteningly real.

Until August 29 (eif.co.uk).

Veronica Lee

A Grand Night For Singing (Edinburgh International Festival @ Edinburgh Academy Junior School)

Rating:

Verdict: Singing in the rain

A Grand Night For Singing — a show of Rodgers and Hammerstein's songs — would be lovely to listen to under the stars on a balmy evening.

The atrocious weather on the night I saw it made this closer to singing in the rain, but thankfully it was being performed in a gigantic marquee — one of the outdoor venues created by the International Festival especially for this Covid-affected year.

Kim Criswell has devised this new staging of a show that was created by Walter Bobbie for Broadway in 1993.

It's chock-full of great songs from Oklahoma!, The King And I, South Pacific and more, and it links them together in a celebration of love — from infatuation ('Hello Young Lovers') to rejection ('All At Once You Love Her') to marriage ('When The Children Are Asleep').

It's a clever conceit and allows some re-imaginings; 'Maria' from The Sound Of Music, for instance, is sung from a frustrated boyfriend's point of view.

The cast of Criswell, Danielle de Niese, Anna-Jane Casey, Damian Humbley and Richard Morrison, under the musical direction of Wayne Marshall, create some enchanted evening.

Until August 13 (eif.co.uk)

Veronica Lee
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Travis Barker celebrated a milestone on Saturday as he successfully took his first ride on an airplane since surviving a deadly plane crash nearly 13 years earlier.

The 45-year-old Blink-182 drummer was glimpsed disembarking a private jet with his girlfriend Kourtney Kardashian, 42, by his side for moral support.

The couple traveled with Kourtney's mother Kris Jenner, 65, and her boyfriend Corey Gamble, 40, for a vacation in Mexico's Cabo San Lucas.

He did it! Travis Barker, 45, celebrated a milestone on Saturday as he successfully took his first ride on an airplane since surviving a deadly plane crash nearly 13 years earlier. The Blink-182 drummer was glimpsed boarding a private jet with his girlfriend Kourtney Kardashian, 42, by his side for moral support

Travis was first spotted at an airfield in Camarillo, California, as he prepared to board the aircraft.

He and Kourtney were reportedly late to arrive for the flight, and Kris and Corey appeared to have waited in the jet for about an hour before they drove up.

Prior to boarding the plane, he and Kourtney embraced, and then she held his hands as they walked up their stairs.

Getting away from it all: The couple traveled with Kourtney's mother Kris Jenner, 65, and her boyfriend Corey Gamble, 40, for a vacation in Mexico's Cabo San Lucas

Getting in the right headspace: Travis was first spotted at an airfield in Camarillo, California, as he prepared to board the aircraft

Taking it easy: Travis was dressed for comfort on the trip in a tank top that showed off his abundant tattoos. He also wore gray pants with a black belt covered in metal studs, and he covered his shaved head with a black ski cap

Fully stocked: The rocker appeared to have packed plenty for the trip south of the border, as he carried a carried a large black Goyard duffle bag over his shoulder

2008 crash: The 45-year-old Blink-182 drummer wasn't able to set foot on an airplane following a deadly plane crash in 2008 in which he was one of only two survivors (pictured)

Travis was dressed for comfort on the trip in a tank top that showed off his abundant tattoos.

He also wore gray pants with a black belt covered in metal studs, and he covered his shaved head with a black ski cap.

The group jetted off to Mexico in a white jet decorated with pink stripes that is owned by Kourtney's youngest sister Kylie Jenner.

Travis hasn't been able to set foot on an airplane following the deadly plane crash in 2008 in South Carolina in which he was one of only two survivors

The plane crash happened on September 19, 2008 - Travis boarded a private jet in South Carolina to head back to Los Angeles following a show, while accompanied by his friend Adam 'DJ AM' Goldstein, his security guard Charles 'Che' Still, and his assistant Chris Baker.

Fiery crash: The pilot, Sarah Lemmon, and the co-pilot, James Bland, were killed within minutes from smoke inhalation and burns as the plane erupted into flames on impact in Columbia, South Carolina. Security guard Charles 'Che' Still and assistant Chris Baker were also killed on impact - seen in 2008

He's not alone: Prior to boarding the plane, he and Kourtney embraced, and then she held his hands as they walked up their stairs

As the small plane was attempting to take off, one of its tires suffered a blow out, causing the craft to overshoot the runway, burst through the airport's fence and over the nearby highway, and finally crash into the embankment on the side of the road.

The pilot, Sarah Lemmon, and the co-pilot, James Bland, were killed within minutes from smoke inhalation and burns as the plane erupted into flames on impact, according to the Chicago Tribune . Still and Baker were also killed on impact.

Travis and Adam were able to escape from the burning plane via an emergency exit over the wing, but both were engulfed in flames as they slid down the wing and got covered in burning jet fuel.

The drummer had third-degree burns over 65 percent of his body and had to spend three months in the hospital while having skin grafts and 26 surgeries to repair the damage.

Luxurious: Barker was flying in style for his first trip back into the air in more than a decade.

Colorful: The group jetted off to Mexico in a white jet decorated with pink stripes that is owned by Kourtney's youngest sister Kylie Jenner

Kylie's jet: Kylie purchased the jet from Global Express before the start of the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. The quasi-billionaire doesn't just use it for her own purposes, but she regularly lets her sisters and mother travel on it across the globe

Kylie's jet - which Travis and Kourtney travelled on was purchased from Global Express before the start of the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. The quasi-billionaire doesn't just use it for her own purposes, but she regularly lets her sisters and mother travel on it across the globe.

The jet cost her a whopping $72.8 million, and jets of its size cost around $5 million per year to operate, according to Page Six.

Kylie opted for a Global Express Jet, which is larger than a Learjet and can fly longer distances, but its increased size also means that it is too big to land at many private air fields.

Pricy: The jet cost her a whopping $72.8 million, and jets of its size cost around $5 million per year to operate, according to Page Six

Going big: Kylie opted for a Global Express Jet, which is larger than a Learjet and can fly longer distances, but its increased size also means that it is too big to land at many private air fields

Kris Jenner and her beau Corey Gamble both looked vacation ready as they disembarked in Cabo San Lucas.

The iconic momager wore a lovely black-and-white dress covered in hypnotizing patterns.

She wore her dark hair in her standard bob and had gold hoop earrings on.

The Keeping Up With The Kardashians star also had on a black mask to help slow the spread of the novel coronavirus.

Corey rocked a casual white button-up shirt with a white patterned bucket hat. He also had on gray shorts and white trainers.

Both carried several carry-on bags as they stepped off the plane.

Vacation looks: Kris Jenner and her beau Corey Gamble both looked vacation ready as they disembarked in Cabo San Lucas. The iconic momager wore a lovely black-and-white dress covered in hypnotizing patterns

She wore her dark hair in her standard bob and had gold hoop earrings on. The Keeping Up With The Kardashians star also had on a black mask to help slow the spread of the novel coronavirus. Corey rocked a casual white shirt for the relaxing journey

Low-key: He also had on gray shorts and white trainers, and both carried several carry-on bags

Back in June, Travis shocked his fans when he tweeted that he might ride on an airplane in the future.

He tweeted, 'I might fly again,' and his fans quickly launched adoring tweets in support of him returning to the sky.

'Wow bro! Strong move, but I never doubted your strength!' tweeted a supportive fan.

Another person replied that they were impressed 'that he could us his bus for long [sic]' and that 'he's almost ready to leave the bus behind!'

One user admitted to sharing Travis' traumatizing experience with her children.

'This is an amazing step for someone with your past,' she wrote.

Foreshadowing: Back in June, Travis shocked his fans when he tweeted that he might ride on an airplane in the future

Shocker: He tweeted, 'I might fly again,' and his fans quickly launched adoring tweets in support of him returning to the sky

Supportive: 'Wow bro! Strong move, but I never doubted your strength!' tweeted a supportive fan, while another person marveled that he'd been using a bus for so long

They have his back: Others recounted how they overcame their fears following plane crashes to show it was possible to fly again

Teaching moment: One user admitted to sharing Travis' traumatizing experience with her children. 'This is an amazing step for someone with your past,' she wrote

On the same page: One user had shared in the experience of being in a plane crash, though they were eventually able to get back in the air. 'It took me years to fly again,' they admitted

One user had shared in the experience of being in a plane crash, though they were eventually able to get back in the air.

'It took me years to fly again,' they admitted. 'I fly all the time now, but every once and awhile the fear creeps back in. Breathing helps.

'I hope you make it back up one day,' they added.

Travis has recently been opening up about the trauma he experienced during his 2008 plane crash.

'I fly all the time now,' the Twitter user continued, 'but every once and awhile the fear creeps back in. Breathing helps. I hope you make it back up one day'

Last moments on the ground: Travis and Kourtney were seen driving up to the airfield. The two appeared to be in a black Range Rover

Part of his healing process: Travis has recently been opening up about the trauma he experienced during his 2008 plane crash

Wake-up call: In a May interview with Men's Health , he shared that the crash helped motivate him to stop abusing prescription drugs

In a May interview with Men's Health, he shared that the crash helped motivate him to stop abusing prescription drugs.

'People are always like, "Did you go to rehab?'' he recounted. 'And I [say], "No, I was in a plane crash." That was my rehab. Lose three of your friends and almost die? That was my wake-up call. If I wasn't in a crash, I would have probably never quit.'

Crash landing: 'People are always like, "Did you go to rehab?'' he recounted. 'And I [say], "No, I was in a plane crash." That was my rehab. Lose three of your friends and almost die? That was my wake-up call. If I wasn't in a crash, I would have probably never quit.'

The fateful night: Late at night on September 19, 2008, Travis boarded a private jet in South Carolina to head back to Los Angeles following a show

On board: Among those accompanying him was his friend Adam 'DJ AM' Goldstein, as well as his security guard Charles 'Che' Still, and his assistant Chris Baker

Disaster: As the small plane was attempting to take off, one of its tires suffered a blow out, causing the craft to overshoot the runway

Instantaneous: Travis and Adam were able to escape from the burning plane via an emergency exit over the wing, but Still and Baker were also killed on impact

On fire: Both Travis and Adam were engulfed in flames as they slid down the wing and got covered in burning jet fuel

Severe: The drummer had third-degree burns over 65 percent of his body and had to spend three months in the hospital while having skin grafts and 26 surgeries to repair the damage

Sick at the sight of them: After the crash, Travis was overcome with a debilitating fear even at the sight of an airplane

Fear: 'I was dark… I couldn't walk down the street. If I saw a plane [in the sky], I was determined it was going to crash, and I just didn't want to see it,' he said

After the crash, Travis was overcome with a debilitating fear even at the sight of an airplane.

'I was dark… I couldn't walk down the street. If I saw a plane [in the sky], I was determined it was going to crash, and I just didn't want to see it,' he said, adding that he was 'haunted' by the experience of 'being burned' and 'trying to grab my friends from a burning plane.'

But he also struck a more hopeful not now that nearly 13 years have passed since the crash.

'Now it's been so many years, it's getting easier for me. There are days where I'll wake up and never think about it,' he said.

Traumatizing: He added that he was 'haunted' by the experience of 'being burned' and 'trying to grab my friends from a burning plane'

Healing with time: But he also struck a more hopeful not now that nearly 13 years have passed since the crash

Optimistic'Now it's been so many years, it's getting easier for me. There are days where I'll wake up and never think about it,' he said.

'Survivors guilt': In May, around when his interview was published, Travis got the phrase 'Survivors guilt' tattooed on his arms

The incident has certainly been on his mind recently, as last month he got the words 'Survivors guilt' tattooed on his forearms.

Travis may have some newfound confidence thanks to his girlfriend Kourtney Kardashian, who's a noted flier and traveler.

She and the rest of the Kardashian–Jenner family regular travel across the globe on elite private jets, though she's had to stay on the ground when traveling with her musician boyfriend due to his debilitating fear.

She regularly shares the highlights from her international trips to her Poosh lifestyle site, though her trips were curtailed amid the ongoing pandemic.

The reality star doesn't appear to have any issues traveling by air, as evidenced by a 2019 Keeping Up With The Kardashians episode in which she gushed about how much she enjoyed traveling with her children now that they were getting older.

Since she's taken countless private jet rides, she may be the perfect person to accompany Travis on a short flight.

She's a pro: Kourtney likely helped give Travis renewed confidence, as she's a regular flier and traveler

Updates: The Keeping Up With The Kardashians star regularly shares the highlights of her international travel on her lifestyle website Poosh

The drummer certainly wants to get back in the air, despite how terrifying the idea might be.

'I have to,' he said in his Men's Health interview. 'I want to make the choice to try and overcome it.'

The musician added that he yearns for the normal, everyday feeling of returning home from a plane trip.

'If I do it, and the angels above help me in my travels and keep me safe, I would like to come back and [tell them], "Hey, I just flew here, and then I flew home. And everything was fine." I have to tell them, because I almost left them,' Travis said, adding, 'That's a perfect day.'

He did it: At the time, Barker said he wanted to get back in the air, despite how terrifying the idea might be. 'I have to,' he said. 'I want to make the choice to try and overcome it'

Looking up: 'If I do it, and the angels above help me in my travels and keep me safe, I would like to come back and [tell them], "Hey, I just flew here, and then I flew home. And everything was fine"
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Paris Fury has shared a heart-warming video of her newborn daughter Athena asleep in her cot as she remains in intensive care at Alder Hey Children's hospital, Liverpool.

The mum-of-six, 31, took to Instagram on Sunday to share a sweet clip of her little one, who looked adorable wrapped up in a pal pink jumper.

Panning the camera over to the hospital cot, little Athena looked peaceful and had two toys accompany her in her cot, while a pink dummy was placed nearby.

That's my girl: Paris Fury has shared a heart-warming video of her newborn daughter Athena asleep in her cot as she remains in intensive care at Alder Hey Children's hospital, Liverpool

Captioning her video, Paris, who looked radiant in a blue vest top, penned a quote from popular children's book Love You Forever by Robert Munsch, which read: 'I’ll love you forever, I’ll like you for always.

'As long as I’m living, my baby you’ll be.'

The post garnered several messages from her followers who sent their well wishes to her bundle of joy.

Peaceful: The mum-of-six, 31, took to Instagram on Sunday to share a sweet clip of her little one, who looked adorable wrapped up in a pal pink jumper

Doting: Captioning her video, Paris, who looked radiant in a blue vest top, penned a quote from popular children's book Love You Forever by Robert Munsch, which read: 'I’ll love you forever, I’ll like you for always'

It comes after Paris saw her five children for the first time in a week on Friday as they visited her in hospital while she looks after newborn daughter Athena who remains in intensive care.

She shared a sweet snap of her brood Venezuela, 10, Prince John James, eight, Prince Tyson II, four, Valencia, three, and Prince Adonis Amaziah, 16 months, with her mother who's been looking after them.

Alongside the picture, she wrote: 'Just seen my other five for the first time in a week. They are blessed with the best Granny in the world who has watched them all since I came into hospital. I love you mam.

Family: It comes after Paris saw her five children for the first time in a week on Friday as they visited her in hospital while she looks after newborn daughter Athena who remains in intensive care

'I can't wait to be home with them all together soon please God.'

She also shared an update on her daughter's progress, telling followers: 'She's doing really well and had a good 48hrs. Just getting there slowly', as she cuddled her little one.

She also shared an update on her daughter's progress, telling followers: 'She's doing really well and had a good 48hrs. Just getting there slowly', as she cuddled her little one.

Baby: She also shared an update on her daughter's progress, telling followers: 'She's doing really well and had a good 48hrs. Just getting there slowly', as she cuddled her little one

Adorable: She then showed fans a cute pink romper she had been sent for Athena with the words: 'Fighter just like my daddy' written on it

She then showed fans a cute pink romper she had been sent for Athena with the words: 'Fighter just like my daddy' written on it.

It comes after earlier on Friday it was revealed that Athena was dead for three minutes before being resuscitated by 'miracle workers' at Liverpool children's hospital.

The newborn is currently in intensive care, and while the baby is said to be 'stable', Tyson's father John revealed that things had been touch and go earlier tin the week.

'It's been a bit of a white knuckle ride, we've had a lot to deal with,' John told BT Sport.

Shocking: It comes after earlier on Friday it was revealed that Athena was dead for three minutes before being resuscitated by 'miracle workers' at Liverpool children's hospital

'But we've come out on the other side due to professionalism of Alder Hey Hospital in Liverpool, they're the best children's hospital in the country if not the world.

'They've been really magnificent, they've really saved her life because she was dead for three minutes and they brought her back, it's onwards and upwards from today.'

Earlier that day, Tyson shared an update on his newborn daughter Athena's condition, saying she has had a 'stable day' without using a breathing ventilator.

The boxer, 33, took to Instagram on Thursday to say that she was 'doing well' but is still in intensive care 'for now'.

Devoted parents: The boxer, 33, took to Instagram on Thursday to say that Athena was 'doing well' but is still in intensive care 'for now' (pictured together in May)

Alongside a picture of her in hospital he wrote: 'Update for everyone. Baby Athena is doing well & has had a stable day off ventilator, thanks to everyone for the prayers, still in ICU for now.

'Thanks to all the DRs & nurses. God bless you all.'

Meanwhile, Tyson later shared a snap of his sweet birthday card 'signed' by his newborn daughter as he marked his 33rd birthday.

The special card featured tiny footprints belonging to his baby in pink and yellow, alongside the heartwarming message which read: 'To daddy, happy birthday, I love you with all my heart Athena xxx.'

Beside on set of footprints were the words: 'Athena four days old.'

The couple revealed that Athena was born on Sunday and taken straight to the ICU afterwards but didn't give any further details.

Condition: In February Paris revealed that her daughter was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition

In February Paris revealed she was due sometime in August, but stated that she was likely to go into labour early due to an undisclosed medical condition.

Speaking on Loose Women after announcing her pregnancy, she said: 'I usually have a condition that makes the babies come a bit earlier so it will probably be the beginning of August, which is better for me, the last few weeks are terrible!'

Tyson recently revealed newborn daughter was back in intensive care just hours after she came off the ventilator following her first ICU admission.

The boxer took to Instagram on Tuesday to share a snap of his baby girl where he announced the news.

Poor baby: Tyson recently revealed newborn daughter was back in intensive care just hours after she came off the ventilator following her first ICU admission

Sad: The following morning, Paris shared a short video of her little girl, where she revealed that she has a 'big day today'

Alongside the photo of a sleeping Athena in which she's hooked up to various wires, the father-of-six, penned: 'Baby Athena is back on icu, please keep her in your prayers'

The following morning, Paris shared a short video of her little girl, where she revealed that she has a 'big day today'.

The sweet clip saw little Athena lying in her cot with what appears to be a breathing aid attached while her mother films her.

Captioning her video, Paris penned: 'My beautiful baby girl this morning. More awake now and sucking her dummy.'

She added: 'She has a big day today, please God it goes well', alluding to a possible medical procedure for the tot.

Little one: Paris previously shared the first snap of their baby daughter on Monday following the tot's first admission to intensive care which saw have a ventilator to help with her breathing

Paris previously shared the first snap of their baby daughter on Monday following the tot's first admission to intensive care which saw have a ventilator to help with her breathing.

Athena was born on August 8th, with Tyson revealing she was in intensive care as he announced the birth.

He said: 'Please can everyone pray for my baby girl who was born this morning. Athena Fury born 8/8/21.'

The birth of their baby girl comes after Paris endured a lengthy two-day labour.

Congratulations: Athena was born on August 8th, with Tyson revealing she was in intensive care as he announced the birth
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brian May has revealed that he and Anita Dobson are quitting London for good after recent flash floods wrecked their Kensington home.

The Queen guitarist, 74, and his EastEnders legend wife, 72, have decided to pack up and leave for pastures new, as he dubbed the capital too 'brutal' to bear.

Brian told how the floods were just the 'catalyst' for their departure, explaining how they grew to 'hate' living in the area and had struggled to live there for 'such a long time.'

Leaving: Brian May has revealed that he and Anita Dobson are quitting London for good after recent flash floods wrecked their Kensington home

The couple's Kensington property was devastated on July 12th this year, with the carpets and rugs, his childhood photo albums and Anita's treasured keepsakes ruined by a 'stinking sludge' following a period of extreme heavy rainfall.

Speaking to The Mirror of their decision to leave, Brian explained: 'The house is wrecked and it is heart-breaking. The funny thing is we actually hated living where we are for a long time.

'We put a lot of love and care into building the house but the surroundings have been horrible for such a long time. They have been building basements now for about eight years all around and there is constant noise, traffic and dust and pollution and rudeness. London now is brutal.'

Time to go: The Queen guitarist, 74, and his EastEnders legend wife, 72, have decided to pack up and leave for pastures new, as he dubbed the capital too 'brutal' to bear (pictured: The damage to their Kensington home with ruined photos and keepsakes)

The musician went on to say that the flood had been a 'catalyst' for their exit, adding that just 'have to leave'.

Brian also reflected on coming back to his home on the day it was ruined, detailing how he discovered his basement floor 'floating with black sewage'.

He said: 'It’s really unpleasant and we are never going to feel the same about that house again. We are not going to get it back what it was. For us it is time to quit and I am OK about that now.'

The rocker concluded that he 'never dreamed' that his basement would flood and 'did not sleep' for four days while trying to rescue to treasure possessions, photos and memorabilia from the murky water.

Struggles: Brian told how the floods were just the 'catalyst' for their departure, explaining how they grew to 'hate' living in the area and had struggled to live there for 'such a long time' (pictured in 2019)

Tough: Speaking of their decision to leave, Brian explained: 'The house is wrecked and it is heart-breaking. The funny thing is we actually hated living where we are for a long time' (pictured in 2019)

Last month the guitarist took to Instagram to detail the disaster of the flood, which he discovered upon returning to his West London property from a day at Royal Holloway University.

Brian documented this on social media, branding the mess 'disgusting' and 'heartbreaking'.

He explained that his photo albums had been at another of his homes, which had recently been under threat of forest fires - yet they fell victim to the flooding.

Decision: It’s really unpleasant and we are never going to feel the same about that house again. We are not going to get it back what it was. For us it is time to quit and I am OK about that now' (pictured in 2017)

The rock star told his 2.8 million followers that the flood was the fault of the council, approving poorly-designed basements to be built in the London suburb with 'ineffective' drainage.

He penned: 'After a nice day at The Royal Holloway College, we came back to horror in our house.

'The whole bottom floor had been inundated with a sewage overflow - which has covered our carpets, rugs and all kinds of precious things in a stinking sludge.

Shock: Last month the guitarist took to Instagram to detail the disaster of the flood, which he discovered upon returning to his West London property from a day at Royal Holloway University

Ruined: The guitarist documented this on social media, branding the mess 'disgusting' and 'heartbreaking'

Memories: Several of Brian's photos and other valuables were seen strewn over the floor

Flooding: Brian shared a snap of footprints in the sludge that covered his home

'I had rescued all my most treasured childhood photo albums and scrapbooks from my studio house because it was threatened with a forest fire some months ago.

'It's disgusting, and actually quite heartbreaking. It feels like we were have been invaded, desecrated.

'Anita had a lifetime of memorabilia on the floor of our basement - and most of it is sodden and ruined.

Aftermath: He explained that his photo albums had been at another of his homes, which had recently been under threat of forest fires - yet they have now fallen victim to the flooding

He posted: 'The Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea council was warned years ago that sinking so many deep basement extensions would obstruct the aquifers underneath our living space and render the drainage system ineffective'

Nightmare: Brian's basement sustained a considerable amount of damage

Fury! Brian took to Instagram to rant about the matter

Claims: He claimed it was the council's fault fir approving poorly-designed basements to be built in the London suburb with 'ineffective' drainage

'Where did I put it all for safety? In the basement here in Kensington. Irony. Today it turned into a sodden mess.

'I'm devastated - this stuff is only "things" - but it feels like Back To The Future when the photograph fades - feels like a lot of my past has been wiped out. I'm angry!

'Historically, for 150 years, Kensington has never flooded due to rainwater. Why did this happen? It's almost certainly the result of all the basement building that has been plaguing this area for the past 10 years.

'The Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea council was warned years ago that sinking so many deep basement extensions would obstruct the aquifers underneath our living space and render the drainage system ineffective.'

Elsewhere, property expert Kirstie Allsopp, who lives in the same area as Brian, also experienced damage and documented this on social media.

'There's been biblical rain in London, homes flooded & rain in places in our home its certainly never been before,' she said of the unseasonal July weather. 'If you're away/at work and can get someone to check your basement/terrace/flat roof/chimney/French doors please do.

'In some areas water is coming up through toilets,' she tweeted.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She regularly turns London's Marylebone into a street-side runway.

And Mollie King, 34, did not disappoint on Sunday as she made her way to BBC Broadcasting House in time to present her weekend Radio 1 show.

The blonde bombshell looked incredible in a flowing khaki maxi dress, which she accessorised with a walnut clutch.

Beauty: Mollie King showed off her bronzed pins in a summer-ready khaki maxi dress as she arrived at Broadcasting House for her BBC Radio 1 show on Sunday

Elevating her height in a pair of lace-up heels, the former The Saturdays band member flashed her bronzed pins as she strutted her way towards the building's entrance.

The Higher hitmaker had flawlessly applied her makeup, having painted her lips a bold crimson.

Mollie's sleek bleached locks swept behind her in the wind and her sun-kissed skin glowed as she stepped into the sun's rays.

Back in April 2018, the multi-talented star was announced as Matt Edmondson's co-host for a BBC Radio 1 show on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays which began in June of that year.

Stunning: She regularly turns London's Marylebone into a street-side runway

Fashion forward: The blonde bombshell looked incredible in a flowing khaki maxi dress, which she accessorised with a walnut clutch

Her additional projects include Strictly Come Dancing, where she placed fifth with AJ Pritchard.

Mollie is engaged to England cricketer Stuart Broad and the pair have recently moved in together.

The couple have been an on-off item since 2012, but have been dating steadily since the start of 2019 leading up to their engagement.

They finally reunited earlier this year after Stuart spent 10 weeks abroad on tour with the England cricket team in Sri Lanka, India.

Work it! Elevating her height in a pair of lace-up heels, the former Saturdays band member flashed her bronzed pins as she strutted her way towards the building's entrance

The couple, who spent two months apart, cosied up for a selfie with the accompanying caption: 'Can you tell I'm happy to have him home!?'

And in a recent interview with MailOnline, Mollie revealed that she hopes to reunite with fellow Saturday's members Vanessa White, Frankie Bridge, Una Healy, and Rochelle Humes, one day.

The singer was part of the five-piece girl band from 2007 to 2014, and in that time they released four studio albums, headlined four UK tours and supported mega group Girls Aloud.

The happy couple: Mollie is engaged to England cricketer Stuart Broad and the pair have recently moved in together

Asking about reforming, Mollie told MailOnline: 'I always say never say never.

'We are all enjoying doing different things, presenting, family life, Una is doing music still. I would definitely think about it.

'We came up on my Spotify shuffle the other day and I was like, 'oh I love this song so much!' It would be fun at some point!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Iris Law looked incredible as she flaunted her toned abs at the Formula E 2021 BMW i Berlin E-Prix in Germany on Sunday.

The model, 20, displayed her enviable midriff in a quirky blue plaid print dress with cut-out sections as she posed up a storm.

The dress sported silver medallion detail and was paired with snakeskin print shoes.

Wow: Iris Law looked incredible as she flaunted her toned abs at the Formula E 2021 BMW i Berlin E-Prix in Germany on Sunday

The star wore tinted shades atop her newly blonde buzzcut and sported a radiant palette of make-up.

The daughter of Jude Law and Sadie Frost accessorised with glittering jewellery.

Last month Iris looked sensational as she displayed her long slender legs in a slinky red and white summer dress on Instagram.

The model who debuted a blue buzzcut earlier this week, looked the picture of confidence as she sat on the step of a rustic building to pose for the camera.

Wow: The model, 20, displayed her enviable midriff in a quirky blue plaid print dress with cut-out sections as she posed up a storm

Blonde again: The star wore tinted shades atop her newly blonde buzzcut and sported a radiant palette of make-up

Peace: The star flashed the peace sign as she climbed into a race car

Fun: Iris posed with Formula E racing drivers Norman Nato and Edoardo Mortara

There they are: Curtis and AJ Pritchard were also in attendance

The midi dress perfectly highlighted Iris' tan and rode up a little in the warm breeze.

The daughter of Jude Law and Sadie Frost wore a blue bra beneath her dress, almost matching the shade of her newly dyed hair.

Iris gazed off into the distance from behind her shades as she munched on an apple. She accessorised with a simple gold chain necklace and matching bracelets on each wrist.

Summer ready: Last month Iris looked sensational as she displayed her long slender legs in a slinky red and white summer dress on Instagram

Summertime: The model who debuted her blue buzzcut recently looked the picture of confidence as she sat on the step of a rustic building to pose for the camera

Daydreaming: The midi dress perfectly highlighted Iris' tan and rode up a little in the warm breeze

In style: She accessorised with a simple gold chain necklace and matching bracelets on each wrist, while she wore some gold hoop earrings which glistened in the bright daylight

Iris posted a snap of herself playfully posing with her friend as they ventured out into the local town at night and a picture of her belongings packed into a old fashioned carry suitcase, with the dress she'd earlier been wearing folded neatly on top.

Earlier this week, Iris looked stunning as she captured her honed physique to social media in a rural field before uploading sultry snaps to her Instagram grid.

She wrapped a white sarong around her waist, partially covering her abstract briefs and washboard stomach.

Double trouble: Iris posted a snap of herself playfully posing with her friend as they ventured out into the local town at night

Form-fitting: Earlier this week, Iris looked stunning as she captured her honed physique to social media

New look: Iris debuted her new blue hair in an Instagram post earlier this week (left, right with her previous bleach blonde buzzcut)

It comes after the blonde beauty was seen poking fun at her new buzz cut on social media last week.

Iris shared a selfie comparing herself to bizarre snaps of Barbie dolls that had all of their hair chopped off.

Iris captioned her post: 'Buzzed,' and that was all it took to entertain her followers.

The London native debuted her buzz cut in British Vogue at the beginning of July and explained it was for her role in upcoming series Pistol where she plays Soo Catwoman.

Hilarious: The rising star entertained her followers as she compared herself to bizarre-looking Barbie dolls that had all their hair chopped off
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arabella Chi showed off her incredible physique in a bikini as she posted a racy photo to Instagram on Sunday, reminiscing on her recent sun-soaked Spanish holiday.

The former Love Island star, 30, has returned to London from Ibiza and shared the snap of herself where she donned a stringy blue and white floral bikini as she pulled a sultry pose against a white wall.

In one image she oozed confidence as she posed with her arms in the air, making sure to flaunt her enviable curves.

Wow! Arabella Chi set pulses racing as she showed off her incredible physique in a blue bikini as she reminisced on Instagram about her recent sun-soaked Spanish holiday on Sunday

Throwback: The Love Island star was taking a look back on her recent sun soaked getaway

The model's long blonde locks flowed down her back in another image, where she turned her back to the camera to show off her peachy behind.

Arabella highlighted her natural beauty by wearing subtle make up, consisting of mascara and a sweep of nude lipstick.

She seemed to be have had a relaxing time, writing the caption: 'A lil slice of heaven @atzaro_hotel'

Amazing: The model's long blonde locks flowed down her back in another image, where she turned her back to the camera to show off her peachy behind

She also took to her social media story on Sunday to post a video of her reuniting with her dog.

She kissed the pooch on the head, clearly elated to be back together after the time away.

The posts comes after Arabella and DJ Tom Zanetti seemingly confirmed their blossoming romance.

The music producer has been spotted out in Ibiza with her and he took to his Instagram story to share several cosy snaps and videos as they danced and enjoyed dinner and drinks last week.

The pair would have also spent time together filming the latest I Saw It First clothing advert which they both starred in recently.

The DJ split with Made in Chelsea star Sophie Hermann, 34, in June after six months of dating.

Sophie confirmed the news when she met up with best friend Fredrik Ferrier on the season finale of the Channel 4 show.

'We were incompatible,' she told him. 'I am disappointed with my own judgement.'

Tom and Sophie developed an unlikely romance in the Celebs Go Dating mansion earlier this year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Liberty Poole will tell the girls about Jake Cornish's declaration of love in Sunday night's episode of Love Island.

But the girls will be left unsure if the revelation is genuine, and bring this up with the 21-year-old Nando's waitress.

The conversation starts with Liberty telling the girls while they sit round the fire pit: 'You guys are going to be so proud of me. I literally went upstairs and I said how I felt and I didn’t take no s**t and I stood my ground.'

Confusion: Liberty Poole, 21, will tell the girls about Jake Cornish's, declaration of love in Sunday night's episode of Love Island, but the girls question whether it is the truth

She continues: 'He then said "You know what Lib? You make me feel ways that I didn’t feel before. You make me nervous" And then he goes "I do love you." He said those words to me and I feel so happy.'

But Chloe Burrows, 25, is left unconvinced and flags up the fact that he may just be declaring his love because it's what Jake, 24, thinks Liberty wants to hear, after they have spent a few days in a rocky patch.

Chloe says: 'You’re going to hate me. Do you not think he’s telling you what you want to hear?'

Truthful? The conversation starts with Liberty telling the girls while they sit round the fire pit: 'You guys are going to be so proud of me.' Before telling her pals of Jake saying 'I love you'

The couple have been together since day one of this year's series, and have even made it official, but Liberty had her doubts after it was revealed Jake wasn't sexually attracted to her in the movie night challenge, and continued to act icy towards her in the Villa.

In the conversation with her pals, Liberty looks round at all of them to ask: 'Is that what you all think?'

To which Faye Winter tentatively replies: 'I don’t know baby.'

Questions: Chloe Burrows, 25, flags up the fact that he may just be declaring his love because it's what he thinks Liberty wants to hear, after they have spent a few days in a rocky patch

Declaration: Friday night's Love Island episode saw Jake finally drop the L-bomb to Liberty

Not convinced: After a candid make-or-break conversation, Jake finally said those three little words four weeks after Liberty first uttered them, but viewers at home were not convinced and accused him of saying 'what she wants to hear'

Liberty seems a little confused, and seeks advice from her friends, asking them: 'Do you think I’m being an idiot?'

Chloe says: 'I don’t think he would say something if he didn’t mean it but I also think is it convenient that he said it this evening after all of this?'

News of Jake’s declaration and the girls’ feelings toward it swiftly travel around the Villa.

It isn’t long before Jake learns of the girls’ reaction has to convince them and Liberty that his feelings are genuine.

Romantic meal: Elsewhere in the Villa, the boys are set to cook up a storm for their partners

Elsewhere in the Villa, the boys are set to cook up a storm for their partners.

Teddy Soares, 26, receives a text saying: 'Boys. It’s time to cook up a storm as you serve up a couples dinner! #pastalavistababy #thecarb-dashians'

While the girls get glammed up for the evening, the boys begin preparations for a romantic three-course dinner.

Chefs for the evening: While the girls get glammed up for the evening, the boys begin preparations for a romantic three-course dinner

Funny: Liam Reardon, 21, brings over his and Millie Court's starter of asparagus. Millie, 24, asks: 'Is this an aphrodisiac?' He replies: 'Aphrodisiac? What’s that?'

The couples all look in high spirits as they enjoy their meals.

Liam Reardon, 21, brings over his and Millie Court's starter of asparagus. Millie, 24, asks: 'Is this an aphrodisiac?'

The Welsh hunk then seems confused when he replies: 'Aphrodisiac? What’s that?'

Over at Priya Gopaldas, 23, and Brett Staniland's, 27, table talk turns to previous relationships. Priya says: 'Have you ever been in love?'

Serious chat: Over at Priya Gopaldas, 23, and Brett Staniland's, 27, table talk turns to previous relationships. Priya says: 'Have you ever been in love?'

Cheeky: When it is time for the main course, Chloe asks Toby: 'I love garlic bread! Do you want to do some snogging after garlic bread?'

Brett says: 'No. I’ve never said ‘I love you’ to anyone. Do you feel like there is something wrong with me now?'

Priya jokes: 'Yes, I feel like you’re a bit of a robot!'

When it is time for the main course, Chloe asks Toby Aromolaran: 'I love garlic bread! Do you want to do some snogging after garlic bread?'

Coupled up: Faye appears less than impressed with tonight’s main course. Faye says: 'I hate pasta!' To which Teddy says: 'What if I feed it to you?'

Cute: The Islanders seemin high spirits as Liberty fed her boyfriend Jake some food

Toby, 22, jokingly replies to her cheeky remark: 'I don’t mind'

But Faye appears less than impressed with tonight’s main course. Faye says: 'I hate pasta!' To which Teddy replies: 'What if I feed it to you?'

Meanwhile, Liberty and Jake seem in good spirits as she feeds him a forkful of her food.

Just when the couples were about to enjoy their dessert, Toby receives a text which reads: 'Islanders. Tonight each couple must vote for the two couples who they think are the least compatible.

Drama: Just when the couple were about to enjoy their dessert, Toby receives a text

'Those who receive the most votes risk being dumped from the island.

'You must now decide in your couples who you are going to choose and submit your decision by text. You must not discuss your decision with anyone else. #judgementday #gowithyourgut'

The couples begin their difficult deliberations and it isn’t long before it’s time for them to submit their decision via text.

LOVE ISLAND, SUNDAY NIGHT AT 9PM ON ITV2 AND ITV HUB

Oh no: The text reads: 'Islanders. Tonight each couple must vote for the two couples who they think are the least compatible.' The couples begin their difficult deliberations and it isn’t long before it’s time for them to submit their decision via text

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She recently jetted off to Juicy Oasis retreat in Portugal to complete a seven day juice, yoga and fitness programme.

And Saira Khan, 51, took to Instagram on Sunday to reveal that she is now able to fit into a beautiful floral jumpsuit that she had not been able to zip up back in January.

Sharing before and after photos, the Loose Women star showed off the results of her recent weight loss, admitting that she had hoped to have been able to fit into the stylish piece by March, however didn't achieve the goal until August.

Impressive: Saira Khan, 51, took to Instagram on Sunday to reveal that she is now able to fit into a beautiful floral jumpsuit that she had not been able to zip up back in January

In the first trio of images Saira could be seen standing in her bedroom with the chic piece unzipped, and in the second batch fit comfortably into her jumpsuit.

The doting mother explained in her caption: 'In January I did a little video about how I could not zip up this jumpsuit. I vowed myself I would zip it up in 3 months.

'Well it took me 8 months to achieve the goal. I wanted to share this to say that getting healthier and fitter takes time and you have to be patient with yourself.

'Throughout those 8 months I've had to live a normal life, which means stress, lack of sleep, eating too much and not drinking enough water.'

Saira wrote: 'It took me 8 months to achieve the goal. I wanted to share this to say that getting healthier and fitter takes time and you have to be patient with yourself'

She continued: 'The @thefast800_official has helped me enormously to understand the foods which nourish my body and @juicemasterretreats is a place I have used to reset, relax, de stress and just be at one with myself.

'The results as you can see are obvious, healthier, happier, trimmer, and more relaxed me.

'You will not be able to lose fat by just eating the right foods, you also have to relax, sleep and drink water.'

Saira concluded: 'Finally, just because you didn't reach your goal in the time you said you would, does not make you a failure, just keep going and you will succeed.

'I never weigh myself. I do not use scales as a measure of my health. I used how I feel about myself and I use my waist as a good measure.

'The key thing is whatever goal you are trying to achieve, start it with a smile and you will get far.' [sic]

Last month Saira, who made her name on Lord Sugar's The Apprentice, stayed at the Juice Masters Retreat, which operates from Portugal, Turkey and Algarve locations and can cost £2300 for a week's stay.

Its founder Jason Vale, who has sold six million books, promises for 'an environment that would truly nourish mind, body and spirit, and take people on a journey that would inspire and relax in equal measures'.

While there, Saira kept her followers updated with her progress, sharing a sensational snap of herself in a neon green and pink bikini while showcasing her impressive washboard abs.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Emily Atack turned heads in Manchester City Centre as she made her way to a friend's wedding in a bright red maxi dress on Saturday.

Standing out from the crowd in the drape-neck number, the 31-year-old clutched a red velour purse in her left hand along with her phone in her right.

From her earlobes swung a pair of oversized red-and-orange floral earrings and her makeup had been applied flawlessly.

Eyepopping: Emily Atack was a vision in a red drape-neck maxi dress and neon orange heels as she attended a friend's wedding in Manchester on Saturday

The Inbetweeners star wore her sandy tresses in a middle parting, which she had tied behind her head, and flashed her bronzed arms in the unmissable outfit.

Emily elevated her height in a pair of neon orange heels and wore a pair of bangles on her wrist.

On the very same day, the former I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here contestant took to Instagram to share a sultry mirror selfie in her ensemble.

Outdoing the bride? Standing out from the crowd in the drape-neck dress, the 31-year-old clutched a red velour purse in her left hand along with her phone in her right

Captioning her shot, 'Well Red,' followed by a lips emoji, Emily swiped her hand over her right hip and stuck out her chin to show off her dark peach painted lips.

Giving her followers a glimpse into the big day via her Stories, the former Dancing on Ice contestant appeared to be in good spirits as she greeted her fellow guests with beaming smiles.

Puckering up to her gal pals for selfies and posing for group shots, Emily seemed to be having a whale of a time - and she made sure her fans knew of it too!

Looking good: On the very same day, the former I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here contestant took to Instagram to share a sultry mirror selfie in her ensemble

Pals: Giving her followers a glimpse into the big day via her Stories, the former Dancing on Ice contestant appeared to be in good spirits as she greeted her fellow guests with beaming smiles

Radiant: Puckering up to her gal pals for selfies and posing for group shots, Emily seemed to be having a whale of a time - and she made sure her fans knew of it too!

The bride's big day was certainly held at an interesting location as the Luton-born star was seen hanging out with a group of friends inside an empty swimming pool, of all places.

It comes a week after the Celebrity Juice team captain appeared to be resurrecting her part as 'Charlotte Big Jugs' in The Inbetweeners.

Reprising her role 13 years on, Emily dressed as a schoolgirl, filming what appears to be a skit for ITV2's The Emily Atack Sketch Show.

Quirky: The bride's big day was certainly held at an interesting location as the Luton-born star was seen hanging out with a group of friends inside an empty swimming pool, of all places

In a clip shared to Instagram while on a break, she joked that she looked like she was 45-years-old in the white shirt and striped tie.

Her blonde locks in pigtails, Emily then used a device to inflate her bust - truly bringing her Inbetweeners character back to life.

She found it hilarious, giggling with those around her at the gag.

'Charlotte Big Jugs having a break down 13 years on!' she joked in the caption.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Abbie Quinnen looked radiant as she wore a green patterned dress for the premiere of the film Extinct in London at Leicester Square's Vue cinema.

The dance student, 24, who is the girlfriend of Strictly Come Dancing star AJ Pritchard, was on auntie duties on Sunday as she took her niece and nephew to the VIP screening.

She looked stylish in the green floaty number, which she paired with chic white cowboy boots.

Amazing: Abbie Quinnen, 24, looked radiant as she wore a green patterned dress for the premiere of the film Extinct in London at Leicester Square's Vue cinema.

Her long bright blonde locks looked stunning as they tumbled over her shoulders in soft waves.

Abbie accessorised with a small blue bag which she slung over her shoulder.

The film, Extinct, is an animation about two extinct animals who find themselves transported from 1835 to modern day Shanghai.

Stunning: The dance student looked stylish in the green floaty number, which she paired with chic white cowboy boots.

Sweet: Abbie was on auntie duties on Sunday as she took her niece and nephew to the VIP screening

Pitch Perfect star Adam Devine will voice the character of Ed and Crazy Ex Girlfriend actress Rachel Bloom will star as Op.

Other actors in the flick include The Hangover's Ken Jeong and Schitt's Creek's Katherine O'Hara.

The film will be released in the United Kingdom on August 20th.

The outing comes after AJ confirmed last month that he and Abbie are 'closer than ever', six months after she suffered horrific burns in a freak accident

VIP screening: The film, Extinct, is an animation about two extinct animals who find themselves transported from 1835 to modern day Shanghai starring Adam Devine and Rachel Bloom

The twinkle-toed star confessed their relationship has had 'ups and down' since her terrifying ordeal, but their romance is 'going the right way'.

Abbie required three skin grafts after she was burned while attempting to turn a glass into a vase for a TikTok video, and has since had to wear a compression vest to help heal her scars.

Speaking to the Sunday Mirror in July, AJ said: 'It has been hard, but it has brought us closer together.

'She is doing good on the journey. I hate that word but it is a journey.

'Ups and downs and lefts and rights but all going the right way at the end of the day. That is all that matters.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They recently enjoyed a sun-soaked family getaway.

And Kate Ferdinand was seemingly missing the sunshine on Sunday, when she shared a series of fun family snaps of her and her husband Rio's recent getaway, captioning her post: 'Reminiscing.'

Posting ten throwback photos of their summer travels on Instagram, Kate, 30, wowed in a series of bikinis and could be seen enjoying quality time with her eight-month-old son Cree as well as her step children.

Throwback: Kate Ferdinand, 30, was seemingly missing the sunshine on Sunday, when she shared a series of fun family snaps of her and her husband Rio's recent getaway

Sweet: A particularly sweet photo saw footballer Rio, 42, enjoying some quality time with little Cree at the seaside

Kate is doting stepmother to 42-year-old Rio's three children, Lorenz, 14, Tate, 12, and Tia, nine.

In the first snap, a radiant Kate worked her best angles while lapping up the sunshine on a beautiful beach wearing a bright blue bikini.

In the second, the blonde beauty enjoyed a game of cards while sitting on a brown beach towel and in the third, Kate could be seen jumping off of a concrete pier into the sea.

Another image showed Kate enjoying a walk in the sunshine with Cree, whose pram was protected from the sun beneath a black umbrella.

Cards: In one photo, Kate enjoyed a game of cards while sitting on a brown beach towel

Heart-melting: Kate also posted a heart-melting photo of Cree sitting between her legs

In her fifth photo, Kate enjoyed another day at the beach, this time slipping into a chic nude-hued bikini.

A particularly sweet sixth photo saw footballer Rio enjoying some quality time with little Cree at the seaside, while Kate cuddled up to a friend's child in a seventh sunny snap.

Kate also posted a heart-melting photo of Cree sitting between her legs alongside a clip of herself playing in a swimming pool and a final snap in which she could be seen cuddled up to who appears to be Rio's daughter Tia.

The star's post comes three days after she shared a candid make-up free photo in which her facial pigmentation could be seen.

Taking to Instagram on Thursday, the blonde beauty told her followers: 'Me without make-up,' as she posted the image, and admitted: 'I always feel so insecure about it & it really does get me down, I try to cover it at all costs.'

Chic: In her fifth photo, Kate enjoyed another day at the beach, this time slipping into a chic nude-hued bikini

Taking the plunge: In one clip shared by Kate she could be seen jumping off of a concrete pier into the sea

Sunny walk: Another image showed Kate enjoying a walk in the sunshine with Cree, whose pram was protected from the sun beneath a black umbrella

Beneath the bare-faced photograph, Kate spoke truthfully about 'trying my best to love myself as I am' and shared: 'As soon as the sun comes out my face looks like a patchwork.'

Earlier this year, Kate revealed in an interview with The Sun that she suffers from melasma, a patchy skin pigmentation.

Speaking to the paper in March, Kate was asked what her 'beauty splurges' were, to which she replied: 'All my skincare products are expensive, but I have suffered from melasma [patchy pigmentation] so I really do take care of my skin.'

The British Skin Foundation explains melasma as 'a common skin condition of adults in which brown or greyish patches of pigmentation (colour) develop, usually on the face.'

Pool fun: Kate also shared a clip of herself playing in a swimming pool as the sun beat down from above

Friends: Kate cuddled up to a friend's child in a seventh sunny snap

Family: In a final snap, Kate could be seen cuddled up to who appears to be Rio's daughter Tia

The description continues: 'It is more common in women, particularly during pregnancy (when up to 50% of women may be affected). Sometimes men may also be affected. Melasma is more common in people of colour and those who tan very quickly but can occur to anyone.'

The charity's information page concludes: 'Melasma usually becomes more noticeable in the summer and improves during the winter months.

'It is not an infection; therefore, it is not contagious, and it is not due to an allergy. It is not cancerous and will not develop into skin cancer.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Anne-Marie looked glamorous as she arrived at the homecoming event at The SSE Wembley Arena in London on Sunday.

The singer, 31, wore a white tea dress with puffy sleeves for the celebratory affair, hosted by the National Lottery, where is set to perform later in the evening.

The chic star paired her dress with Prads shoes as she posed with Team GB gymnasts Alice Kinsella, Jennifer Gadirova, Jessica Gadirova and Amelie Morgan, who won the bronze team medal.

Stylish: Anne-Marie, 30, looked glamorous as she arrived at the homecoming event at The SSE Wembley Arena in London on Sunday

The 2002 hit maker looked sleek as she slicked back her candy pink hair into a low up-do, as she posed with 27-year-old weightlifter Emily Jade Campbell.

The singer wore a quirky eye make up look of diamante and black winged liner, and she complemented the statement look with a slick of nude lipstick.

By way of accessories, she kept it simple by wearing multiple hoops in her ears, and a gold chain with a coin pendant hanging on it.

Chic: The singer posed with Team GB gymnasts Alice Kinsella, Jennifer Gadirova, Jessica Gadirova and Amelie Morgan, who won the bronze team medal

The minidress showed off her toned pins, and revealed a tattoo the singer has on her left knee which reads: 'Confidence,' in cursive lettering.

Anne-Marie is set to stun audiences with a fully immersive performance in collaboration with the English National Ballet.

She is amongst many artists to perform at the event, including Rag'n'bone Man, Nile Rodgers, Laura Mvula, and Yungblud who will perform alongside the best of Britain's dance and theatre artists.

Yungblud will sing David Bowie's iconic hit anthem Heroes alongside a dance circus performance from Motionhouse.

Ivor Novello winner Laura Mvula will pair up with the esteemed contemporary dance company Rambert to perform a solo set.

Cute: She wore a white tea dress with puffy sleeves for the celebratory affair where is set to perform at the star-studded event later in the evening

Gorgeous: The 2002 hit maker looked sleek as she slicked back her candy pink hair into a low up-do as she posed with weightlifter Emily Jade Campbell, 27

Performer: The star dazzled the audience as she sang her hit tunes

Going for it: Anne-Marie beamed a smile while singing with snaps from the games behind her

The moving 90 minute concert to welcome home Team GB athletes will be hosted by Radio One presenters Greg James and Clara Amfo and also feature music from Bastille and Nile Rodgers with his band Chic.

KSI is also set to perform at the event, and he showed off his edgy style on the red carpet wearing a baby pink silk shirt and a black combat trousers

Singer Griff was also in attendance wearing the cardigan Tom Daley knitted poolside, paired with a yellow slip dress with her hair slicked back into a bubble pony tail

Speaking ahead of the event, Greg James said: 'As always with the Olympics, I've become an expert in events I only think about every four years.

'I can't wait to celebrate our extraordinary Team GB athletes and be in front of an actual crowd again.

'It's been a long time coming – it's going to be a brilliant night. Anyway, must go, I'm off to practice shot put,' he joked.

What a set up! An impressive floral display surrounded the stunning singer

Memorable: Anne-Marie was illuminated by blue lights

Looking good: She slicked her pink locks back into a sleek ponytail

Looking good: The singer wore a quirky eye make up look of diamante and black winged liner, and she the statement look with a sweep of nude lipstick

Showstopper: Anne-Marie is set to stun audiences with a fully immersive performance in collaboration with the English National Ballet

Co-host Clara Amfo gushed of the much-loved Team GB athletes: 'It would be understatement to say that the road to Tokyo 2020 has not been easy for Team GB but their dedication and passion to the sports they love has been nothing short of inspiring!

'I am so honoured to be hosting Team GB Homecoming Concert with Greg, on what promises to be a brilliant show full of celebration and love!

'Every single athlete deserves the very best homecoming and what better place than Wembley with these world class artists!'

The celebration will re-unite Team GB with their friends, family and fans for the first time since Tokyo 2020, which closed with an emotional ceremony on Sunday.

Team GB finished the Games with the same number of medals as at London 2012 but were beaten by the USA, China and Japan for the top spots.

Good company: She is amongst many artists set to perform at the event, including Rag'n'bone Man, Nile Rodgers, Laura Mvula, and Yungblud who will perform alongside the best of Britain's dance and theatre artists.

Fashion forward: KSI is also set to perform at the event, and he showed off his edgy style wearing a baby pink silk shirt and a black combat trousers

Jason Kenny's record breaking gold medal moved GB up to 64 medals on Sunday, while Lauren Price victory in the middleweight final allowed them to replicate history.

As a result, Team GB finished fourth in the Tokyo medals table with 22 gold, 21 silver and 22 bronze medals for a total of 65.

It made Tokyo their second-most successful Olympics overseas after the contingent won 67 medals in the Rio de Janeiro Games five years ago.

Looking good! Singer Griff was also in attendance wearing the cardigan Tom Daley knitted poolside, paired with a yellow slip dress with her hair slicked back into a bubble pony tail

Talent: Gold medal winning diver Tom Daley, 27, was all smiles as he posed at the homecoming event. Tom's knitting went viral on Tik Tok, Twitter and Instagram throughout the games

Pride: Athletes arrived at the event wearing their Team GB kit including gymnast Joe Fraser, 22

Medal: Kayaker Liam Heath, 36, showed up at the event with his bronze medal

Britain's chef de mission Mark England hailed the team's achievement as the greatest in their Olympic history, saying: 'Following Beijing we had no idea that British athletes would deliver 65 medals in London.

'We knew we were in great shape for Rio but it had never been done before, matching and then surpassing London's number of medals.

'I just think that finishing this Games with two gold medals, and for this team to deliver 65 medals, is absolutely extraordinary.

Team: Cyclist Matt Walls, 33, was in attendance

Medal winner: Gymnast Bryony Page, 30, wore her bronze and silver medals with pride

Amazing: Taekwondoin, Bradly Sinden, 22, wore his silver medal

'Not only has the team made history but it has probably made history on the back of the most complex and most challenging and difficult environment that we will face certainly in my lifetime.

'It has been against all the odds and I think it is the greatest achievement in British Olympic history. It has been the miracle of Tokyo and it has been wonderful to be here.'

Team GB looked in high spirits as they arrived for the event wearing their kit, and some wore their medals.

Good times: Swimmer Tom Dean, 21, looked proud as he posed for the camera

Prize winner: The cyclist Ryan Owens, 25, wore his silver medal for the star studded event

Proud: 26-year-old Jack Laugher wore his bronze medal round his neck

Medallist: Cyclist Josie Knight, 24, arrived at the event

Team: Gymnasts, Jessica Gadirova, 16, Alice Kinsella, 20, Amelie Morgan, 18 and Jennifer Gadirova, also 16, posed for a group shot at the affair

Power couple: Cyclists, Laura Kenny, 29, and Jason Kenny, 33, were in attendance

Happy: Gold medal winning gymnast Max Whitlock, 28, wore red white and blue with pride at the event

Amazing: Rower Helen Glover, 35, arrived at the event in her GB kit

Medallist: BMX Rider, Declan Brooks, 25, wore his bronze medal at the event
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Things are set to get tense once again in the Love Island villa as the islanders will be tasked with voting for the least compatible couple.

Spoilers for Sunday night's show reveal that the group's romantic dinners will be abruptly interrupted by a text which asked them to vote for the couples who they think are the least compatible.

And in a brutal twist, the islanders with the most amount of votes will be at risk of being dumped from the villa just a week before the grand final on August 23rd.

Drama incoming: Things are set to get tense once again in the Love Island villa as the islanders will be tasked with voting for the least compatible couple

Sunday's episode will see the boys show off their culinary skills as they rustle up a three-course dinner for the girls.

But things turn slightly sour during dessert when Toby receives a text which reads: 'Islanders. Tonight each couple must vote for the two couples who they think are the least compatible.

'Those who receive the most votes risk being dumped from the island.'

The message continues: 'You must now decide in your couples who you are going to choose and submit your decision by text.

Decision: Spoilers for Sunday night's show reveal that the group's romantic dinners will be abruptly interrupted by a text which asked them to vote for the couples who they think are the least compatible (pictured last week)

'You must not discuss your decision with anyone else. #judgementday #gowithyourgut.'

Elsewhere during Sunday's episode, Liberty will tell the girls about Jake's declaration of love, but the girls will be left unsure if the revelation is genuine, and bring this up with the bombshell Nando's waitress.

The conversation starts with Liberty telling the girls while they sit round the fire pit: 'You guys are going to be so proud of me. I literally went upstairs and I said how I felt and I didn't take no s**t and I stood my ground.'

So close: In a brutal twist, the islanders with the most amount of votes will be at risk of being dumped from the villa just a week before the grand final on August 23rd

Uh oh: Things turn slightly sour during dessert when Toby receives a text which reads: 'Islanders. Tonight each couple must vote for the two couples who they think are the least compatible.

She continues: 'He then said ''You know what Lib? You make me feel ways that I didn't feel before. You make me nervous'' And then he goes ''I do love you.'' He said those words to me and I feel so happy.'

But Chloe is left unconvinced and flags up the fact that he may just be declaring his love because it's what Jake thinks Liberty wants to hear, after they have spent a few days in a rocky patch.

Chloe says: 'You're going to hate me. Do you not think he's telling you what you want to hear?'

Shock vote: 'Those who receive the most votes risk being dumped from the island' (pictured last week)

The couple have been together since day one of this year's series, and have even made it official, but Liberty had her doubts after it was revealed Jake wasn't sexually attracted to her in the movie night challenge, and continued to act icy towards her in the Villa.

In the conversation with her pals, Liberty looks round at all of them to ask: 'Is that what you all think?'

To which Faye tentatively replies: 'I don't know baby.'

Unsure: Elsewhere during Sunday's episode, Liberty will tell the girls about Jake's declaration of love, but the girls will be left unsure if the revelation is genuine

Liberty seems a little confused, and seeks advice from her friends, asking them: 'Do you think I'm being an idiot?'

Chloe says: 'I don't think he would say something if he didn't mean it but I also think is it convenient that he said it this evening after all of this?'

News of Jake's declaration and the girls' feelings toward it swiftly travel around the Villa.

It isn't long before Jake learns of the girls' reaction has to convince them and Liberty that his feelings are genuine.

Love Island continues Sunday at 9pm on ITV and ITV Hub.

Concerns: Chloe is left unconvinced and flags up the fact that he may just be declaring his love because it's what Jake thinks Liberty wants to hear

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gordon Ramsay was every inch the doting dad as he enjoyed a family day with wife Tana and son Oscar, two, in Rock, Cornwall on Saturday.

The chef, 54, lovingly carried his son on his shoulders as he walked along with Tana, 46, by his side.

Gordon wore a grey t-shirt and shorts, paired with trainers and a baseball cap.

Banter: Gordon Ramsay was every inch the doting dad as he enjoyed a family day with wife Tana and son Oscar, two, in Rock, Cornwall on Saturday

Tana showcased her enviable legs in black shorts and a matching vest top, while little Oscar wore a black outfit.

The family looked to be having a great day as they paddled in the sea and built sandcastles.

Little Oscar was also seen having a paddle with his doting mum Tana before Gordon jokingly poked Tana with a plastic lobster.

Paddle: Tana showed off her fantastic figure as she took Oscar for a paddle

Family: Gordon and Tana looked relaxed as they headed to the beach with Oscar

Fun: Gordon wore a grey t-shirt and shorts, paired with trainers and a baseball cap

Beach day: Tana showcased her enviable legs in black shorts and a matching vest top, while little Oscar wore a black outfit

Last year the TV personality angered locals after relocating his family to their second home during the outbreak as the Government urged Britons not to travel from hotspots to the countryside.

Gordon moved into a beachside £4.4 million mansion in the village of Rock in Cornwall as he decided to escape from London at the start of the pandemic.

The outing comes as Tana looked stunning as she slipped back into her wedding dress 25 years after the big day in a new Instagram post.

She posted a video telling her followers that she can still fit into her wedding dress '25 years and five pregnancies later.'

Chat: Little Oscar was the spitting image of his father as he walked along

Snap: Gordon took a fun pic of his son digging a hole in the sand

Cute: Tana playfully flipped her son around in the water as they enjoyed the day

Scenic: Gordon took in the stunning views as he watched Oscar

In the video, she can be seen looking very happy as she is twirling around and laughing while looking at the camera.

The cookery book writer captioned the video: 'Clearing out our home and unearthed my wedding dress- 25 years and 5 pregnancies later and happy to say it still fits #mamasstillgotit @gordongram'

The Hell's Kitchen star, 54, was clearly lovestruck with his wife and commented: 'Omfg @tanaramsay' with a fire emoji.

The couple have raised their brood together which also includes Megan, 23, twins Jack and Holly, 21, and Matilda, 19.

Go for it: The star also played ball games with his beloved pet

One for the album: Gordon took a picture of Tana and Oscar in the surf

Yay: Gordon swung his son into the air as he enjoyed the day

Family: The pair looked in great spirits as they spent time with Oscar

Family: Gordon and Tana were enjoying a break from their hectic schedules

Smile: Oscar looked adorable as he laughed while Gordon swung him around
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lucy Watson's followers were in for a treat on Sunday as the reality star took to Instagram to share a peachy shot of herself while holidaying in Greece.

Sweeping her way through an idyllic sea cove, the 30-year-old set pulses racing as she showcased her toned bottom in a skimpy white bikini.

The former Made in Chelsea star swam her way through the turquoise sea, allowing her damp chocolate tresses to fall over her bronzed back in natural waves.

Hot stuff: Lucy Watson set pulses racing as she showcased her toned bottom on Sunday in a skimpy white bikini while taking a morning dip in the idyllic Greek sea

Cool splash: Lucy went for a morning dip in the paradisaical sea cove

In the caption, the pub conglomerate heiress wrote: 'morning dip.'

Joining her on the sun-soaked holiday is her fiancé James Dunmore, 32, who she first met on the E4 set of Made In Chelsea in 2015.

Lucy spent four years alongside her fellow Sloane Rangers on the hit show before deciding to start her own vegan restaurant Tell Your Friends, the jewellery line Creature and a series of cookbooks.

Career change: Lucy spent four years on Made in Chelsea before deciding to start her own vegan restaurant Tell Your Friends, the jewellery line Creature and a series of cookbooks

She became engaged to James in September last year after he popped the question during a romantic getaway in Greece.

Divulging into the details of how her beau proposed, the influencer told her Instagram followers last December that a lot of planning had gone into the gesture.

Lucy explained: 'He got the hotel we were staying in to send me a letter saying we were going on a free yacht trip (awkwardly I wasn't that surprised). He had booked the boat and planned everything.

'The boat was stunning and I was trying to get content for the hotel. There was a full vegan meal and champagne and we went on a crazy beautiful tour of some private islands. Some of the prettiest scenes I've ever witnessed.

'We went to take a photo together and there he was on one knee. I was literally in shock, my heart didn't beat for like 3 seconds.

'We then spent the day on the boat and had the best time with another couple we're friends with, watched the sun go down. It was perfect.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They take on the roles of straight-faced police officers in the hard-hitting series Line of Duty.

But Martin Compston, 37, Vicky McClure, 38, and Adrian Dunbar, 63, looked worlds away from their on-screen characters on Friday night as they hit the streets of London for a boozy night out.

Taking to his Instagram Story to document the catch-up, Martin feverishly laid out his plans.

Friends: Line of Duty's Martin Compston joined his co-stars Vicky McClure and Adrian Dunbar as they hit London for boozy night out on Friday... after admitting he almost rejected his role in the hit series

The excited Scotsman said: 'I'm off to meet some friends I haven't seen in a wee while.

'We haven't seen each other in a couple of months.

He went to ask his 3,000-strong audience, 'How are we all?'

All the meanwhile, his followers were commenting, 'He's already p*****,' and 'Don't get too p*****', followed by a string of laughing emojis.

Martin was soon met with a pint and a hug by his pals at Highgate's The Prince of Wales where the actors teamed up for a group hug while loudly shrieking.

'Hello,' a waving Vicky could be heard saying before the camera was shoved towards her face, along with Adrian's.

In character: They take on the roles of straight-faced police officers in the hard-hitting series Line of Duty

We can only imagine what became of the gang following the tipsy beginning to their night.

It comes as Martin told The Telegraph that he gets 'the fear' when he thinks about almost rejecting his role in the RTA winning series.

Best known for his portrayal of DI Steve Arnott in the BBC crime drama, the Greenock-born star was offered the part at the same time he was cast in The Wee Man, which he'd been desperate to feature in.

And Martin will always be thankful to his agent for his 'wizardry' in making the schedule fit so he could do both, as he'd told his representative to turn down Line of Duty if there was a clash.

Peace out: Taking to Instagram to document the catch-up, Martin excitedly laid out his plans

Reunion: Martin was soon met with a pint and a hug by his pals at Highgate's The Prince of Wales where the actors teamed up for a group hug while loudly shrieking

He said: 'Luckily my agent managed some wizardry because, God, if I'd turned down Steve Arnott… that would have been rough… I get the fear now and again thinking how close I was to not doing it.'

While it has yet to be confirmed if there will be a seventh series of the blockbuster show, Martin expects his character will go through some sort of 'torture' again if there is.

He joked of showrunner Jed Mercurio: '[He] loves torturing Steve slash me… Every year I say to him, "What's next? Am I getting framed for murder or am I being thrown over the stairs?"'

The last series featured a joke about Martin and Stephen Graham's heights, branding them 'short a****' but the actor admitted Jed initially cut the jibe from the intended episode because he thought he was 'p***** off'.

Fun-filled: We can only imagine what became of the gang following the tipsy beginning to their night

Tipsy? 'Hello,' a waving Vicky could be heard saying before the camera was shoved towards her face

However, Martin insisted that it made him laugh.

Even if there isn't another series, Martin knows he, Jed, and co-stars Vicky McClure and Adrian Dunbar will be 'pals for life'.

He added: '[Adrian taught me] life begins at 60. He's got a zest for life – he's infectious to be around. [Vicky is one] of my best mates, somebody who I go to for advice, we speak probably every other day.'

The ending of season six was criticised by many disappointed fans and Martin believes people are 'more than entitled' to speak out about feeling underwhelmed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has received rave reviews for her performance in 2:22 A Ghost Story.

And Lily Allen made another stylish departure from London's Noël Coward Theatre on Saturday, this time with her husband David Harbour in tow.

Holding hands as they strolled though the capital, Lily, 36, wowed in a floaty polka dot dress while Stranger Things star David, 46, cut a dapper figure in black trousers and a dark-wash denim jacket.

Happy couple: Lily Allen, 36, made another stylish departure from London's Noël Coward Theatre on Saturday, this time with her husband David Harbour, 46, in tow

The duo headed to upmarket fish restaurant J Sheekey for a spot of dinner.

Doting mother Lily teamed her plunging gown with a chic pair of black, open-toe sandals and wore her hair swept up.

David layered a crisp white T-shirt beneath his jacket and covered his nose and mouth with a face mask.

He kept the evening chill at bay beneath a navy beanie.

Wow: Holding hands as they strolled though the capital, Lily wowed in a floaty polka dot dress while David looked dapper in black

It comes days after David jokingly sent Lily 'bad luck' flowers.

Taking to Instagram on Thursday following her performance in front of gushing theatre reviewers, Lily shared a note from David who remarked that he hoped she wasn't 'reviewed well' as he'll be 'miserable.'

Alongside a pretty bunch of flowers, he penned a message which read: 'My ambitious wife, these are bad luck flowers 'cause if you get reviewed well in this play, you get all kinds of awards and I will be miserable.'

Oh dear! Lily's husband jokingly sent her 'bad luck' flowers ahead of her West End debut in 2:22 A Ghost Story as he claimed he'd be 'miserable' if she was reviewed well (pictured in 2020)

Funny: Lily shared a note from her Stranger Things star beau who remarked that he hoped she wasn't 'reviewed well' as he'll be 'miserable'

Stage star: The singer made her West End debut in 2:22 A Ghost Story earlier this month before impressing critics during Wednesday's press night (pictured on stage on August 5)

The humorous actor signed off with: 'Your loving husband'.

Highlighting the fact that she had in fact received great reviews for her performance, Lily hilariously captioned her post: 'sad day for @dkharbour.'

Lily's production, which opened at Noel Coward Theatre on August 3, received high praise from critics who praised the 'macabre playfulness' of the production and Allen's stellar stage presence.

Lily plays the character Jenny in the supernatural thriller about four friends caught up in a night of high tension.

She is joined on stage by former EastEnders star Jake Wood, City Of Angels actor Hadley Fraser and Julia Chan of Silent House.

The play follows Jenny, who believes her new home is haunted but her husband Sam (Fraser) remains sceptical.

They argue with their first dinner guests, old friend Lauren (Chan) and new partner Ben (Wood) and decide to stay awake until 2.22am to discover the truth.

As well as recent praise from critics, Lily already received glowing reviews from social media following her debut performance earlier this month.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Demi Lovato showed off their quirky sense of style as they stepped out with a mystery woman at Craig's in West Hollywood on Saturday.

The singer, 28, looked stunning in a grey-blue blazer and baggy black satin trousers as they exited the establishment.

They covered their raven locks with a black satin cap, and accessorised further with chunky silver hoops.

Stylish: Demi Lovato, 28, showed off their quirky sense of style as they stepped out with a mystery woman at Craig's in West Hollywood on Saturday

Demi held onto one of their entourage as they sported a very glamorous make up look, wearing fake eyelashes and dark winged eyeshadow, paired with nude lipstick.

Their female companion looked equally as stunning as Demi in a busty floral maxi dress which boasted a thigh skimming slit.

The Heart Attack hitmaker opted for edgy studded boots with a chunky sole for the outing, while their friend chose nude coloured heeled sandals.

Edgy style: The singer looked stunning in a grey-blue blazer and baggy black satin trousers as they exited the establishment

Friends: Their female companion looked equally as stunning in a busty floral maxi dress which had a thigh skimming slit

The pair of them later stepped into a car, where they seemed to be in high spirits as they giggled in the backseat.

The outing comes after a sit-down interview at YouTube's virtual Pride celebration in June of this year, the star said officially changing their pronouns to they/them and has been 'so rewarding.'

Lovato revealed that they were identifying as non-binary on their with Demi Lovato podcast 4D earlier this year.

Good times: The pair of them later stepped into a car, where they seemed to be in high spirits as they giggled in the backseat

'Every day we wake up, we are given another opportunity and chance to be who we want and wish to be,' Demi said on Instagram in detailing the news.

'I've spent the majority of my life growing in front of all of you … you've seen the good, the bad, and everything in between. Not only has my life been a journey for myself, I was also living for those on the other side of the cameras.

'Today is a day I'm so happy to share more of my life with you all - I am proud to let you know that I identify as non-binary and will officially be changing my pronouns to they/them moving forward.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ed Sheeran has admitted that his London restaurant Bertie Blossoms has been struggling to survive amid the coronavirus pandemic.

The pop star, 30, who is worth an estimated £220million, told how it's been 'very difficult' to keep his eatery in upmarket Notting Hill open following its launch just two months before the first Covid-19 lockdown hit in March last year.

Ed explained how the restaurant has had a 'rocky start' and unless you're a successful restaurateur like celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay, it's tough to survive.

Business woes Ed Sheeran has admitted that his London restaurant Bertie Blossoms has been struggling to survive amid the coronavirus pandemic

The Shape Of You hitmaker launched the business venture with manager, Stuart Camp, with the West London eatery said to be named after both their wives – Ed’s wife Cherry Seaborn and Stuart’s spouse Liberty Shaw.

But the restaurant has struggled after being forced to close just months after opening due to the pandemic, with Bertie Blossoms evening offering half price white wine on Deliveroo to lure in the punters during lockdown.

Speaking on Jessie Ware’s Table Manners podcast, Ed said: 'If you’re looking to make a small fortune in the food industry you should start with a large fortune.

'It’s one of these things where, unless you’re Jamie Oliver or Gordon Ramsay and you have loads of restaurants, it’s very difficult.

Struggles: The pop star, 30, who is worth an estimated £220million, told how it's been 'very difficult' to keep his eatery in upmarket Notting Hill open following its launch just two months before the first Covid-19 lockdown hit in March last year

'It’s had a rocky start as it opened two months before the pandemic.'

Ed went on to say the establishment offers 'really good beers' and has things he 'would want in the bar', with the menu offering a variety of foods including oysters from his hometown of Suffolk, fish and chips and a £24.50 rib eye steak.

The Thinking Out Loud singer added that he enjoys visiting his restaurant when he visits London from his sprawling Suffolk estate, explaining why he opted to move out of the capital.

Tough: Ed explained how the restaurant has had a 'rocky start' and unless you're a successful restaurateur like celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay, it's tough to survive

He said: 'I love London but when I lived there full-time I felt trapped and didn’t go out a lot. I was thinking people cared more than they did.

'Now I am living in Suffolk I’ll dip into London for a night and enjoy the experiences. I’m a Suffolk boy and this is where I feel most comfortable.'

‘I can go into a pub and see people and go, “OK”, but in ­London it’s more full-on. And there are a lot more ­restaurants to compete with, too.’

Last year, Ed refused to furlough his ten staff at the restaurant, instead paying their wages out of his own pocket.

The star confirmed he would not ask the Treasury to pay up to 80 per cent of the restaurant staff's salaries, up to a threshold of £2,500 per month.

A spokesperson for Sheeran told The Sun at the time: 'The business, co-owned by Ed Sheeran and Stuart Camp, is not, and will not, be accessing any Government scheme of any kind, including furloughing, grants, loans and so on.'

Difficulties: 'It’s one of these things where, unless you’re Jamie Oliver or Gordon Ramsay and you have loads of restaurants, it’s very difficult'

Businessman: The Shape Of You hitmaker launched the business venture with manager, Stuart Camp, with the West London eatery said to be named after both their wives – Ed’s wife Cherry Seaborn (pictured) and Stuart’s spouse Liberty Shaw

Elsewhere, Ed revealed that he was told as a youngster to forget his musical aspirations and get a 'real job', telling that kids shouldn't just be pushed to focus solely on academics.

He told the Sunday Mirror's Watts the Goss column: 'I think kids should be encouraged to be creative. When I was a child, saying you wanted to be a musician, they'd go, "You need to get a real job."

'School is so stressful. You've got all these exams - maths, English and science - all these things are very difficult. But what I want to say to kids is if you do what you love, you will eventually get paid for it.'

He went on to say that he learned more from his career lows than his highs, telling how playing to 'one person' in a Swindon bar taught him 'more' than playing at Wembley.

Real job: Elsewhere, Ed revealed that he was told as a youngster to forget his musical aspirations and get a 'real job', telling that kids shouldn't just be pushed to focus solely on academics

The superstar also revealed that he doesn't want his daughter Lyra, who turns one later this month, to follow in his footsteps in the music industry as he wants her to forge her own identity away from him.

He explained: 'I think it's from being in the music industry - I'm like, 'I would not wish this on my child. I would hate for her to be known as my daughter rather than just Lyra, I want her to have own identity.'

Ed remarked that 'sporty' Lyra is more likely to follow Hockey player mum Cherry's direction.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She recently jetted off to the French Riviera with her family after attending the star-studded wedding of Lady Kitty Spencer.

And Emma Weymouth is still lapping up the balmy St Tropez weather, enjoying a sun-drenched beach day with her children at Le Club 55 on Sunday.

Slipping into a tiny black bikini adorned with seashells, the mother-of-two, 35, who is married to the Eight Marquess of Bath, Ceawlin Thynn, beamed from ear to ear as she frolicked amongst the waves.

Wow: Emma Weymouth, 35, wowed in a tiny black bikini while holidaying in St Tropez on Sunday, enjoying a sun-drenched beach day with her children at Le Club 55

Wearing her raven tresses loose and carrying snorkelling gear, the former Strictly Come Dancing contestant was in her element while strolling along the shore.

The beauty was sporting an immaculate red manicure and wore a luxury watch on her left wrist.

After cooling off in the water, Emma returned to the shore with her hair slicked back and looked radiant without so much as a spot of make-up on.

Once dry, she slipped into a chic polka dot beach coverup and sunglasses, keeping the sunshine at bay beneath a stylish straw hat.

Emma returned to France earlier this month after attending the nuptials of her friend Lady Kitty Spencer in Italy.

In her element: Wearing her raven tresses loose and carrying snorkelling gear, the former Strictly Come Dancing contestant was in her element while strolling along the shore

Princess Diana's niece, 30, wedded her long-term boyfriend Michael Lewis at a 17th century Italian castle in August.

Lady Kitty's father Earl Spencer, 57, did not attend and she was walked down the aisle by her brother Louis Spencer, Viscount Althorp, 27, and half brother Samuel Aitken, whose father is businessman Jonathan Aitken.

Princess Diana's niece said 'I do' in front of a hushed congregation in the Villa Aldobrandini in Frascati, a stunning country mansion with views towards Rome on Saturday.

Photographs of the bride showed her wearing a high-necked Victorian-inspired lace gown by favourite designer Dolce and Gabbana for the occasion, which featured puff sleeves and a cinched waist.

Slicked back: After cooling off in the water, Emma returned to the shore with her hair slicked back and looked radiant without so much as a spot of make-up on

Cover up: Once dry, she slipped into a chic polka dot beach coverup and sunglasses, keeping the sunshine at bay beneath a stylish straw hat

Meanwhile she swept her hair back into a low bun and opted for a lengthy train for the occasion.

Her husband opted for a smart white tuxedo and, later, Prince William and Harry's younger cousin changed into a second gown, with short sleeves, pink floral detailing and a flowing hemline.

Emma and her husband were among a host of glamorous guests at Kitty's nuptials including the bride's sisters; twins Eliza and Amelia, pop star Pixie Lott and her model boyfriend Oliver Cheshire, Idris Elba's wife Sabrina and Made In Chelsea star Mark Vandelli.

Wedding guest: The Strictly Come Dancing star returned to France after attending the nuptials of her friend Lady Kitty Spencer in Italy
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Fleur East has revealed she was 'so embarrassed about having afro hair' that she went to extreme measures to straighten her natural texture, admitting: 'I even used my mum's iron on it.'

Speaking in a new interview, the X Factor star, 33, explained she 'straightened it all the time' and added: 'For much of my life, particularly as a teenager, I hated my hair.'

She told The Sun: 'I had run-ins with kids at school – I was too black for the white girls and too white for the black girls. I didn't fit anywhere.'

Candid: Fleur East, 33, has revealed she was 'so embarrassed about having afro hair' that she went to extreme measures to straighten her natural texture

Fleur, who is currently co-hosting ITV's The Void game show alongside Ashley Banjo, also touched upon her decision to wear her hair natural while on air, telling the paper: 'Hair is a massive thing to my community.'

She added: 'When I walked out on set on day one of The Void, the first thing Ashley said to me was: ''Wow! You're wearing your hair natural! That's fantastic!'''

The songstress added that Ashley likely thought she would have made the decision to wear her hair 'all groomed and straightened' as that's what 'so many women do,' but insisted: 'I was never going to do that.'

Elsewhere in the interview, Fleur touched upon her experience growing up in a mixed race household.

Fleur said: 'I had run-ins with kids at school – I was too black for the white girls and too white for the black girls. I didn't fit anywhere' (pictured: 2019)

Of living with her Ghanaian mother Irene, 58, and her English father Malcolm - who died last year aged 74 - Fleur recalls her father encouraging her to wear her hair naturally, however shared that her mother would always wear wigs, braids and even had her hair relaxed.

Fleur told the paper: 'That was just what we did to fit in.'

The star said that while at home her father would encourage the family to celebrate their Ghanaian culture, but added that things were different in 'the outside world'.

She recalled an incident that occurred at school when she was just nine years old.

Fleur was approached by a girl and asked: 'Why is your skin always dirty?' and said the 'shock and humiliation' stays with her to this day.

New gig: Fleur is currently co-hosting ITV's The Void game show alongside Ashley Banjo (pictured)

The hit-maker struggled with her identity growing up, disheartened by the lack of women of colour in the public eye, however that all changed when she saw Mel B take to the stage with the Spice Girls.

Fleur recalled: 'There was Mel B with her hair in a 'fro, looking amazing.'

She said the moment was 'huge' for her and gave her the confidence to start wearing her natural hair when singing and performing.

However Fleur was later told to straighten her hair when singing in a band with another woman who wore her natural hair, being told by management 'we can't have two of you like that'.

After straightening her hair Fleur said she no longer felt like herself.

Family: Fleur gushed about her husband, Marcel Badiane-Robin, 33, who she said has been her rock since the loss of her beloved father Malcolm (pictured) in March 2020

The star also spoke candidly about her appearance on the X Factor in 2014, insisting she and Simon Cowell 'never had an issue' and despite hair and makeup artists on the show suggesting she straighten her hair, he instructed behind-the-scenes staff to 'leave it'.

Elsewhere, Fleur gushed about her husband, 33-year-old fashion designer Marcel Badiane-Robin, who she said has been her rock since the loss of her beloved father Malcolm in March 2020.

She also expressed her frustration at often being asked when she is planning on having children, before turning her attention back to her hair, sharing her excitement over the fact that her decision to wear her natural hair on TV may inspire young women watching.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She recently started dating Kendall Jenner's ex Ben Simmons.

And Maya Jama looked incredible in a tiny bikini as she shared a slew of snaps to mark her 27th birthday on Sunday.

The former Radio 1 DJ took to Instagram to update her followers with her movements in the tropical destination, while showing off her enviable frame.

Hot stuff: Maya Jama looked incredible in a tiny bikini as she shared a slew of snaps to mark her 27th birthday on Sunday

Yummy: Munching on a tasty-looking lobster, the MTV star kept things casual in a further shot as she sported a hot pink bikini to take a dip in the pool

Posing on a balcony with a breathtaking mountain-lined sea view, the former 4Music presenter sprawled her toned arms in the air as she exhibited her slim figure in a skimpy orange bikini.

Going barefoot for the fun-filled shot, Maya's beautiful dark brown tresses cascaded in natural waves over her shoulders.

The Circle presenter went on to upload a cheeky snap where she showed off her sparkling white gnashers while sticking out her tongue.

Sipping through a straw on a golden drink, she donned an oversized navy tee and extended her pins out, making the most of the space to herself in the cabin.

Pearly whites: The Circle presenter went on to upload a cheeky snap where she showed off her sparkling gnashers while sticking out her tongue

Having fun: Sipping through a straw on a golden drink, she donned an oversized navy tee and extended her pins out, making the most of the space to herself in the cabin

Munching on a tasty-looking lobster, the MTV star kept things casual in a further shot as she sported a hot pink bikini to take a dip in the pool.

Behind her, a sweeping wood-panelled mansion filled the background of her shot.

Filling her fans with envy, Maya completed her slew of snaps with an incredible infinite view of the ocean, complete with palm trees and quaint stepping stones out to the beach.

She captioned her post, '27 ALL THE BIRTHDAY FEELS ❤️ CLING CLING YA BASTARDS I LOVE YOU ALL.'

Supermodel Jourdan Dunn led the tributes, writing, 'Happy beautiful my Leo queen,' while singer Alesha Dixon commented, 'Happy birthday darling ❤️.'

It comes after Maya recently took her relationship with NBA basketball star Ben Simmons, 25, public.

Her beau also took to the app to give his followers a glimpse into their playful antics.

Captioning the video, 'Happy birthday to this beautiful girl,' Maya could be seen in the private jet cabin wearing a blue blanket around her head while re-creating a famous scene from Steven Spielberg's E.T.

He also appeared on her Instagram story in July, as the pair playfully larked about with each other.

Ben could be seen pulling Maya in closer to him and affectionately covering her face with his hand.

The couple were seen kissing in the stands at Wimbledon, as they stopped by the annual tennis tournament earlier this month.

Maya and Ben were first romantically linked in June, after they were seen together on a night out at restaurant Sexy Fish in London.

Ben previously dated Kendall Jenner, 25, but the pair called things off in May 2019 after months of dating on-and-off.

Maya, meanwhile, dated rapper Stormzy for four years, with the pair splitting the same year - ending their relationship in order to focus on their careers instead.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nicola Peltz looked stunning as she posed in a pool wearing a skimpy yellow bikini in an Instagram post on Saturday.

The actress, 26, gave a sultry smile up at the camera in the image as she wore heavy eye make which accentuated her naturally beautiful facial features.

Her platinum blonde locks were wet from the water and they were slicked back from her face.

Wow! Nicola Peltz , 26, looked stunning as she posed in a pool wearing a skimpy yellow bikini in an Instagram post on Saturday

She kept it simple with her accessories, with only a gold chain round her neck.

A small butterfly tattoo was shown off in the picture, which sat just underneath her collar bone.

Her fiance Brooklyn Beckham, 22, was sure to compliment his love in the image, taking to the comments to sweetly say: 'My absolute angel ❤️❤️ '

Sweet: Her fiance, Brooklyn Beckham was sure to pay his love a compliment in the comments saying: 'My absolute angel'

Engaged: Last year, Brooklyn confirmed the news he'd proposed to Nicola with a gushing Instagram post in which he called himself the 'luckiest man in the world'

Last year, Brooklyn confirmed the news he'd proposed to Nicola with a sweet Instagram post.

Sharing a stunning snap of the couple, he wrote: 'Two weeks ago I asked my soulmate to marry me and she said yes xx I am the luckiest man in the world. I promise to be the best husband and the best daddy one day. I love you baby xx.'

In October it was claimed that the pair planned to exchange vows in two celebrations on both sides of the Atlantic.

It's thought that Brooklyn will have his brothers Romeo, 18, and Cruz, 16, as his best men for the ceremony, with proud mum Victoria designing Nicola's wedding gown.

According to The Sun, Brooklyn's sister Harper, 10, will be chief bridesmaid, while Brooklyn's father David will act as the master of ceremonies.

The two ceremonies - held in Nicola's hometown of Florida and the Beckhams' estate in the Cotswolds - will ensure that both Brooklyn and Nicola's loved ones can be in attendance.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sophie Turner cut a stylish figure as she headed for a late night dinner with husband Joe Jonas at Craig's in West Hollywood on Saturday night.

The Game of Thrones actress, 25, looked ravishing in a red slip dress as she and her popstar beau, 32, rode along in a car before joining his brothers Nick, 28, and Kevin, 33.

Sophie pulled out all the stops for the evening, showing a hint of cleavage in the plunging scarlet number, which she teamed with a gold chain necklace.

Lady in red: Sophie Turner cut a stylish figure as she headed for a late night dinner with husband Joe Jonas at Craig's in West Hollywood on Saturday night

The film star swept her dark locks into a neat bun, while much of her face was concealed by a black face mask.

Meanwhile, Joe cut a somewhat more casual figure than his wife, donning a cream polo shirt with a navy trim and gold buttons.

Elsewhere, Kevin and Nick also opted for a relaxed look, with Kevin sporting a green sweatshirt while Nick donned an orange and black number.

Outing: The Game of Thrones actress, 25, looked ravishing in a red slip dress as she and her popstar beau, 32, (pictured) rode along in a car before joining his brothers Nick, 28, and Kevin, 33.

The group kept things low-key and donned face masks as they headed into the swanky eatery.

Sophie and Joe were without their baby daughter Willa, 12 months, as they took some time out from parenting duties.

The couple tied the knot in a Las Vegas wedding on May 1 2019. They exchanged vows for a second time in France the following June.

It's been a busy time for the Primetime Emmy-nominated actress who is currently involved in the production of two television series.

Lovely: Sophie pulled out all the stops for the evening, showing a hint of cleavage in the plunging scarlet number, which she teamed with a gold chain necklace

Evening look: The film star swept her dark locks into a neat bun, while much of her face was concealed by a black face mask

The performer is voicing Princess Charlotte in the animated sitcom The Prince.

The Gary Janetti-created show will focus on the life of Prince George as he humorously interacts with other members of the British monarchy.

The program will also feature the voice talents of several other performers such as Orlando Bloom, Alan Cumming and Lucy Punch.

Chilled: Elsewhere, Kevin and Nick also opted for a relaxed look, with Kevin sporting a green sweatshirt while Nick donned an orange and black number

Casual: The group kept things low-key and donned face masks as they headed into the swanky eatery

The series was initially set to make its debut on the HBO Max streaming service this past spring, although it was delayed due to Prince Philip's passing in April. It has since been released last month.

Turner will also appear as Margaret Ratliff in the long-awaited miniseries The Staircase, which is based on the 2004 docuseries of the same name.

The show will see Colin Firth starring as novelist Michael Peterson, who was charged with murdering his wife Kathleen in 2001 and eventually convicted of voluntary manslaughter in 2017.

Harrison Ford was initially set to take the starring role in the series and serve as one of its executive producers, although he later dropped out of the project.

Cartoon: The performer is voicing Princess Charlotte in the animated sitcom The Prince

On screen: The performer is also set to portray Margaret Ratliff in the upcoming miniseries The Staircase, which is based on the docuseries of the same name (pictured at the 2019 premiere of Dark Phoenix)

The program will also feature the talents of Toni Collette, Juliette Binoche and Parker Posey, among other performers.

The Staircase initially entered the development stage in 2008 and experienced a lengthy writing process before production eventually began last month.

It is currently scheduled to be released on HBO Max in the near future.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nina Agdal flashed her toned abs in a light blue figure-hugging gym wear set as she stepped out after a work out in The Hamptons, New York.

The Danish model, 29, has recently become a fitness instructor, taking to Instagram to document the various yoga classes she runs.

She was glowing as she left the exercise class on Saturday, with her light brown locks swept back into a top knot.

Exercise: Nina Agdal, 29, flashed her toned abs in a light blue figure hugging gym wear set as she steps out after a work out in the Hamptons, New York

Her slender figure was shown off the ensemble, as she carried her belongings in a yellow shoulder bag and light pink backpack.

She was all smiles as she held a bottle of kombucha and her phone in one hand, while taking her hair down with the other.

Later, Nina's caramel locks flowed over one shoulder, and she kept the sun at bay with black square shades.

Stunning: The Danish model was glowing as she stepped out on Saturday, with her dark caramel locks flowing over one shoulder

Ensuring maximum comfort, the fitness fanatic opted for white Nike sliders.

Nina took to Instagram to document her exercised filled morning, as she posed with pals after the class.

Snapping the picture at The Reform Club Inn in the Hamptons, the group of friends looked as if they'd had a good work out.

The beauty has only just embarked on her fitness career, saying on Instagram: 'Crazy to think that a year ago I had not yet taught my first class (like ever ever)… and yesterday had a full class.'

She included a word of advice and encouragement for her 1.6 million followers: 'If you’ve been wanting to do something my advice is to just TRY. Even if you don’t know exactly how it’s gonna go or where it’ll take you follow your gut and keep going.'

Nina and her beau Jack, 26, frequently exercise together and Nina shared a video of the couple's at-home workout sessions during the Coronavirus pandemic.

She started dating Jack in June 2017, shortly after her split from Leonardo DiCaprio, 46.

Jack is the son of supermodel Christie Brinkley and her ex-husband Richard Taubman.

Christie went on to marry architect Peter Cook who legally adopted Jack.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She unwound with her family in sunny Spain following her split with boyfriend Sammy Kimmence and his imprisonment for a £34k fraud.

And Dani Dyer, 25, along with her dad Danny, 44, mum Jo, 44, and sister Sunnie, 14 kept a low profile as they touched down in the UK on Saturday.

The Love Island winner was pictured manoeuvring her seven-month old son Santiago's pushchair, while she combined a light blue denim jacket with a white tee and black leggings.

Heading home: Dani Dyer (second from right) wheeled her son Santiago's pushchair through the airport as she touched down in the UK on Saturday with her dad Danny, mum Jo (far right) and sister Sunnie (second from left) following their sun-soaked trip to Spain

Helping hand: EastEnders actor Danny was pictured offloading baby Santiago's luggage into a taxi

Completing her outfit with a pair of white trainers, the reality star had tied her light brown tresses into a messy bun and wore a disposable facemask.

Swapping their their luxury cliff top villa accommodation for their Essex mansion, the famous family steered their suitcases through the airport.

EastEnders actor Danny was pictured wearing a playful skeleton-printed facemask, along with a black polo shirt and grey trousers as he offloaded Santiago's luggage into the car.

Jo wore her sandy tresses in a messy ponytail while donning a pair of denim shorts and a pink sweater with the motif, 'Sweet But Psycho'. Sunnie sported a denim jacket and cream shirt.

New mum: The Love Island winner was pictured manoeuvring her seven-month old son Santiago's pushchair, while she combined a light blue denim jacket with a white tee and black leggings

Team: Swapping their their luxury cliff top villa accommodation for their Essex mansion, the famous family steered their suitcases through the airport as they made their way to a taxi

Casual: Completing her outfit with a pair of white trainers, the reality star had tied her light brown tresses into a messy bun and wore a facemask

Natural: Jo wore her sandy tresses in a messy ponytail while donning a pair of denim shorts and a pink sweater with the motif, 'Sweet But Psycho'

Dani turned 25 during their opulent Mediterranean trip, where she was branded a 'chav' by her own dad during a comedic birthday tribute.

'Happy Birthday to my day one,' the doting dad began. 'Can’t believe I’ve got a 25 year old chav….me and you against the world baby….

'We thrive when we face adversity…there is no word in that f***ing dictionary to explain how much I love you. Thank you for making me a father. ❤️❤️ [sic]'

To accompany the post, The Wall presenter shared a sweet snap kissing his first born on the head.

Low-key: Danny wore a black polo shirt and grey trousers

Responsible: He kept those around him protected with a playful skeleton-printed facemask

Assisting: He aided the taxi driver with packing their luggage into the car

The birthday girl beamed as she donned navy flowing maxi dress while Dany wore a white polo shirt and khaki shorts.

Behind them, an array of pink-and-white balloons framed a 'Happy Birthday Dani' sign.

The milestone day comes after Dani split from boyfriend Sammy last month when he was slapped with a three year prison sentence.

Cheeky: Dani was branded a 'chav' by dad Danny as they celebrated her 25th birthday on holiday... while conman ex Sammy Kimmence remains in prison

Sammy, 25, was found guilty of £34k worth of fraud and lied to Dani about his crimes.

He duped Peter Martin, 91, and Peter Haynes, 81, by persuading the vulnerable pensioners to let him to invest their money for them and then splashed out on expensive restaurants, hotels and clothes.

His victims had been clients of Sammy when he worked as Senior Trader at Equine Global Sports Limited, a company which subsequently went into liquidation.

The company received money from customers which it would use to place bets on horse races, on their behalf.

Hurt: The reality star's much-needed holiday comes after it was revealed that she had split from boyfriend Sammy, 25, who is the father of her seven-month-old son Santiago, following his conviction and imprisonment for a £34k fraud (Dani and Sammy pictured last year)

After this company ceased trading, he contacted two of his elderly clients and pretended he would continue investing their money in the same way, but instead used it to fund his lifestyle, paying for restaurants and booking a hotel in Ibiza.

Dani and Sammy first began dating prior to her appearance on Love Island in 2018 and split before rekindling their romance in 2019.

The pair announced they were expecting their first child together in July 2020 and Dani and Sammy welcomed son Santiago in January, earlier this year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Darren Day has admitted that he went on a week-long drug binge which saw him not sleep, eat or change his clothes for seven days after he hit rock bottom in lockdown.

The TV and theatre star, 53, told in a new interview how he barricaded himself in his bathroom and took '20 to 30 grammes of cocaine' within the week after his company went bust and his work dried up as a result of the pandemic.

Describing the state he'd got himself in to, Darren likened his appearance to 'the walking dead', before revealing that it was his pal Robbie Williams and sixth fiancée, Sophie Ladds, that had come to his rescue.

Honest: Darren Day has admitted that he went on a week-long drugs binge which saw him not sleep, eat or change his clothes for seven days after he hit rock bottom in lockdown

The singer and actor has always been open about his struggles with addiction in the past – stating he is 'lucky to be alive' after enduring 'dark days' of excessive cocaine and alcohol abuse.

And speaking to The Sun on Sunday, Darren candidly opened up about his latest relapse which occurred 16 months ago, with the now sober star back to full health and starring in two touring productions.

Detailing the difficult time he faced during the first lockdown, Darren told how he spiralled into despair after his company went into liquidation, rehearsals for his shows were scrapped and his earnings suffered.

He emotionally recalled: 'I barricaded myself in the bathroom for seven days. I didn’t eat at all. I didn’t change my clothes for a week. I didn’t sleep. It was last May and I was so stressed, I hadn’t earned since February 2020 and I was four days away from rehearsals for Footloose when all the theatres closed.'

Binge: The TV and theatre star, 53, told in a new interview how he barricaded himself in his bathroom and took '20 to 30 grammes of cocaine' within the week (pictured in 2017)

He added how he wasn't entitled to furlough and Universal Credit and after reaching the end of his tether one night, decided to break his sobriety, telling himself that he'll 'just have a few lines'.

However, those few lines turned into £2,000 worth of the class A drug, with Darren adding: 'I locked myself in the bathroom for seven days. It’s not an exaggeration. I physically locked myself in the ensuite bathroom to our spare room, on my own, for seven days.'

Of his partner Sophie's reaction, whom he became engaged to in August 2020, Darren said that she was 'sad' and 'didn't know how' to deal with things as she's 'never seen him' like that before.

He went on: 'I lost a week of my life. I did about 20 to 30 grammes of cocaine. I kept going until it was gone. I sat at the top of the stairs and I sobbed like I’ve never sobbed before.'

Rock bottom: Describing the state he'd got himself in to, Darren likened his appearance to 'the walking dead', before revealing that it was his pal Robbie Williams and sixth fiancée, Sophie Ladds, that had come to his rescue (pictured in 2016)

He added that in that moment he thought about Sophie and his children and thought that not only did they 'deserve better', but so did he, with the TV personality telling how he'd 'never felt that' before.

At the end of his drugs binge, his partner informed him that he had looked like 'a zombie', with Darren confirming that he looked 'like the walking dead'.

Deciding to sort his life out, the former Celebrity Big Brother star called up pal Robbie Williams - who has faced his own demons in the past - who then put Darren in touch with his mental health team.

Robbie's help then saw Darren attending Zoom meetings and once again having a sponsor after he had previously taken his 'eye off the ball' in terms of his recovery.

Struggles: I barricaded myself in the bathroom for seven days. I didn’t eat at all. I didn’t change my clothes for a week. I didn’t sleep. It was last May and I was so stressed' (pictured in 2017)

Difficult: Of his partner Sophie's reaction, whom he became engaged to in August 2020, Darren said that she was 'sad' and 'didn't know how' to deal with things as she's 'never seen him' like that before

On Robbie, who in 2019 paid for Darren to go to rehab in 2019, Darren said the Angels hitmaker 'wasn’t disappointed' in him for relapsing, adding that Robbie 'sees a lot of me in him'.

During the same frank interview, Darren also told for the first time how he developed a crack addiction between 2001-2005, which he described as 'ridiculously intense'.

He explained how he was grateful that he didn't go down the route of taking heroin, but described smoking crack as his 'darkest days'.

Help: Deciding to sort his life out, the former Celebrity Big Brother star called up pal Robbie Williams, who then put Darren in touch with his mental health team

Darren has now turned his life around and is back on the stage again in productions Footloose and Chicago, with the theatre veteran describing this time as his 'last chance saloon' after battling to get theatre producers to have 'faith' in him again.

It comes after in June of last year, he took Twitter to record a heartfelt video to address the mental strain his lifestyle has had on him over the years.

He told his followers: 'Since my stint in the Celebrity Big Brother house four years ago its well documented that I am in recovery/sobriety with issues around addiction.

Addict: During the same frank interview, Darren also told for the first time how he developed a crack addiction between 2001-2005, which he described as 'ridiculously intense' (pictured on CBB in 2016)

'That I've spoken publicly about. Something I have never spoken about is my mental health issues. That changes as of today because I have become involved with a wonderful new charity: Its OK Not To Be OK.'

Darren appeared on the infamous 2016 series of Celebrity Big Brother, which featured other troubled stars who have experienced issues with mental health and addiction, such as Danniella Westbrook, David Gest and Stephanie Davis.

During the show - on which he finished in third place - he spoke about his addiction battles, opening up further about his troubled past in an interview with Hello! magazine the following summer.

Admission: In June last year, Darren candidly spoke out for the first time about his mental health issues

The West End theatre actor revealed that his wife of 12 year Stephanie Doole - whom he subsequently divorced from in October 2018, just a year after they renewed their wedding vows - inspired him to be a 'better man'.

The stage star said at the time: 'I am a lucky man, right now, and to be honest I am lucky to be here, and I don't mean in this room, I mean I am lucky to be alive.

'My life hit a very dark place and the fact that life is so wonderful now, I am thankful every single day.'

He had previously told ITV's Lorraine in November 2016 that he admitted that his stint on Celebrity Big Brother was an attempt to show the public how far he'd come.

Opening up: The star has stated he is 'lucky to be alive' after enduring 'dark days' of excessive cocaine and alcohol abuse. Pictured in 2016

'The reason for going in the house, I just wanted the opportunity to show the public where I am now,' he explained. 'It's taken time to build up bridges again, the last decade – I've worked hard and it finally feels like all the hard work has paid off.'

In August, Day announced his sixth engagement, little more than a year after confirming the end of his 12-year marriage to actress Stephanie Dooley.

The stage star revealed his proposal to girlfriend Sophie Ladds by sharing photos of her stunning engagement ring with Twitter followers.

Diary room debrief: During his time on celebrity Big brother in 2016 – on which he finished in third place – he spoke about his addiction battles

Captioning two shots of their clasped hands, he wrote: 'Spot the difference! My girl @SophieLadds & I just got engaged. She rocks my world.'

Announcing the news on her own Twitter platform, actress Sophie added: 'DarrenDOfficial you have made me the happiest girl in the world. Always...forever...and a Sophie Day.'

The engagement came exactly a year after Darren confirmed his marriage to Emmerdale star Stephanie Dooley was over.

Delighted:In August, Day announced his sixth engagement, little more than a year after confirming the end of his 12-year marriage to actress Stephanie Dooley
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Emma Thompson cut a stylish figure when she stepped out in London on Sunday to run errands.

Wearing her silver hair loose and wrapping up beneath a chic white raincoat, the Oscar-winning actress, 62, opted for comfort in white sandals and looked radiant as she went about her day.

It comes after her husband Greg Wise was announced as Strictly Come Dancing 2021's tenth contestant on Wednesday, with the Sense and Sensibility actor, 55, signing up to honour the five year anniversary of his 'disco diva' sister Clare's death from cancer.

Errands: Emma Thompson, 62, cut a stylish figure when she stepped out in London on Sunday to run errands wearing a polka dot dress

Strolling through the capital towards the end of the week, Emma framed her face with a stylish pair of glasses.

She looked fresh-faced wearing nothing but a swipe of pale red lipstick.

In her left hand the screen star carried a striped tote bag, and in her right Emma held a patterned face mask.

It was announced during Wednesday's This Morning that Greg would take part in the popular BBC ballroom show.

Radiant: Emma opted for comfort in white sandals and looked radiant as she went about her day

Speaking about his motivation, Greg explained: 'Clare was a huge disco diva and we sent her out of this life in a disco ball coffin to banging 80s music.'

He continued: 'She's prodding me massively to do it. Clare will enjoy watching her little brother do it. She'll be sitting on my left or right shoulder depending on how well I'm doing.'

Greg added that his wife Emma was 'stupidly excited' that he would be appearing on the show.

Clare was first diagnosed with breast cancer in 2013 and started a witty and heartfelt blog detailing her battle with the disease.

She was declared cancer-free in 2014, but in 2015 the disease dug into her bones and she was told it was incurable. There were tumours in her arms, ribs, spine and skull.

Greg cancelled a family holiday in Greece and moved into his sister Clare's London flat in the final three months of her life, in order to be her full-time carer, before her death in 2016 aged 51.

New contestant: Emma's husband Greg Wise signed up to Strictly in honour of his late sister who loved the show so much she was buried in a glitterball coffin

Cute couple: Greg added that his wife Emma Thompson was 'stupidly excited' that he would be appearing on the show (pictured in 2020)

On the night she died Greg wiped her face, told her he loved her and gave her permission to go when she wanted. She died one minute later, holding his hand.

Greg said in a statement: 'My beautiful sister was a huge disco queen. She left our world almost exactly 5 years ago in a glitter ball coffin.

'This is for her. My gorgeous Diva sis, who would have been insane with excitement that her little bro was doing this.

'I will channel her, as her bro can't dance - but I'm thrilled to be dipping my toes, knees, hips and arms into this wonderful world, and hope to make her proud, and obviously make her laugh...'

Greg will join a star-studded line-up of contestants, competing against Sara Davies, AJ Odudu, Dan Walker, Judi Love, John Whaite, Rhys Stephenson, Ugo Monye, Tilly Ramsay, Rose Ayling-Ellis, Robert Webb, Katie McGlynn, Adam Peaty, Nina Wadia and Tom Fletcher.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alesha Dixon has made a pop comeback with her new single War, which is her first music release for five years.

The Boy Does Nothing singer, 41, has cited her daughters as the ones who inspired her to make the return, telling The Mirror: 'I can’t tell my kids to go for their dreams if I’m sitting back in fear and not going for my own.'

The mother-of-two wanted to lead by example for her daughters, six-year-old Azura and one-year-old Anaya.

New music: Alesha Dixon, 41, has made a pop comeback with her new single War, which is her first music release for five years; pictured in 2020

'They obviously see me on TV working on various shows but I want them to see me doing my main passion which has always been music and performing. I want them to see that’s where mummy started.'

Alesha's career in the music industry started when she was 21, when she was in the pop girl group Mis-Teeq.

The Scandalous singers boasted seven top 10 singles and two top 10 albums back in the day, before Alesha embarked on a solo career.

Inspiration: The mother-of-two wanted to lead by example for her daughters, six-year-old Azura and one-year-old Anaya

Comeback: The singer has cited her daughters as the ones who inspired her to make this return, telling The Mirror: 'I can’t tell my kids to go for their dreams if I’m sitting back in fear and not going for my own'

As well as being a singer, she also has appeared as a judge Strictly Come Dancing, The Greatest Dancer and Britain's Got Talent.

The new song, War, is about mental health, and Alesha said she wanted to put it out with no promo or fanfare, saying she is most excited about getting out and performing, and isn't putting pressure on herself to create an album.

Despite being nervous about relaunching her career, she wanted to show her daughters how to be fearless, saying: 'I’ve been working on new music for a couple of years. I haven’t finished it yet but you can put things off and worry and overthink but actually life is too short.'

Way back when: Alesha's career in the music industry started when she was 21, when she was in the pop girl group Mis-Teeq; pictured in 2001 with her band members

Heartfelt: The new song, War, is about mental health, and Alesha said she wanted to put it out with no promo or fanfare, and said she is most excited about getting out and performing; pictured March 2021

Alesha took to Instagram last week to share the news of the release, and captioned the post: 'It’s been so nice sharing for the first time in 5 years, particularly with a song that is so personal.

'Music is straight up therapy! Grateful for this outlet! Thank you @applemusic for your support with ‘WAR’ and thank you for listening!'

The shared the image of the single cover, where she posed against a brick wall looking very cool in an orange two piece shrugged off her shoulders, a black tank top and quirky sunglasses.

Alesha's next step in her career has brought her excitement, and the single War is out now.

Going for it: She said of a new album: 'I’ve been working on new music for a couple of years. I haven’t finished it yet but you can put things off and worry and overthink but actually life is too short'; pictured May 2021
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Simon Cowell is gearing up to launch a new TV car show, according to reports.

The music mogul, 61, is said to consider the decision a 'no brainer' having been approached by a 'number of well-known car experts and racing drivers wanting to partner with him over the years'.

Simon is currently developing the new show - will rival Top Gear - and 'eyeing up' producers.

New show: Simon Cowell, 61, is gearing up to launch a new TV car show, according to reports and is said to consider the decision a 'no brainer'

A source told The Sun: 'Simon has always been a huge car lover — and a car show is always something he has been interested in doing.

'He loves talking cars [and] right now there feels like an especially large appetite. The idea of a new car show is really a no-brainer for him.'

According to the paper, Simon, who appeared as a Top Gear guest in 2007, owns a string of eye-wateringly expensive cars, including a Rolls-Royce Phantom, a Lamborghini Gallardo Spyder, an Eagle Speedster, a £1million Bugatti Veyron and a Rolls-Royce Silver Cloud.

As of 2018, Simon's net worth had accumulated to approximately $550 million (£393m), according to Celebrity Net Worth.

A source said: 'Simon has always been a huge car lover — and a car show is always something he has been interested in doing' (pictured Simon on Top Gear in 2007)

MailOnline has reached out to Simon's representatives for comment.

It was reported in July that X Factor had been axed after 17 years.

Simon is said to have pulled the plug on the ITV talent show - which launched in 2004 and last aired in 2018 - because he doesn't want it to 'become a bit of a joke.'

While around the world the format is still successful, it seems the music mogul has accepted in the UK 'it has become slightly stale' and so has reportedly decided to 'shelve it' for five years, but sources are claiming it's now 'unlikely' to ever return, the Sun reported at the time.

Axed: In July it was reported that X Factor had been axed after 17 years

The news came less than a month after it was revealed that Simon was set to make his TV return with new ITV singing show, Walk The Line.

The Daily Star reported in June that the series will follow musical acts as they perform in front of the judges in a battle to win a cash prize.

The top two of the night will be asked whether they want to go home with some money or 'walk the line' to continue on in the competition to try to come first in the leaderboard.

If they chose to Walk The Line, they will have to go head-to-head against more performers but could hit the jackpot if they top the leaderboard.

The jackpot increases the longer a contestant stays in the show, so performers will have to chose if they want to go home with the money or gamble to win big.

The show will be co-produced by Simon's Syco Entertainment and Lifted Entertainment, and the music mogul will no doubt wanting it to big budget production.

Simon told the publication: 'I am thrilled to be working with Lifted Entertainment and ITV on this new project.

'We wanted to develop a show which will give the contestants a life-changing cash prize if they win. Each show there will be a champion who must make a vital decision: either cash out then and there or stay in the contest to compete again the following night and have a chance to claim the huge prize.

'It's the kind of decision that will have viewers on the edge of their seats – real event TV, I'm very excited at giving musical talent the opportunity to transform their lives like never before.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brooke Vincent looked effortlessly chic on Saturday night as she hit Manchester for a romantic date night with her footballer boyfriend Kean Bryan.

Donning a chic stone trench coat, the 29-year-old paired the number with distressed light blue jeans.

The ex Coronation Street star accessorised her look with a tan leather wristlet, along with a rose-gold faced watch and elevated her height in a pair of stone heels.

Fashion forward: Brooke Vincent, 29, looked effortlessly chic in a stone trench coat and distressed jeans during a date night with her footballer boyfriend Kean Bryan, 24, on Saturday

Brooke's makeup had been flawlessly applied and she had painted her lips an eye-popping shade of red.

Her luscious chocolate locks had been tied back into a sleek middle parting for the outing and a pair of gold hoops swung from her earlobes.

Sporting a delicate interlocking-ring chain necklace, the former Dancing on Ice contestant's neon orange nails were unmissable.

Meanwhile, her beau Kean, 24, combined a white Missoni teddy bear tee with a black Gucci bomber jacket with black ripped jeans.

The Bolton Wanderers player kept things casual in a pair of black trainers and had styled his hair into a smart fade shave.

Looking good: Meanwhile, her beau Kean, 24, combined a white Missoni teddy bear tee with a black Gucci bomber jacket with black ripped jeans

Brooke hasn't appeared on the soap as Sophie Webster since she left the series 18 months ago in August 2019.

She took a break from her role, which she has played for 17 years, to have her sons Mexx and Monroe with her footballer boyfriend, Kean Bryan.

A source told The Sun: 'Brooke has been told there are no plans to kill off the character so she's free to return any time she wants.

'Brooke has appeared in almost 1,300 episodes and plays one of the most popular characters of the modern era and is very well-liked and respected as an individual.

'The bosses would have her back in a heartbeat but it doesn't look like that's going to happen for several years at least.'

MailOnline contacted representatives for Brooke Vincent and Coronation Street for comment at the time.

Brooke's character Sophie was written out of Coronation Street in October 2019 with a plot line of her going to travelling to Cambodia.

Although Brooke left Coronation Street to have her son Mexx, now 18 months old, she never returned to the show and welcomed her second son Monroe last month.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has embarked on a health and wellbeing journey after being trolled online about her appearance last year.

And Fran Parman showcased her 2st weight loss as she attended Olivia Attwood's 30th birthday party in Manchester on Saturday.

The TOWIE star, 29, exuded confidence as she posed in a chic watercolour print slip dress, which revealed her body transformation.

Chic: Fran Parman showcased her 2st weight loss as she attended Olivia Attwood's 30th birthday party in Manchester on Saturday

The dres teased a glimpse of her cleavage and revealed her bronzed legs as she posed.

Fran added a further pop of colour with lavender stiletto heels.

Her brunette tresses were styled in soft waves and she sported a rich palette of make-up.

In June Fran looked incredible a plunging white and blue maxi dress.

'Take time to do what makes you happy,' the TOWIE star told her followers as she worked her angles for the camera in the boho-chic dress.

Stunning: In June Fran looked incredible a plunging white and blue maxi dress

Fran looked gorgeous as she posed in the street in the summer-ready floral print dress, which featured a midriff-baring cut out detail.

She accessorised with a series of long chain necklaces which decorated her décolletage.

The brunette bombshell wore her tresses in loose waves that cascaded round her face and donned a full face of glamorous makeup for the outing.

It comes after Fran has wowed her followers by documenting her weight loss journey.

Weight loss: It comes after Fran was trolled online about her appearance after stepping out in a bodycon dress last year

The reality had put on more than three stone while caring for her elderly grandfather as the pandemic swept across Britain, and her weight gain was noted by fans as she returned to the show last summer following a two-year absence.

The brunette beauty highlighted the unnecessary abuse she received for choosing to wear an unflattering bodycon dress for her TOWIE return.

Taking to Instagram on International Women's Day in March, she wrote: 'The amount of abuse I got on this day was not ok.

'No one knew my story, everyone judged and was quick to bring me down just over a dress. I was so sad on this day but I look back and thank you for the trolling.

Looking good: TOWIE's Fran Parman (pictured) flaunted her two stone weight loss in a sexy Instagram post after opening up about trolling

'The mean words I brought to light and the amount of women that have come forward and messaged me is honestly so beautiful to see the support we have for each other.

'It doesn’t matter what size you are and thank you for all the women that made me believe I was beautiful this size regardless of the trolls.

'Yes I’ve lost weight, but that's because who I feel, more comfortable as a person. It shouldn’t matter what size you are it’s who the person is that matters.

'So with that I just want to say #happyinternationalwomensday you are all beautiful girls in your own way and ignore anyone else who says any different i believe it’s there insecurity putting out on you, so ignore and don’t let anyone bitter bring down your state of happiness. I love you all very much and thank you again.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lottie Moss showed off her incredible figure in a champagne silk slip dress during a night out on Saturday.

The younger sister of Kate Moss, 23, turned heads as she arrived at the luxe Gold restaurant in Notting Hill in the slinky ensemble with friends.

Flashing her toned pins as she hiked up her midi dress, Lottie put on a confident display while strutting her stuff along the street.

Wow! Lottie Moss showed off her incredible figure in a champagne silk slip dress during a night out on Saturday

The Only Fans star teamed her champagne outfit with a pair of beige suede cowboy boots, while she accessorised with a pearl and star necklace.

The blonde beauty styled her long locks in trendy pigtails, while leaving her fringe out at the front to frame her face.

Lottie sported a pared-down makeup palette during her night out, opting for classy winged eyeliner and a slick of baby pink lipstick.

Confident: Flashing her toned pins as she hiked up her midi dress, Lottie put on a confident display as she strutted her stuff along the street

Beauty: The blonde beauty styled her long locks in trendy pigtails, while leaving her fringe out at the front to frame her face

Earlier this month, Lottie went public with with her romance with The Vamps Tristan Evans.

Lottie and Tristan, 26, put on a cosy display as they made their first public appearance together last week.

The pair hit up the MEDAHUMAN's CBD Spritz launch at Isabel Mayfair last Wednesday after dining at La Bodega Negra in London's Soho.

Knocking them back! The blonde beauty sipped on a cocktail using what appeared to be a very cheeky straw

Night out: Lottie was joined by two blonde pals for the festivities

Once inside, Tristan promptly wrapped his arm around his model girlfriend as they posed for photographers, with the 6ft 1in musician towering over Lottie, despite the fact she was wearing heels.

It was revealed at the end of July that Lottie and Tristan were an item, after they were spotted getting up close and personal in Notting Hill two weeks ago before he spent the next evening cooking for her during a cosy night in together.

Edgier than her usual type, Lottie has previously dated Made In Chelsea boys Alex in 2016 and Sam Prince, 24.

New romance: Earlier this month, Lottie went public with with her romance with The Vamps Tristan Evans

Meanwhile, Tristan got engaged to model Anastasia Smith in April 2018, after dating for four years, but by the autumn the pair had split, removing all pictures together from their social media profiles.

Anastasia is now engaged to another man.

Last November The Vamps drummer told Attitude that 'there shouldn't be any boundaries,' when it comes to sexuality.

Around the same time, Lottie came out as pansexual.

The younger half-sister of Kate Moss told her Instagram followers: 'I'm pansexual so I don't really mind... any gender.'

'It kinda changes every day as well. It depends on who I meet.'

A pansexual person is attracted to someone or falls in love with them regardless of their biological sex or gender identity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She never fails to turn heads in glam outfits.

And Mollie King, 34, looked sensational on Saturday for her BBC Radio 1 show as she stunned in an orange satin Valle & Vik gown.

The Saturdays singer oozed radiance in the gorgeous ensemble as she stood outside the BBC's Broadcasting House in London.

Sensational: Mollie King was every inch the glamorous goddess in an orange satin gown for her BBC Radio 1 show in London on Saturday

The stunning presenter worked her best angles in the snaps, her partly waved blonde tresses sitting on her shoulders.

The captivating outfit included a hint of an open back as a side profile pose boasted the star's stunning figure.

Mollie's heels were hidden under her floor-length gown, although a peek of them contributed to her overall look.

Pose: The former Saturdays singer oozed radiance in the gorgeous ensemble as she stood outside the BBC's Broadcasting House in London

Natural: The dress accentuated Mollie's stunning figure

Boosted frame: Mollie's heels were hidden in most of the snaps, although a peek of them contributed to her overall look

The radio host ran her hands through her silky hair for some of the shots, as she appeared in good spirits.

Oozing confidence, Mollie didn't hold back from posing candidly, her minimal but glowing makeup on display.

Back in April 2018, the multi-talented star was announced as Matt Edmondson's co-host for a BBC Radio 1 show on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays which began in the June of that year.

Glam: The radio host ran her hands through her silky hair for some of the shots, as she appeared in good spirits

Radio host: Back in April 2018, the multi-talented star was announced as Matt Edmondson's co-host for a BBC Radio 1 show on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays which began in the June of that year

Talented: The star's additional projects include Strictly Come Dancing, where she placed fifth with AJ Pritchard

Her additional projects include Strictly Come Dancing, where she placed fifth with AJ Pritchard.

Mollie is engaged to England cricketer Stuart Broad and the pair have recently moved in together.

The couple have been an on-off item since 2012, but have been dating steadily since the start of 2019 leading up to their engagement.

They finally reunited earlier this yeat after Stuart spent 10 weeks abroad on tour with the England cricket team in Sri Lanka, India.

The couple, who spent two months apart, cosied up for a selfie with the accompanying caption: 'Can you tell I'm happy to have him home!?'

The happy couple: Mollie is engaged to England cricketer Stuart Broad and the pair have recently moved in together

And in a recent interview with MailOnline, Mollie revealed that she hopes to reunite with fellow Saturday's members Vanessa White, Frankie Bridge, Una Healy, and Rochelle Humes, one day.

The singer was part of the five-piece girl band from 2007 to 2014, and in that time they released four studio albums, headlined four UK tours and supported mega group Girls Aloud.

Asking about reforming, Mollie told MailOnline: 'I always say never say never.

'We are all enjoying doing different things, presenting, family life, Una is doing music still. I would definitely think about it.

'We came up on my Spotify shuffle the other day and I was like, 'oh I love this song so much!' It would be fun at some point!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She was alleged to have caused a rift between Alex Rodriguez and Jennifer Lopez.

And it's certainly not hard to see how Madison LeCroy could ruffle some feathers, after the Southern Charm star shared a sizzling leopard print bikini snap to her Instagram on Saturday.

The Bravo reality star was seen in the picture showing off her bust, after revealing that she'd undergone breast augmentation surgery in October 2019.

Her post comes just as A-Rod's ex-fiancée J-Lo unfollowed the former MLB superstar on Instagram, as well as wiping all their pictures together now she's moved on with Ben Affleck.

Wild thing! Southern Charm star Madison LeCroy shows off her stunning body in leopard print bikini... after allegedly causing rift between A-Rod and J-Lo

In May this year, Alex, 46, firmly denied 'factually incorrect' claims that he got in touch with Madison, 30, after his split from Jen, 52.

'I'm not sure who's looking to benefit from these types of rumors and false stories. They are factually incorrect. Alex is busy concentrating on his businesses and his family,' his representative Ron Berkowitz told DailyMail.com at the time.

However, Madison did previously reveal that she and Rodriguez had chatted online, but insisted that 'we DM’ed, but other than that there was nothing.'

She told Page Six later: 'He's never physically cheated on his fiancée with me.'

A source in Alex' camp told the New York Post at the time: 'He doesn't know this woman. Look, does this mean he didn't DM her and liked a photo or two? I guess not, but he doesn’t know her - and he definitely didn't hook up with her.'

Signs of trouble: Although A-Rod denied anything happened with Madison, it wasn't long before his engagement to J-Lo was called off, and she has since wiped him from social media

'No users found': A search of her followers list also indicated that she no longer was keeping tabs on her ex

Precise: Although the photos with Alex were noticeably absent, solo shots of the pop star performing were still on her page

Taking it in his stride: Meanwhile, A-Rod was seen out on Saturday in NYC looking unbothered, as the news that J-Lo unfollowed him surfaced

Smart: Alex made a very sharp appearance while fetching coffee on Saturday in New York

Still, the rumors coincided with the eventual split of A-Rod and J-Lo - and by the middle of April they had officially ended their romance, which began in 2017 and graduated into an engagement in 2019.

Jennifer then mid-2000s relationship with Ben, a relationship that caught the imagination of the public as 'Bennifer.'

Eagle-eyed fans of the Out Of Sight star first noticed on Saturday that A-Rod was completely out of her (virtual) life.

Turning up the heat: The reality show is known for showing off her flawless bikini body

Idyllic: The Southern Charm star has 526k followers on her Instagram page

Cheeky! The 30-year-old star is rumored to have caught the attention of A-Rod, though he denied anything happened between the pair

Pretty in pink: Madison, 30, shows off another great look on her social media pages

Fans first noticed that photos that featured the former couple were missing, including a set of photos that were taken near the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., in January.

The couple had traveled to the seat of government to celebrate the inauguration of President Joe Biden, and Jennifer sang America The Beautiful and This Land Is Your Land at the outdoor ceremony.

Although the photos with Alex were noticeably absent, solo shots of the pop star performing were still on her page.

A search of her followers list also indicated that she no longer was keeping tabs on her ex.

The Maid In Manhattan actress shares twins Emme and Max, 13, with her ex-husband Marc Anthony, while A-Rod has lookalike daughters Natasha, 16, and Ella, 13, from his marriage to Cynthia Scurtis.

Moving on: Jen, 52, is now back with ex Ben Affleck, 49, (Pictured in 2003)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Just a decade ago, Charlie Sheen was the highest paid actor on television, earning $1.8million per episode on the hit CBS sitcom Two and a Half Men.

In recent years, following a series of mishaps, more tales of his party man exploits, and bizarre behavior that led to his very public meltdown, Sheen has seemingly embraced a more quiet life, especially in the wake of his HIV diagnosis in 2015.

And the Platoon star, 55, proudly showcased the effects of his lifestyle change as he was spotted leaving a CVS Pharmacy in Malibu, seemingly looking healthy.

On the go: Charlie Sheen, 55, stepped out to a CVS Pharmacy in Malibu on Saturday

Sheen stepped out in brown cargo shorts with a black t-shirt and navy blue sneakers.

He also donned a pair of black sunglasses as he carried a reusable bag full of groceries out of the store on another warm and sunny Southern California day.

With COVID-19 still very much a danger, the local Malibu native made sure to wear a black face mask over his mouth and nose whenever he was around people in the public.

Looking good: The former Two And A Half Men star looked healthy in cargo shorts and a t-shirt during his quick stop for groceries at CVS

Just two days ago, to mark the Field Of Dreams game between the New York Yankees and Chicago White Sox in Iowa, Sheen took to Instagram and shared a photo of himself hanging out with a few legendary baseball players that he originally posted back in September 2017.

'Rock Raines, The Wizard, Lefty, Tony Tee, and The Sheen,' he wrote in the caption of the photo seemingly taken in the cornfield of the Field Of Dreams set, along with 'hashtag - we got this.'

He referenced the nicknames of iconic players Tim Raines, Ozzie Smith, and Steve Carlton, along with longtime friend Tony Todd.

Sheen's personal tailspin a decade ago included pleading guilty to assaulting his former wife Brooke Mueller on Christmas day in 2010 and his very public feud with Two And A Half Men creator, Chuck Lorre, where he used such comments as 'winning' and 'tiger blood.'

Diamond days: Sheen reposted a photo of himself and friend Tony Todd with baseball legends Steve Carlson, Ozzie Smith and Tim Raines

His crazed antics would result in his firing from the show in late 2011.

'People have [said to] me, "Hey, man, that was so cool, that was so fun to watch. That was so cool to be a part of and support and all that energy and, you know, we stuck it to the man,"' Sheen told Yahoo! Entertainment.

'My thought behind that is, "Oh, yeah, great. I'm so glad that I traded early retirement for a f-----g hashtag.'

Sheen has made his health his main priority since he publicly revealing that he was diagnosed with HIV in November 2015.

The actor's Hollywood resumes includes such films as Platoon (1986), Wall Street (1987), Eight Men Out (1988), Major League (1989), Navy SEALs (1990), Hot Shots! (1991), and The Arrival (1996), along with the sitcoms Spin City (2000-2002), Two And A Half Men (2003-2011), and Anger Management (2012-2014).

He hasn't had any new film or TV credits in the last few years.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jennifer Lopez made her months-old split from Alex Rodriguez Instagram official after she deleted all traces of their relationship from the social media platform.

The 52-year-old actress and singer also unfollowed her former fiancé amid her social media cleanse.

Eagle-eyed fans of the Out Of Sight star first noticed on Saturday that A-Rod was completely out of her (virtual) life.

Out of sight: Jennifer Lopez, 52, finished severing ties with her former fiancé Alex Rodriguez when she unfollowed him on Instagram and deleted all posts featuring him; seen in May in Inglewood, Calif.

Fans first noticed that photos that featured the former couple were missing, including a set of photos that were taken near the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., in January.

The couple had traveled to the seat of government to celebrate the inauguration of President Joe Biden, and Jennifer sang America The Beautiful and This Land Is Your Land at the outdoor ceremony.

Although the photos with Alex were noticeably absent, solo shots of the pop star performing were still on her page.

A search of her followers list also indicated that she no longer was keeping tabs on her ex.

Deleted: Fans first noticed on Saturday that photos featuring A-Rod, 46, were missing, including a set of photos that were taken in Washington, D.C., in January for the presidential inauguration

'No users found': A search of her followers list also indicated that she no longer was keeping tabs on her ex

Precise: Although the photos with Alex were noticeably absent, solo shots of the pop star performing were still on her page

Taking it in his stride: Meanwhile, A-Rod was seen out on Saturday looking unbothered, as the news that J-Lo unfollowed him surfaced

Smart: Alex made a very sharp appearance while fetching coffee on Saturday

Jennifer and Alex first met all the way back in 2005, but it wasn't until March of 2017 that the couple were first reported to have been dating.

Alex confirmed the relationship later in the month, and the Waiting For Tonight singer also spoke publicly about it.

Their red-carpet debut came shortly afterward in May, when they arrived together looking glamorous at the Met Gala in Manhattan.

The union seemed to be a solid fit for the two, and it didn't hurt that their children also seemed to get along well.

The Maid In Manhattan actress shares twins Emme and Max, 13, with her ex-husband Marc Anthony, while A-Rod has lookalike daughters Natasha, 16, and Ella, 13, from his marriage to Cynthia Scurtis.

Taking their time: Jennifer and Alex first met all the way back in 2005, but it wasn't until March of 2017 that the couple were first reported to have been dating; seen in 2017

Thumbs up: They made their red-carpet debut at the Met Gala in May 2017, and the union seemed to get approval from their children, who regularly spent time together

Just over two years into their relationship, the lovebirds got engaged in March of 2019.

But a year the later the coronavirus spread across the globe and forced the couple to indefinitely postpone their wedding plans.

But by the spring of 2021, Alex was beset by rumors that he had cheated with Southern Charm star Madison LeCroy, though she claimed the two had never met in person.

Page Six reported in March of that year that they had decided to go their separate ways.

'This has been a long time coming,' a source told People at the time. 'They are tied in their business worlds so it's not a cut and dry breakup. It's taken a while for them to even think about untangling it all.'

But on March 13, the couple made an about-face and claimed 'We are working through some things' in a statement.

They were seen shortly afterward as they got close in the Dominican Republic, where Jennifer was shooting a film, but in April they were reported to have split for good.

Next step: Just over two years into their relationship, the lovebirds got engaged in March of 2019. But a year the later the coronavirus spread across the globe and forced the couple to indefinitely postpone their wedding plans

The end: Alex was beset by cheating rumors in the spring of this year, and they confirmed their breakup in April, though they denied an initial report from a month earlier; seen in 2018

'We have realized we are better as friends and look forward to remaining so,' they said in a joint statement.

'We will continue to work together and support each other on our shared businesses and projects. We wish the best for each other and one another’s children. Out of respect for them, the only other comment we have to say is thank you to everyone who has sent kind words and support.'

It wasn't long after Jen and Alex split that her former fiancé Ben Affleck, 49, came back into the picture.

The couple had previously dated in the early 2000s and had been engaged from 2002 until early 2004, before separating.

But according to TMZ, Ben got back in touch with Jennifer in February and began sending her 'loving and longing' emails while she was on set filming.

It's unclear if she and Alex were together at that time, or just keeping up appearances, but she continued responding back and forth through the duration fo the shoot.

Heating up: Ben Affleck, 49, who was engaged to Jennifer from 2002–2004, began writing her loving emails in February, and he was seen going to her LA home in April; seen in 2003

In April, Ben was seen driving to a hotel, only to be picked up in Jennifer's SUV and taken to her home in LA for them to spend time together.

The two kicked things up a notch in May with a week-long trip to snow Montana, and then followed that one up with another trip to Miami, where she and her family were based at the time.

It wasn't until June that the renewed lovers were spotted kissing at a birthday party for Jennifer's sister Lynda Lopez.

They repeated the gesture in a steamy set of photos in June to mark the singer's 52nd birthday.

In recent weeks the couple have been seen touring houses around Los Angeles, and Jennifer's kids are reportedly comfortable with Ben and up for a move back to the West Coast.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She was seen modeling a risque lingerie set earlier in the day for her 1million Instagram followers.

And Amelia Hamlin kept her toned physique in check by stopping by a gym in Los Angeles on Saturday afternoon.

Hours after her workout, the 20-year-old model was seen grabbing dinner with her boyfriend Scott Disick, 38, and his son Mason, 11, at a restaurant in Calabasas.

Gym rat: Amelia Hamlin kept her toned physique in check by stopping by a gym in Los Angeles on Saturday afternoon

Dinner date: Hours after her workout, the 20-year-old model was seen grabbing dinner with her boyfriend Scott Disick, 38, and his son Mason, 11, at a restaurant in Calabasas

Amelia's workout attire consisted of a maroon sports bra and matching high-waisted leggings that exposed her taut tummy and hugged her every curve.

She let her brunette hair flow out from under a black baseball cap emblazoned with the phrase, 'Deep Funk And Divine Intervention.'

Hamlin kept a black purse tucked under her toned arm and trekked back to her car in a pair of slide sandals.

The Instagram star shielded her eyes with a pair of huge shades and appeared to be wearing little to no makeup for the solo outing.

A lady with a message: She let her brunette hair flow out from under a black baseball cap emblazoned with the phrase, 'Deep Funk And Divine Intervention'

Fueling up: Wanting to refuel, Hamlin swung by a smoothie shop in the area to grab a pink-toned drink

Wanting to refuel, Hamlin swung by a smoothie shop in the area to grab a pink-toned drink.

With a workout checked off of her list, Amelia quickly changed out of her gym clothes and into a trendy monochrome ensemble for her night out with Scott.

She strolled through the restaurant parking lot with Disick's eldest child by her side, while rocking a beige knit bra top and matching skirt.

Scott shares Mason, as well as son Reign, six, and daughter Penelope, nine, with ex Kourtney Kardashian, 42.

Instead of her gym slides, the model threw on some sandals that coordinated perfectly with the vibe of her outfit.

Family time: Amelia strolled through the restaurant parking lot with Disick's eldest child by her side, while rocking a beige knit bra top and matching skirt

Former flame: Scott shares Mason, as well as son Reign, six, and daughter Penelope, nine, with ex Kourtney Kardashian, 42; the former couple pictured in 2015

As for Scott, the Talentless founder kept casual in a black graphic tee and a pair of blue printed shorts.

He kept his head covered with a black cap that matched his sneakers.

Amelia's mother Lisa Rinna recently revealed that Amelia is 'very happy right now' in her relationship with Scott during an appearance on Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen on Wednesday.

Rinna, who shares Amelia and Delilah Belle Hamlin, 23, with LA Law alum Harry Hamlin, 69, responded, 'How do you think I feel?,' when asked about her thoughts on the pairing.

'Listen, I will say this: Amelia's very happy right now and you really want your kids to be happy, so Harry and I are very thrilled that she's happy,' said the Bravo beauty.

Happy: Amelia's mother Lisa Rinna (pictured) recently revealed that Amelia is 'very happy right now' in her relationship with the 38-year-old Talentless founder during an appearance on Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen on Wednesday

In love: Not included in Saturday's sultry Instagram snaps was Amelia's much older boyfriend Scott Disick; Amelia and Scott pictured in July

The pair in February revealed they had been dating, as they have been linked since last fall.

A source in March told People that the couple has been 'getting serious,' and that their 18 years in age difference isn't a factor in the romance, as 'she grew up in the industry and knows how all this works.

'It's a different type of maturity, and they really don't feel the age difference.'

Rinna chatted about her daughter's relationship on the Andy Cohen talk show this past May, saying of Disick, 'He was very nice, we had a very nice time ... it is what it is.'

In a June episode of RHOBH, Rinna said she was nervous over the public celeb relationship with Disick.

Wants what's best for her: 'Listen, I will say this: Amelia's very happy right now and you really want your kids to be happy, so Harry and I are very thrilled that she's happy,' said the Bravo beauty; Amelia pictured in June

Getting serious: A source in March told People that the couple has been 'getting serious,' and that their 18 years in age difference isn't a factor in the romance, as 'she grew up in the industry and knows how all this works; the couple seen in May

'Amelia has had her struggles in the press, but it's now a new headline,' Rinna said. 'No one's talking about the eating disorder anymore and you know what, thank God. As a mother, I'm like, "Good." This gives her another label to deal with.'

Earlier in the day on Satursday, Amelia proudly displayed her gym-honed physique on Saturday in a series of sultry snapshots uploaded to Instagram.

She slipped into a hot pink leopard print bra and matching panties from her go-to intimated brand Boux Avenue.

'the allure of women feat. @bouxavenue,' captioned Hamlin, who posed with a copy of the famous François Baudot photo book.

Amelia's long brunette hair was worn down and flowed down her back and chest in straightened strands.

Wow! Amelia Hamlin proudly displayed her gym-honed physique on Saturday in a series of sultry snapshots uploaded to Instagram

As for makeup, Hamline highlighted her plump pout with a peach lip gloss and doused her lashes in mascara.

The youngest daughter of Lisa Rinna and Harry Hamlin was captured sitting on a chair with her copy of The Allure Of Women in hand, which features images of iconic female style muses.

One shot showed her with the book resting in her lap, as to expose the details of her chest-amplifying bra.

While the second shot showed Hamlin covering her face with it as she sat with her legs pressed together.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They recently returned from a romantic trip to her native Brazil.

And on Saturday night, Alessandra Ambrosio looked very much in love with her new boyfriend Richard Lee, as the pair headed into dinner at trendy hotspot Nobu in Malibu, California.

The former Victoria's Secret Angel, 40, stared lovingly into the male model’s eyes, as he smiled back affectionately.

On Saturday night: Alessandra Ambrosio looked very much in love with her new boyfriend Richard Lee, as the pair headed into dinner at trendy hotspot Nobu in Malibu

Ambrosio wore a cute and sexy bright green knit dress, which had a keyhole opening at her midriff.

She carried a woven straw purse, and walked along in similar-looking sandals that looked to be made from rope.

The mother of two painted her finger and toenails in matching shades of green, and had an emerald pendant necklace on her chest layered with other pieces of delicate jewelry.

Look of love: The former Victoria's Secret Angel stared lovingly into the male model’s eyes, as he smiled back affectionately

Peek-a-boo: Ambrosio wore a cute and sexy bright green knit dress, which had a keyhole opening at her midriff

She wore mismatched earrings with one in the shape of a feather.

Her brown hair was down for the evening, and her makeup was soft.

Richard, whom Alessandra began dating earlier this year, was chic and understated in an all-black outfit.

He wore a matching beaded bracelet and carried a pale green sweatshirt over one shoulder.

Lovely: Alessandra's brown hair was down for the evening, and her makeup was soft

Earlier in the day: The brunette beauty uploaded an action shot of the pair playing beach volleyball to her Instagram, tagging Richard as he ran to the net to hit the ball

He looked happy and thrilled to be by his beauty’s side.

Neither Richard nor Alessandra were wearing face coverings while they were outdoors.

Earlier in the day, the brunette beauty uploaded an action shot of the pair playing beach volleyball to her Instagram, tagging Richard as he ran to the net to hit the ball.

Romantic: The couple recently returned from a romantic trip to her native Brazil

Alessandra confirmed her smoldering romance with Richard when they were spotted on a romantic dinner date in February.

She was previously involved with Italian fashion designer Nicolo Oddi who founded the brand Alanui with his sister Carlotta.

Meanwhile, Alessandra shares her two children Anja and Noah with her ex-fiance Jamie Mazur, who co-founded RE/DONE.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tristan Thompson sent out a cryptic messages on Saturday in the caption of his latest Instagram post.

'Some people will judge you for changing. Some people will celebrate you for growing. Choose your circle wisely,' wrote the 30-year-old basketball player, who boasts 3.4million followers.

Thompson's talk of 'changing' and 'growing' comes amid his recent split from baby mama Khloe Kardashian which was reportedly prompted by allegations that he had cheated on the reality star, again.

Freshly dressed: Tristan Thompson wrote about 'changing' and 'growing' in the caption for a stylish snap that was shared to his Instagram account on Saturday

Included with his caption was a very stylish shot of Tristan standing in front of a large black-and-white print.

Thompson was dressed in a leather button-up shirt worn on top of a black t-shirt.

The power forward, who was recently traded to the Sacramento Kings, also sported a pair of slightly distressed pants in the snap.

The professional basketball player contrasted the dark tone of his outfit with a set of bright yellow Nike Air Force Ones.

He accessorized with a stylish pair of sunglasses and a single necklace as he directed his view towards the camera.

Working things out: Thompson's post comes amid his ongoing romantic troubles with Khloe Kardashian; they are seen in 2018

Though he was riding solo on Saturday, Tristan was spotted out with his ex Khloe on Friday afternoon as they attended a Paw Patrol screening with their daughter.

The two were initially linked after they were spotted leaving a nightclub in each other's company in 2016.

Prior to becoming involved with the 37-year-old reality television personality, the athlete was in a relationship with Jordan Craig, with whom he shares a son named Prince Oliver, aged four.

Kardashian was also previously married to Lamar Odom, whom she divorced in 2016.

Starting strong: The couple was first romantically linked after they were spotted leaving a nightclub in each other's company in 2016; the two are seen in 2018

The couple went public with their relationship later that year after making several appearances together.

The clothing designer and the center worked on their connection over much of 2017, with the former regularly expressing her devotion to her boyfriend on social media.

Kardashian later revealed that she was pregnant with the couple's first child through a post made to her Instagram that December.

She later announced that the two would be expecting a girl the following March during an episode of Keeping Up With The Kardashians.

Letting everyone know: Kardashian announced that the pair would be expecting a girl during an episode of Keeping Up With The Kardashians

A new start: The couple appeared to have worked out their differences following the birth of their daughter, True, in April of 2018

However, it was reported that Thompson had been unfaithful to his partner over the course of their relationship that April, to which neither of the two publicly responded.

The pair eventually worked out their differences following the birth of their daughter, True, now aged three.

In September of that year, Tristan was reported to have been seen spending time with another woman, which may have inspired the couple to separate in February of 2019.

Not strong enough: Thompson was eventually seen spending time with another woman in September of 2018 and the couple split up the following February

Kardashian and Thompson spent much of that year coparenting their child, although they went on to settle their differences that December.

Last year, the parents went on to quarantine together during the early stages of the pandemic, and they appeared to have resumed their relationship by August.

Although the pair stayed together for an extended period of time, they split up this past June and remain on amicable terms while coparenting their daughter.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has been celebrating a loved-up anniversary with her husband of 11 years.

And Ashley Graham took a moment to celebrate herself as well on Saturday, when she momentarily uploaded a sexy selfie to her Instagram Stories in a bright orange bikini top that displayed her baby bump.

The model, 33, stood with her hands on her hips, which were covered in a patterned beach wrap.

Ashley Graham took a moment to celebrate herself on Saturday: She momentarily uploaded a sexy selfie to her Instagram Stories in a bright orange bikini top

She had one leg slightly raised and she ornamented her pregnant belly with a beaded belly chain.

Ashley puckered her lips into a kiss and wore black rectangular sunglasses.

She stood next to a simple caption, which read, 'BYE!'

The beauty also shared further tributes to her husband of 11 years, Justin Ervin, on social media on the occasion of their anniversary.

She shared a brief selfie video of the pair in bed with their baby son Isaac, one, as they lounged in what looked to be a vacation destination and Justin, 35, held onto his diapered son’s foot.

Family lounging: The beauty also shared further tributes to her husband of 11 years, Justin Ervin, on social media on the occasion of their anniversary

She tagged her husband‘s account and wished him a 'Happy Anniversary' in the caption.

Earlier in the day, Graham shared further well wishes for her spouse, promising to love her Ervin for '100 more' years as she celebrated their 11 year wedding anniversary.

Taking to Instagram, the beauty gushed in the caption of a couples photo, 'I have loved you immensely for 11 years. and I'll love you for 100 more. you are my forever. happy anniversary my Justin (heart emoticon).'

'You are my forever': Graham promised to love her husband Ervin for '100 more' years as she celebrated their 11th wedding anniversary

In the photo, the couple exuded cool as they posed side by side, with Ashley leaning ever-so-slightly towards her husband.

Justin also celebrated the milestone occasion on his Instagram Stories, where he posted sweet wedding day flashbacks.

'11 years ago we said, "I do..." Thank you for being my best friend, my closest confidant, the mother of my children and my bride. I love you @ashleygraham,' he gushed in a photo of the then-newlyweds.

He also shared a beautiful photo of blushing bride Ashley, beaming with joy in her wedding dress with a loose curl falling over her face.

'Thank you for being my best friend': Justin also celebrated the milestone occasion on his Instagram Stories, where he posted sweet wedding day flashbacks

Going to the chapel! He also shared a beautiful photo of blushing bride Ashley, beaming with joy in her wedding dress with a loose curl falling over her face

Ashley first met Justin in 2009 at church. The couple quickly began dating, with their nuptials occurring the following year.

They now have one-year-old baby son Isaac and another one on the way.

On Wednesday, the model put her growing midsection on display as she worked a flirty bright orange mini dress on Wednesday.

The model couldn't have looked any happier striking an array of poses upon a beachfront balcony.

Working it! Graham put her growing midsection on display as she rocked a flirty bright orange mini dress on Wednesday

The mom-to-be was a vision of glamour with her brunette tresses styled into sleek, loose waves with a glamorous side part.

She worked an array of gold jewelry, including a chain necklace, and a pair of strappy neon yellow heels which injected another playful touch to the look.

In the images, Ashley tenderly cradled her bump while flashing a silly, shocked expression for the camera.

She appeared more contemplative in a second shot capturing her gazing towards the ocean blue with her hand gently resting at the top of her belly.

Hey mama! Graham, who shares son Isaac with husband Justin, gazed contemplatively towards the ocean blue as she rested one hand on her burgeoning bump

And a third snap captured the model looking euphoric as she posed on the balcony with her hands on either side of the railing.

Ashley announced she was expecting her second child with husband Justin a little over a year after giving birth to their son Isaac last year.

The model recently admitted her control has 'gone out the window' during her pregnancy.

Speaking with People, Ashley said she has stopped trying to 'control' her body because she knows she will 'never feel the same' as she did before she was pregnant.

Bun in the oven! Graham announced she was expecting her second child with husband Justin a little over a year after giving birth to their son Isaac last year

She said: 'I think being in control when you're pregnant, it just gets thrown out the window.

'And I learned that the hard way when I tried to control everything when I was pregnant with Isaac and I told myself that I was going to bounce right back because I was breastfeeding and everybody told me, "Oh, if you breastfeed you're going to lose all the weight." And I had a few honest women tell me you will never feel the same. So they were just blunt with me and sure enough, I haven't felt the same.

'And then boom. I was like, "Well, I just got pregnant again so maybe I'll never feel the same and I don't even know what I felt like before I was pregnant with Isaac anyways."'

Forever and ever: Graham tied the knot with her husband Justin in 2010

Ashley also heaped praise on the 'mommy community' that she joined when she was pregnant with her first child, as she now has a place to go to for advice without being shamed.

'I think that the best thing I did was find a mommy community and when I'm pregnant, I find other pregnant people to just call and ask [questions] because this pregnancy is so different from the last and different symptoms, different feelings.

'And then when the kid gets here, then you have a whole other slew of questions because they don't come with a manual, so [I'm] all about the community. And I think that if I didn't have that, I would be so lost.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lizzo is already causing a stir in the pop culture sphere after releasing her long-awaited new single Rumors featuring rapper Cardi B on Friday.

The 33-year-old singer raised some eyebrows by name dropping Drake at one point in the track, playfully denying to have ever hooked up with the hip hop superstar.

In a recent interview with Apple Music's Zane Lowe, Lizzo said the high profile name-drop was an effort to turn the tables on male musicians who often list their female sexual exploits in their songs.

Causing a stir: Lizzo is already causing a stir in the pop culture sphere after releasing her long-awaited new single Rumors featuring rapper Cardi B on Friday; Lizzo pictured in 2019

All of Lizzo's Drake talk comes at the end of Rumors' first verse, just before the pre-chorus.

'Last year, I thought I would losе it / Readin' s*** on the internet / My smoothie cleanse and my diet / No, I ain't f*** Drake yet (Ha),' the Detroit, Michigan native belts out.

The Juice star revealed to Lowe that she wanted to give society a taste of its own medicine, while also showcasing a bit of her sense of humor in the lyrics.

Name-drop: The 33-year-old singer raised some eyebrows by name dropping Drake at one point in the track, playfully denying to have ever hooked up with the hip hop superstar; Drake pictured in May

Turning tables: In a recent interview with Apple Music's Zane Lowe, Lizzo said the high profile name-drop was an effort to turn the tables on male musicians who often list their female sexual exploits in their songs; Cardi B and Lizzo featured on Rumors cover art

'I just thought it would be so funny to say,' she said before sharing that she has 'a small relationship' with Drake and that 'he's very cool.'

She went on to assert, 'I just feel like women, there's so many times where girls' names get dropped in songs because they're fine.'

The Good As Hell star said rappers have often called out women in music, which was followed by her giving an example of Biggie Small's hit song Dreams.

Honored: Later in the interview with Lowe, Lizzo heaped praise on Cardi, while offering the reason why she shared the mic with the Bodak Yellow rapper

One of a kind: 'There was just no one else for it. There was literally no one else. From the day the ink dried on her Atlantic contract I said, "please get me on a song with Cardi B,"' said Lizzo

Long-time coming: The Detroit, Michigan native confessed she wanted to do a collaboration with Cardi the day she signed with Atlantic Records

Later in the interview with Lowe, Lizzo heaped praise on Cardi, while offering the reason why she shared the mic with the Bodak Yellow rapper.

'There was just no one else for it. There was literally no one else. From the day the ink dried on her Atlantic contract I said, "please get me on a song with Cardi B."'

She added, 'She's just funny. I like funny people and she can rap. You know what I'm saying?' she explained before adding, 'Seriously be rapping. It's because she was true to herself the whole time. She's a groundbreaker. You can't deny her ability. She's a superstar.'

Rumors is Lizzo's first major release since her critically acclaimed 2019 album Cuz I Love You.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is a well-know vegan and animal welfare advocate.

And Kate Mara threw her 'support' behind the Big Cat Public Safety Act by rocking a tee adorned with its name and campaign logo on Saturday afternoon in Los Angeles.

The act was reintroduced in the US Senate in April, and aims to provide a solution to the 'dangerous and cruel problems associated with private ownership of big cats and direct contact activities like cub petting.'

Activism: Kate Mara threw her 'support' behind the Big Cat Public Safety Act by rocking a tee adorned with its name and campaign logo on Saturday afternoon in Los Angeles

The 38-year-old actress teamed her well intentioned top with a pair of skintight black leggings.

Mara trekked through the parking lot in a pair of checkered slide sandals after attending a Pilates class in the LA neighborhood of Los Feliz.

Her bleach blonde jaw-length hair was styled half up, half down and she rocked a pair of clear RayBan shades over her eyes.

Fit: Mara trekked through the parking lot in a pair of checkered slide sandals after attending a Pilates class in the LA neighborhood of Los Feliz

The American Horror Story star had a pink mask tucked around her wrist that coordinated with her reusable water bottle.

Slung across Kate's body was a black designer bag with a silver chainlink strap.

Kate made the dramatic change from auburn to blonde back in June, proudly unveiling her new hair on Instagram.

Her cause: Kate and her sister Rooney Mara (pictured left) are well-know vegans and animal welfare advocates

Changes: Kate made the dramatic change from auburn to blonde back in June, proudly unveiling her new hair on Instagram

'New hair,' captioned the star, who then encouraged her 452,000 followers to check out her critically-acclaimed Netflix series A Teacher.

The limited series, which is 10-episodes in length, premiered on FX in November 2020.

A Teacher documents the predatory relationship formed between teacher Claire Wilson (played by Mara) and her young student Eric Walker (played by Nick Robinson) and the complexities and consequences of the inappropriate entanglement, as per IMDB.

Limited series: Mara's latest project A Teacher documents the predatory relationship formed between teacher Claire Wilson (played by Mara) and her young student Eric Walker (played by Nick Robinson) and the complexities and consequences of the inappropriate entanglement, as per IMDB; Kate and costar Nick pictured

Complex: Speaking to Deadline , Kate opened up about the research and preparation she endured to play the role, noting that delving into the mind of a predator is an answerless feat

Speaking to Deadline, Kate opened up about the research and preparation she endured to play the role, noting that delving into the mind of a predator is an answerless feat.

'I definitely did research into these stories, and specifically the Mary Kay Letourneau one, and there’s a documentary that I watched that I found really fascinating,' she recalled.

'But, it’s not like I could go and talk to one of these people. I don’t have an answer, and I think that that was one of the reasons why I think playing the character and exploring the show is so interesting, because you just have to do your own assessment, and try and find pieces of these specific people and stories that, maybe do make sense, or if you were to make up a backstory about somebody and maybe why they got to this place, it’s hard, because there isn’t just an answer for that, that we’re aware of.'

Home life: When she is not challenging herself with her work, Mara is living a happy home life with her husband Jamie Bell (left)

When she is not challenging herself with her work, Mara is living a happy home life with her husband Jamie Bell.

The couple wed in 2017 after meeting on the set of their 2015 sci-fi film Fantastic Four.

Jamie and Kate have since welcomed a child together, and they have opted to keep them out of the public eye.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He recently came out in support of his best friend and filmmaking partner Ben Affleck's rekindled romance with former fiancee Jennifer Lopez.

And Matt Damon was seen heading to dinner at celebrity-friendly Japanese eatery Nobu in Malibu, California on Saturday evening.

The Good Will Hunting star, 50, smiled while exiting his large black SUV as he entered into the restaurant to dine with his daughters Isabella, Gia and Stella.

Happy: Matt Damon was seen heading into dinner after leaving his car with the valet at trendy celebrity-friendly Japanese eatery Nobu in Malibu on Saturday

He was dressed in all black, with a hoodie on and a face mask hanging from one ear.

The sighting comes soon after the Stillwater star, who is close friends with Affleck, said there's 'no-one' who wants to see his on-again romance with Lopez go the distance more than him, as he really wants them both to be 'happy'.

When asked if he thought Ben and Jennifer would make it, Matt told The Carlos Watson Show: 'Oh man, no one's pulling harder than I am.

'They're both great. I just want for their happiness. They seem pretty happy right now.'

In black: The Good Will Hunting star, 50, smiled while exiting his large black SUV, on his way in to dine with his daughters

Matt has previously spoken about his pal's relationship, as he told Extra last month he was 'so happy' for the couple amid their rekindled romance.

He said at the time: 'He's the best. He deserves every happiness in the world. I'm glad for both of them.'

Meanwhile, it was recently reported 52-year-old Jennifer – who previously dated Ben between 2002 and 2004 – is 'fully committed' to Ben, but they aren't planning on getting married.

Supportive: The sighting comes soon after the Stillwater star, who is close friends with Ben Affleck, said there's 'no-one' who wants to see Ben's on-again romance with Jennifer Lopez go the distance more than him

Back on! The couple have recently reconciled, 17 years after calling off their engagement (pictured July 2021 in Los Angeles)

A source told E! recently: 'They are fully committed to each other... They have been meshing their lives and families and don't feel the need to get engaged yet or even tie the knot.

'They have both been there and don't feel it's necessary. They are both very secure within their relationship and Ben worships her. It's truly meant to be and everyone around them thinks they are a perfect match.'

However, the pair are likely to move in together soon, and the couple have been spotted house hunting together in recent months.

The couple were photographed this past week touring Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate, fueling rumors that the singer is looking to relocate to the West Coast from Miami, Florida for the actor.

They were reportedly touring the five-acre property once belonging to the famous British-American comedian at around 11:30AM, and spent an hour there.

An insider told ET Online last month that their 'friends wouldn't be surprised if they move in together and ultimately end up together. They're spending all of their free time together and making each other a priority.'

Ben has three children - Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine – with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner, whilst Jennifer has 13-year-old twins Emme and Max with her ex-husband Marc Anthony.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cardi B shared a video of herself showing off her baby bump to her Instagram Story on Saturday afternoon.

The 28-year-old rapper was seen wearing an eye-catching outfit while dropping verses as she stared at her growing stomach in the mirror of what appeared to be a department store.

The Grammy-winning hitmaker announced that she was pregnant with her second child while performing at the BET Awards in June.

A better look: Cardi B showed off her growing baby bump while dropping a few verses in a video that was shared to her Instagram account on Saturday afternoon

Cardi sported an eye-catching geometric bodysuit that conformed tightly to her baby bump in the video.

The rapper, born Belcalis Marlenis Almanzar, also sported a pair of black-and-white heeled shoes.

The performer's beautiful brunette hair fell towards her shoulders and contrasted well with the brighter colors of her outfit.

She notably accessorized with a single ring and a sparkling necklace in the share-worthy clip.

Eye-catching ensemble: The Grammy-winning rapper was dressed in a multicolored geometric bodysuit while placing her stomach on full view

Cardi initially announced that she was pregnant while performing with the rap group Migos, of which her husband Offset is a member.

The couple was initially linked in 2016 when the Up rapper teased a collaboration with the 29-year-old performer.

Cardi and Offset were later spotted spending time together during the following year's Super Bowl, which served as their first official date.

She later shared a video of the pair to her Instagram that Valentine's Day, although the pair went on to publicly deny that they were in a relationship.

Happy together: Cardi shares her daughter, Kulture, with her husband of several years, Offset; the two are seen performing at the BET Awards 2021

Keeping it low-key: The two were initially romantically connected in 2017, although they kept their relationship under wraps for an extended period of time; they are seen in 2020

Cardi and Offset went on to remain low-key about their connection throughout much of 2017, although the former shared several posts to her Instagram account that suggested that they had separated.

The couple later reconciled, and the Migos member went on to publicly pop the big question to his now-wife during a performance in Philadelphia, which she accepted.

The pair fielded cheating rumors on the part of the Walk It Talk It co-songwriter on several occasions, although the two remained together.

During a 2018 interview with Rolling Stone, Offset spoke about the qualities that he admired in his wife.

Making a scene: Offset popped the big question to his now-wife during a 2017 performance in Philadelphia; they are pictured in 2020

He described her as 'real solid, came from where I came from, did what I did. She's herself, man. I seen her develop from the trenches all the way up, and I like how she did it. I respect her grind as a woman.'

That year, Cardi revealed that she was pregnant with the couple's child during an appearance on Saturday Night Live, and she gave birth to Kulture, aged three, that July.

However, the couple split up that December, and although Offset appeared at one of her concerts in an effort to win his estranged wife back, she sent him off stage.

The pair eventually settled their differences and spent much of the following year in each other's company as they raised their daughter.

Doing their thing: The couple put many of their differences aside and spent much of 2019 raising their daughter

In September of last year, Cardi filed for divorce and made it publicly known that she was frustrated with her husband's continued marital issues.

The two went on to reunite the following month, and the Bodak Yellow rapper called off the divorce that November.

The hitmaker has since shared several snaps on her Instagram account to show off her still-growing baby bump.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sylvester Stallone heaped love and praise on his wife Jennifer Flavin as they rang in her 53rd birthday on Saturday, August 14.

To mark her big day, the Rocky and Rambo legend, 75, took to Instagram and shared a recent photo of himself and Jennifer posing sweetly next to one another.

'Happy birthday to Jennifer! A fantastic wife and mother! We love you,' Stallone gushed in the caption.

All love: Sylvester Stallone heaped love and praise on his wife Jennifer Flavin as they rang in her 53rd birthday on Saturday, August 14

In the photo, the couple appeaed to be standing outside, presumably in the backyard of their plush home that they share together in Palm Beach, Florida.

With a glowing smile, Jennifer modeled a red floral number as she posed with her right arm wrapped lovingly around her husband.

She had her dirty-blonde tresses styled long, with major bangs, and a part in the middle.

Stallone could be seen flashing a big beaming smile, while dressed in a blue and black checkered button-down shirt.

His salt and pepper-colored hair was pushed back off his face.

Personal milestone: In early July, the Rocky and Rambo legend celebrated his 75th birthday

Longtime love: To mark her husband's 75th birthday on July 6, Flavin shared her own loving tribute, where she thanked Stallone for 'always making me laugh and loving me so much'

Walk down memory lane: Flavin's most recent birthday post to Stallone included photos taken during their relationship that began back in 1988

Stallone's birthday love to his wife comes about five weeks after he celebrated his 75th birthday on July 6, which included an Instagram shoutout from Flavin.

'Happy 75th birthday my love!' Flavin wrote in the caption of six photos that were taken during various times throughout their relationship, which began back in the late 1980s.

'Thank you for always making me laugh and loving me so much! I love you forever,' she added, along with three red heart emojis.

Destined: The couple broke up in the early 1990s, only to reunite and get married in May 1997

Going strong: Flavin and Stallone celebrated 24 years of marriage this past May

The couple, who celebrated their 24th wedding anniversary this past May, started their romance back in 1988 but broke up after several years together. They would eventually reunite several years later and go on to tie-the-knot in 1997.

Stallone and Flavin have three adult daughters together named Sophia, 24, Sistine, 23, and Scarlet, 19.

The Oscar-winner also welcomed two sons with his first wife, Sasha Czack: Sage, who died of heart failure in July 2012 at the age of 36 and Seargeoh, 42.

Stallone was previously married to actress Brigette Nielsen for about two years in the 1980s.

His girls! The actor, writer and director has three daughters with Flavin: Sistine, 23, Scarlett , 19, and Sophia, 24; the family is pictured in a post from July 21
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@His wife recently faced backlash for continuing to breastfeed their daughter, who is now five years old.

But rapper Ice-T still made a showing with his wife Coco Austin and their daughter Chanel Nicole Marrow on Saturday, at a special screening of the new animated film PAW Patrol: The Movie in New York City.

The family posed in the hallway of the AMC Empire cinema in Times Square in front of a cardboard cutout display from the movie, and a fuzzy character dressed in costume.

Fun crowd: Ice-T made a showing with his wife Coco Austin and their daughter Chanel Nicole Marrow on Saturday, at a screening of the new animated film PAW Patrol: The Movie in NYC

The 63-year-old actor and hip-hop star, born Tracy Lauren Marrow, wore all black with stars around his collar, while model Coco, 42, was lovely in a colorful patterned minidress featuring a low-cut bust line.

Their sweet little girl was in a pineapple patterned dress, and she held a Paw Patrol backpack up for one photo.

Paw Patrol features voice acting from stars such as Iain Armitage, Yara Shahidi, Randall Park, Dax Shepard and reality star Kim Kardashian.

Fun: The family posed in the hallway of the AMC Empire cinema in Times Square in front of a cardboard cutout display from the movie, and a fuzzy character dressed in a costume

Summer styles: The actor and hip-hop star wore all black with stars around his collar, while model Coco was lovely in a colorful patterned minidress featuring a low-cut bust line

The sighting of Ice-T and his family comes after Coco recently said she thinks it's wrong for 'society' to pressure moms to stop breastfeeding 'at two.'

The remark came after Austin sparked quite a bit of backlash when she revealed she still nurses five-year-old daughter Chanel earlier this month.

But Coco told E!'s Daily Pop she's not letting the outrage sway her opinion, explaining that 'as a mother' you should only stop breastfeeding after the child 'says so.'

Cute: Their sweet little girl was in a pineapple patterned dress, and she held a Paw Patrol backpack up for one photoTheir sweet little girl was in a pineapple patterned dress, and she held a Paw Patrol backpack up for one photo

'I'm [not] going to stop because I feel like it's a great bonding experience between her and I,' she went on. 'She's my only child, it's not like I have a big family of kids, and so I'm savoring every moment with this child.'

Coco - full name Nicole - had her daughter in her lap as she unpacked her views on breastfeeding, admitting while she's 'not really an arguer' she stands by her parenting choices.

Little Chanel also made it clear she was happy sticking close to mom, saying yes and smiling when mom asked her 'Do you want the boob?'

Controversy: The sighting of Ice T and his family comes after Coco recently said she thinks it's wrong for 'society' to pressure moms to stop breastfeeding 'at two'

As for Ice, he also had things to say on the matter, squarely telling haters to 'F off'.

He made his feelings explicit that he and Coco were far from 'normal parents' in a risqué photo he tweeted last week.

The Law & Order: Special Victims Unit star looked off guard with his face covered in shaving cream, while Coco sported pink hair and had her nether regions lathered up for a shave.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's shared some jubilant posts on social media in recent days after her father Jamie Spears announced via his lawyers that he would be stepping down from her conservatorship in the future.

And Britney Spears was spotted getting some fresh air on Saturday, just days after the news broke.

The 39-year-old pop icon was seen driving her white Mercedes-Benz nearby her luxurious home in Thousand Oaks, California.

Fresh air: Britney Spears, 39, took a relaxing joy ride near her Thousand Oaks home on Saturday, days after her father Jamie Spears, 69, said he planned to step down from her conservatorship

Britney appeared to be casually dressed for the afternoon drive, and she matched her car with a set of playful white wayfarer-style sunglasses.

It's not clear if she had a specific destination or if she just wanted some time out of the house, as she was seen driving around in circles not far from her home.

The Womanizer singer was also glimpsed in her pricy vehicle on Friday, when she relaxed with a cigarette.

She was pictured browsing through her phone while the car was parked.

The ability to drive seems to be important to Britney, as she specifically mentioned her rides with her boyfriend Sam Asghari during an impassioned statement she delivered in front of a judge in regards to her ongoing conservatorship battle.

According to her, the conservatorship doesn't allow her to let Sam take the wheel.

Taking it easy: Britney appeared to be casually dressed for the afternoon drive, and she matched her car with a set of playful white wayfarer-style sunglasses

No rush: It's not clear if she had a specific destination or if she just wanted some time out of the house, as she was seen driving around in circles not far from her home

Taking a puff: The Womanizer singer was also glimpsed in her pricy vehicle on Friday, when she relaxed with a cigarette

Drive my car: In an impassioned statement in court, Britney said she wanted her 'boyfriend [Sam Asghari] to be able to drive me in his f**king car'

'All I want is to own my money and for this to end and for my boyfriend to be able to drive me in his f**king car,' she said in a fury.

As the conservatorship has allegedly had such tight constraints on what she's allowed to do, getting a little fresh air in her car may be a welcome respite from spending time at home.

Since her father's announcement that he plans to step down sometime in the future, Britney referenced her cryptic 'Project Rose' on Instagram.

Britney's super-short video featured her in a tightly pleated white patterned peasant top that she appears to have worn previously.

She was seen sniffing the flower in the photo, which only lasted about a second.

Smelling the roses: Britney sniffed a pink flower in another Instagram entry from Friday for her series Project Rose, which she hasn't explained so far

Going strong: 'Project Rose is a year old and 9 days old!!!!' she gushed in her caption. 'Why does this project smell so f***ing good still today????'

'Project Rose is a year old and 9 days old!!!!' she gushed in her caption. 'Why does this project smell so f***ing good still today???? Psss if you look closely the mood ring I’m wearing was for my song MOOD RING!!!!'

Although Britney doesn't appear to have explicitly stated what Project Rose or her other color-coded projects entail, they appear to simply refer to a series of coordinated photos featuring recurring colors or objects.

In the case of Project Rose, which she sometimes refers to as Project Red, she seems to pose with either a red flower or other red items or clothing.

Later on Friday, Britney shared two extreme closeups of her face as she documented her recent weight-loss attempt.

She didn't appear to be wearing a shirt and was lit similarly to a topless post from July 30.

Slimming down: Later on Friday, Britney shared two extreme closeups of her face as she documented her recent weight-loss attempt

A slightly zoomed-out second photo appeared to show her covering her bust with her hands.

'It’s really weird whenever I try to slim down it usually starts with my legs first ... then my stomach ... then my face … and that's when I know I’ve actually lost weight!!!!' she explained.

Although she sounded excited at getting results, the hitmaker wasn't totally sold on her slimmer figure and seemed to miss some of her curves.

'When you swipe to the second pic you can actually really see how slim my face is but I’m not so sure I like it… In the old days when women were heavier they were considered more attractive to men because it was a sign of wealth!!!!' she continued.

'I have a couple of throwback dances from this summer where I looked heavier but it's weird cause I think I was happier!!!! Oh well ... sorry for my shallow talk of weight … but it is what it is you know!!!! GOD BLESS YOU ALL ☀️!!!!!'

Mixed feelings: 'I’m not so sure I like it,' Britney said of her weight loss and added that she was happier in dancing videos where she was heavier

Britney's latest posts following a joyous dancing video from earlier on Friday.

She put on a high-energy display in black lace catsuit while striking a number of poses, captioning the post simply with three kiss emojis.

It follows Thursday's court filing by Jamie, 69, who says he's finally planning to relinquish control of his daughter's estate, marking a huge victory for the singer as she battles to end a 13-year conservatorship — even though he did not immediately resign.

Britney has been known to share a wealth of content for her fans on social media, and has made more than a few pointed digs at her family members and her current situation.

Freedom: Britney dances in lace bodysuit in an Instagram video from earlier on Friday... just a day after father Jamie agreed to step down as conservator of her estate

Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Jamie has been paying himself $16,000 a month since 2008 to manage his daughter's estimated $60million fortune.

He announced Thursday that he would stepping down, as his daughter has long demanded, provided Judge Brenda Penny asked him to and there was a plan in place for Britney's care.

The 39-year-old pop star put on a high-energy display in black lace catsuit while striking a number of poses, captioning the post simply with three kiss emojis.

Moving on: It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators

Pointed: Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Busting a move: The singer delights her fans with her social media content

Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, said it was 'a vindication for Britney'.

'We are pleased that Mr. Spears and his lawyer have today conceded in a filing that he must be removed,' he said. 'It is vindication for Britney.'

In the court documents, obtained by TMZ, his lawyers write: 'There are, in fact, no actual grounds for suspending or removing Mr. Spears as the Conservator of the Estate ... and it is highly debatable whether a change in conservator at this time would be in Ms. Spears' best interests.

'Nevertheless, even as Mr. Spears is the unremitting target of unjustified attacks, he does not believe that a public battle with his daughter over his continuing service as her conservator would be in her best interests.'

Jamie Spears, pictured with Britney in 2015, on Thursday resigned as her conservator. He said that he was stepping down because he did not feel the continued public battle was in her best interests

It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators.

Meanwhile, Britney appears to be free to continue to post as she pleases on her Instagram account.

Her friend, Paris Hilton took to Twitter yesterday, to express her relief that Britney is a a step closer to her freedom.

'I’m so happy to hear this news,' the socialite, 40, wrote with emojis of clapping hands and a heart. 'It’s been so long overdue but I’m so glad that Britney is on her way to finally being free.'

Ecstatic: Britney certainly looks upbeat after the news of her father Jamie stepping down

Twists and turns: Fans have been glued to her Instagram account amid the ongoing drama

Not so mellow yellow: The star put on an energetic display in the latest Instagram video

Happy: Britney appeared to be in a good mood in her latest video

The hotel heiress added, 'Sending so much love!' adding the now-ubiquitous hashtag #FreeBritney.

Rosie O'Donnell also took to Instagram to comment on the latest development in the case, sending her well-wishes to the pop star, as she said: 'That's right, he's stepping down, all the pressure worked, good for you Britney, being brave - tick tock you don't stop!'

Jamie, who has always insisted he was acting in the best interests of his superstar daughter, said that he will work with the legal teams to bring the complex case to an end.

'So, even though he must contest this unjustified Petition for his removal, Mr. Spears intends to work with the Court and his daughter's new attorney to prepare for an orderly transition to a new conservator,' his lawyers wrote.

Jamie, who is not believed to have spoken to his daughter since before Christmas, said that he will continue to look out for his daughter's best interests.

Jamie, 69, is pictured in 2008 leaving Los Angeles County Superior Courthouse - when her conservatorship was introduced. After 13 years, it now finally seems to be coming to an end

Mathew Rosengart, Britney Spears's lawyer, was appointed on July 14 to represent her - replacing the court-appointed Sam Ingham

'Regardless of his formal title, Mr. Spears will always be Ms. Spears' father, he will always love her unconditionally, and he will always look out for her best interests,' the lawyers said.

'If the public knew all the facts of Ms. Spears' personal life, not only her highs but also her lows, all of the addiction and mental health issues that she has struggled with, and all of the challenges of the Conservatorship, they would praise Mr. Spears for the job he has done, not vilify him.'

He said that the arrangement 'has worked as intended' and it was not surprising that Britney had felt 'constrained'.

The lawyers wrote: 'The Conservatorship has provided Ms. Spears with a structure to help her navigate the daily challenges of her personal life, family matters, medical issues, and career.

'By nature, the structure includes safeguards to protect the Conservatee from self-harm or harm from others.

'It is not surprising that Ms. Spears has often felt constrained or subject to excessive supervision.

'But, at least for the greater part of the past thirteen years, the Conservatorship has worked as intended.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eiza Gonzalez was seen picking up a refreshing drink in Studio City on Saturday afternoon.

The 31-year-old actress flaunted her figure in a near-monotone outfit, while letting her hair flow out from under a bucket hat with 'More Love' embroidered on it.

Eiza appears to have 'love' on the brain being that she recently confirmed her burgeoning romance with professional lacrosse player Paul Rabil in July.

Refreshing: Eiza Gonzalez was seen picking up a refreshing drink in Studio City on Saturday afternoon

Gonzalez was seen wearing a slim-fitting white tank top that exposed her impressively sculpted arms during the outing.

She paired her top with a matching set of shorts that fell to the upper portion of her beautifully tanned thighs.

The Baby Driver actress rocked a pair of dark beige high-heeled Vince Camuto shoes that contrasted well with the main shade of her outfit.

The performer added a bit of sparkle to her ensemble by throwing on several pieces of gold jewelry.

More? The 31-year-old actress flaunted her figure in a near-monotone outfit, while letting her hair flow out from under a bucket hat with 'More Love' embroidered on it

Luscious locks: The performer's beautiful brunette hair contrasted beautifully with her mostly-white outfit, which she paired with some Vince Camuto heels

Gonzalez notably sported a stylish pair of tortoiseshell-framed sunglasses while spending time in the bright California sun.

She covered up the top portion of her gorgeous brunette hair with an embroidered pink bucket hat.

The remainder of her luscious locks spilled onto her shoulders and backside during her time in public.

The actress has been linked to Rabil ever since they were spotted spending time together in Los Angeles this past June.

New flame: Eiza appears to have 'love' on the brain being that she recently confirmed her burgeoning romance with professional lacrosse player Paul Rabil in July; Paul and Eiza seen together in June

Prior to beginning a relationship with the 35-year-old professional athlete, Gonzalez was romantically connected to several figures in the entertainment industry.

The performer previously dated Josh Duhamel following his split from his former wife, Fergie.

Although the two appeared to be enjoying each other's company during their short-lived romance, they ended things between them in the summer of 2018.

She went on to share a steamy weekend in her native country of Mexico with Timothee Chalamet last June, but their connection reportedly fizzled out soon after they returned to the United States.

Past connections: The performer was previously romantically involved with entertainment industry figures such as Josh Duhamel and Timothee Chalamet; she is seen in June

The beginning of Gonzalez's relationship with Rabil was first reported on by Page Six, who noted that the actress had visited her beau during a training camp in Massachusetts earlier this year.

A source revealed that the two 'walked into training camp in Massachusetts together for breakfast, as he had a game the next day.'

Another insider also expressed that the two were spotted at a party in Los Angeles this past May and noted that the pair was getting very close during the event.

'It was clear they are a couple and have been dating for a little while,' the source stated.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Syesha Mercado is now in a battle to keep custody of both of her young children.

The former American Idol finalist, who's been trying to regain custody of her 18-month-old son after he was placed in foster care earlier this year, had her newborn daughter taken away from her during a roadside encounter with sheriff department officers in Florida on Wednesday.

Mercado's 10-day old daughter remains in state protection following an August 12 court hearing, according to the Miami Herald-Tribune.

The singer and her partner, Tyron Deneer, recorded much of Wednesday's incident, where they were presented with a court order to hand over their child for a checkup at a hospital, and posted it on Instagram, writing: 'THEY TOOK OUR BABY AGAIN!'

Family's legal battle: Syesha Mercado, 34, had her newborn daughter taken away by sheriff deputies in Florida on Wednesday during a traffic stop, five months after her 18-month old son, Amen'Ra (pictured), was placed in foster care

Mercado and Deener were driving in Sarasota, Florida with their newborn daughter when authorities pulled them over and insisted that they surrender the then 10-day-old child.

In the Instagram video, Deener can be seen sitting in the driver's seat, while Mercado was in the backseat with their baby.

After being informed of the court order to hand over their child for the welfare checkup, the pair both pled their case to be the ones to take the daughter to the doctor.

At one point, Mercado begged deputies not to take her newborn, explaining that she is being breastfed. After pumping breast milk into a bottle in the backseat of a vehicle into a bottle, the 34-year-old could be seen in the clip slowly walking her daughter over to deputies, begging for them not to take her.

Heartbreaking: The American Idol alum sobbed and pleaded with authorities during the roadside stop to take custody of her daughter in Sarasota, Florida

Mother's plea: This is my baby, my baby is just days old and you're taking my baby away from me,' the singer pleaded to sheriff department officers

Family matters: The 34-year-old mother sobbed as she pleaded her case during the stop

'How could you do this this? Do you not feel anything?' Mercado asked authorities with obvious raw emotion to her voice before she started to cry.

'You guys, I'm human. This is my baby, my baby is just days old and you're taking my baby away from me. You're taking my baby away from me. You have no hearts. This is so wrong,' she said while sobbing as she held her daughter in her arms in a pink and white blanket.

'You don't care... my baby is healthy and happy.'

During the video, sheriff's deputies explained that the newborn was being taken because the couple did not inform authorities that Mercado had given birth while she was still in the midst of her legal battle over custody of her son.

In response, Deener argued that they had requested all questions about them go through their attorney, which he maintained did not happen. The couple also shared that the baby had just gone for a health checkup the previous day and they had all the paperwork to prove it.

Child custody: Mercado's partner, Tyron Deneer, also pleaded to authorities to not take their child as he filmed much of the incident with a camera phone

Mother's anguish: Eventually, Mercado handed over her baby girl, who was wrapped in a blanket, to authorities

Roadside: Sheriff department officers had a court order to take the newborn into custody because the couple had a pending case involving their 18-month-old son

The video, which lasts for just over one hour, has prompted outrage from Mercado's supporters, who feel racism played a role in her case, along with other injustices. Mercado and her partner Tyron Deener are both Black.

The couple's legal battles over their children began in late February when they took their then one-year-old son, Amen'Ra, to Johns Hopkins All Children’s Hospital in St. Petersburg, Florida, to get him 'extra fluids' because he was struggling with the transition from breast milk to solid foods.

But by the end of the hospital stay, the little boy was taken from the couple and put into the care of the Manatee Child Protective Services. Mercado has since said armed officers 'forcefully removed me from my son' after she was accused of abuse and neglect.

'They ripped me away from my proudest creation in life, pure joy, my SUNhine,' the singer wrote in an Instagram post.

Their plea: During the exchange the couple said their daughter had just gone for a health checkup the previous day and they had all the paperwork to prove it

Sad situation: The couple eventually walked back to their parked vehicle without incident

Dispute: In a statement to NBC News on Friday, the Manatee County Sheriff's Office revealed it had received information from a hospital's child abuse line that their boy was 'severely malnourished,' which Mercado disputes

In a statement to NBC News on Friday, the Manatee County Sheriff's Office revealed it had received information from the hospital's child abuse line that a boy was 'severely malnourished,' which Mercado disputes.

'Amen'Ra was forcefully and legally kidnapped from us by CPS, who claim we refused a B12 shot that was a matter of life and death, which is an absolute lie. We never refused a B12 shot, and at no point was he on the verge of death,' Mercado wrote on a GoFundMe page that she created to help pay for legal fees.

At last check on Saturday evening, August 14, the 'Bring Rae Home' GoFundMe account had received $327,874 in donations.

Mercado insists her children are prime examples of racial discrimination in Manatee County, and that her son has since been placed with a white foster family without interviewing qualified relatives or friends for placement while authorities investigate.

Mercado appeared on season 7 of American Idol in 2008, and ended up coming in third behind runner-up David Archuleta and winner David Cook

Foster care: The singer's young son was placed into foster care in March after receiving information from a hospital's child abuse line that a boy was 'severely malnourished'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Shang-Chi star Simu Liu appeared to call out Disney CEO Bob Chapek on Saturday for his recents comments referring to the release of his upcoming Marvel film as an 'experiment.'

The 32-year-old Kim's Convenience star tweeted that 'We are not an experiment' in response to an out-of-context remark Chapek made on an earnings call with investors.

The social media post launched a series of impassioned tweets from fans about the upcoming superhero movie, with many comparing it both favorably and negatively to Black Panther.

War of words: Shang-Chi star Simu Liu, 32, called out Disney CEO Bob Chapek, 60, for calling the release strategy of his upcoming Marvel film an experiment, which led to fan fury; seen July 24 in Anaheim, Calif.

Chapek, 60, made his original comment on a Thursday call with investors when he said that Shang-Chi's release would be 'an interesting experiment for us.'

Chapek was specifically referring not to the content of the film, but to how it would be distributed, as the movie is going to be available only in theaters for its first 45 days, at which point it will be available to Disney+ subscribers.

That's a departure for Disney (which owns Marvel Studios), as its earlier movies released during the ongoing coronavirus pandemic premiered simultaneously in theaters and on the streaming service (for an additional fee).

The Ryan Reynolds–starring action–comedy Free Guy is also being release by the studio with a 45-day theatrical window, so Shang-Chi isn't the only recent release for the studio taking that route.

'The prospect of being able to take a Marvel title to the service after going theatrical for 45 days will be yet another data point to inform our actions going forward on our titles,' Chapek added during the call.

Context: Chapek said Thursday on an earnings call that Shang-Chi's release would be 'an interesting experiment for us' as it and Free Guy will only be available in theaters for 45 days, and not immediately available on Disney+; seen in 2017 in Paris

Speaking past each other: Liu wrote 'We are not an experiment' and said 'We are the underdog; the underestimated.' However, he may have misinterpreted Chapek's comments, which referred to the release strategy, not the film's content

Liu responded to the comments on Saturday in a tweet, though he seemed to zero in on the term 'experiment,' rather than the context of Shang-Chi's release strategy.

'We are not an experiment,' he began. 'We are the underdog; the underestimated. We are the ceiling-breakers. We are the celebration of culture and joy that will persevere after an embattled year.

'We are the surprise,' he continued. 'I’m fired the f**k up to make history on September 3rd; JOIN US.'

Scott Mendelson, a film industry reporter for Forbes, suggested the Liu had misinterpreted Chapek's words (possibly 'willfully') in order to stoke up 'performative outrage' shortly before the movie's release.

'Breaking: Movie star obliviously (or willfully) misinterprets non-controversial quote from studio executive well beyond its specific context (a context emphasized in the very next sentence) for the sake of performative outrage days before big movie premieres...' he wrote, while leaving out any specific names.

Cynical ploy: Scott Mendelson, a film industry reporter for Forbes, suggested the Liu had misinterpreted Chapek's words, possibly 'willfully'

Strategy: Mendelson suggested Liu took the comments out of context 'for the sake of performative outrage days before [the] big movie premieres...'; Liu seen with Tony Leung Chiu-wai (L) and Awkwafina (R) in Shang-Chi

Although Liu may have misinterpreted Chapek's remarks, his tweet launched a bevy of angry tweets from fans, many of whom felt that Disney and Marvel weren't promoting the film, which features a primarily Asian cast, as vigorously as they would have with their other superhero movies.

Several social media users compared the buzz around Shang-Chi to Black Panther, though some thought that the new film wasn't generating the same excitement that Black Panther did, while others object to the two films being compared.

'We, asians, get our first ever asian-led marvel film and @marvel isn't doing anything to promote it. tweeting a poster isn't enough. please promote shang-chi like you promoted black widow [sic],' complained one user.

'and y'all are saying that shang-chi might do bad at theaters? it's because you're not promoting it lmfao,' they added.

Another person added: 'FACT!! Here in the UK I usually see adverts everywhere for new Marvel movies in between TV shows but I haven't seen anything of #ShangChi at all. It's really weird and not right at all. @MarvelStudios sort it out.'

Lackluster release: Although Liu may have misinterpreted Chapek's remarks, his tweet launched a bevy of angry tweets from fans, many of whom felt that Disney and Marvel weren't promoting the film enough

Not visible: One person believed they weren't seeing as many ads for Shang-Chi as for comparably Marvel superhero films

Not a fan: Another person said 'No one wants to be a guinea pig,' referencing Liu's tweet

Another person complained that Shang-Chi was merely a diversity project for Marvel and Disney.

'All true 2 fans of #ShangChi and what he represents!' wrote a one user who quoted Liu's tweet.

Sadly to @MarvelStudios this is infact a monitery experiment born of the success of #BlackPanther who they similarly view only through a lens of diversity rather than value as an individual character like #Ironman & #Spiderman [sic].'

'Hey @MarvelStudios there's a movie coming out in 3 weeks which I think you're forgetting to promote,' complained one Twitter user.

Another person joked that they were 'already wildly attracted ' to Simu Liu, but 'he's now 10x more attractive' after calling out Chapek.

'No one wants to be a guinea pig,' added another person in solidarity with Liu.

Diversity hire: Another person complained that Shang-Chi was merely a diversity project for Marvel and Disney

Forgetting something? 'Hey @MarvelStudios there's a movie coming out in 3 weeks which I think you're forgetting to promote,' complained one Twitter user

Having a laugh: Another person joked that they were 'already wildly attracted ' to Simu Liu, but 'he's now 10x more attractive' after calling out Chapek

Some users called out Liu for seemingly misinterpreting Chapek's statement.

'C'mon man! Now all the media outlets are running with "#ShangChi star fires back at Disney CEO" not a good look man. You had to have known exactly what he was referring to,' wrote one person.

Others didn't care for the way some complained about Shang-Chi not getting the kind of excitement that Black Panther got, which seemed to imply that Black viewers who eagerly anticipated the Chadwick Boseman–starring film weren't interested in Shang-Chi.

'The #BLackPanther vs. #ShangChi #MarvelStudios movie debate is BS! Sorry, I looked forward to Black Panther, just as much as I am towards Shang-Chi. Fact folks are trying to knock one another down is pure #ToxicFandom and the problem with the #Fandom nowadays,' one person tweeted.

Pointing fingers: Some users called out Liu for seemingly misinterpreting Chapek's statement

'Toxic Fandom': Others didn't care for the way some complained about Shang-Chi not getting the kind of excitement that Black Panther got

Conflict: Some users even blamed Asian viewers for not being as excited about Shang-Chi as Black viewers were about Black Panther

Comparison: Another person wrote 'maybe the Asian community should've showed out like the black community did with BP [sic]'

'Keep My King and Wakanda out of ya mouths,' read another furious tweet. 'If y'all can't pull it together for #ShangChi like we did for BP, then that's a community issue.

'BP came out in a different time for movies no less but I bet you we still showing out for BP: Wakanda Forever no matter what.'

Another user echoed a similar sentiment: 'Y'all stay bringing up Black Panther when trying to hype up Shang-Chi. It's getting strange. Considering when BP came out the non blacks were screaming what abt us instead of being excited.....

'If the movie does bad I don't wanna hear s**t from y'all bc maybe the Asian community should've showed out like the black community did with BP.'

Simple: But others complained that the question of theatrical vs. streaming release wouldn't be an issue if Disney would simply pay actors a greater amount for streaming views

Coming soon: Shang-Chi will be released exclusively in theaters starting September 3

But others complained that the question of theatrical vs. streaming release wouldn't be an issue if Disney would simply pay actors a greater amount for streaming views.

'It's 100% on the studios for treating streaming as something separate then theatrical views,' a Shang-Chi fan tweeted.

'If someone is paying money in a theatre or online to watch a movie, that is a damn ticket sale and the actors and all involved should be compensated as such.'

Shang-Chi will be released exclusively in theaters starting September 3.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's the youngest daughter of two of the biggest country music stars working today.

And Audrey McGraw made a sweet and heartfelt debut in her father Tim McGraw's new music video on Friday, for a song titled 7500 OBO.

The brunette beauty, 19, appeared as a lovelorn teen in the video as she experiences love and loss for the first time in an old pickup truck.

Introducing Audrey: Audrey McGraw made a sweet and heartfelt debut in her father Tim McGraw's new music video on Friday

In the video, Audrey's character is seen interacting with her father (played by an actor, not her real dad) as he purchases the truck for her, before she eventually meets and falls for a handsome suitor.

As her real father Tim, 54, sings of the heartbreak that causes him to be selling the truck, Audrey gets her heart broken as her boyfriend moves away in the clip.

7500 OBO is the third single off Tim's 16th studio album, titled Here on Earth, which was released one year ago in August 2020.

Country crooner: The video, for a song titled 7500 OBO, is off McGraw's album Here On Earth

The music video is McGraw's first since way back in 2018.

Ahead of 7500 OBO's release, the Grammy winner posted a sweet selfie with his daughter from on set, with the pickup in question seen in the background.

'Couldn’t be more thrilled to have my youngest daughter, Audrey, play the lead role in the music video for 7500 OBO!!!' he wrote in the caption.

Young love: The 19-year-old beauty, left, appeared as a lovelorn teen in the video, as she experiences love and loss for the first time in an old pickup truck

This Kiss songbird Hill, 53, posted the same photo to her Instagram, writing in the caption, 'So proud of these two. Our baby girl Audrey has grown up. Don’t miss the premiere of Tim’s new music video with Audrey. It is so good!!!'

In addition to Audrey, Tim and his wife of 25 years Faith are also parents to daughters Gracie, 24, and Maggie, 23.

Ever the bashful father, McGraw also shared a snippet to his Instagram feed just ahead of the video drop, showing him reacting to the scene where his daughter had to kiss the actor playing her love interest.

The whole McGraw gang: In addition to Audrey, Tim and his wife of 25 years Faith are also parents to daughters Gracie, 24 (left), and Maggie, 23 (right); seen here in 2015

McGraw also shared a snippet to his Instagram feed just ahead of the video drop: It showed him reacting to the scene where his daughter had to kiss the actor playing her love interest

'I'm not calling that a make-out scene,' he remarked in the clip.

'That's just a nice little peck on the cheek after a date!

'I tried to yell "cut" but I didn't get there quick enough,' Tim added jokingly. 'I'm not gonna beat him up. I guess I'll let him slide on this one. It's not easy for a dad to watch.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is known for showing off her flawless physique in runway shows and social media outlets alike.

And on Saturday, Bella Hadid was seen giving her best looks to the camera in a series of glammed-up shots that were shared to her Instagram account.

The 24-year-old model appeared to be embracing an angelic image in the pictures and wrote a brief message in the post's caption that read: 'Do U know how much I love you?'

Looking good! Bella Hadid was ever the heavenly model in a set of sizzling snaps that were shared to her Instagram account on Saturday

Hadid was seen wearing a nearly see-through sleeveless white dress that fell to the middle of her toned thighs.

She paired her outfit with a matching set of Yeezy Foam Runners that added a bit of modern charm to her clothing ensemble.

The social media personality wore numerous gold bracelets, which provided elements of shine to her monotone outfit.

Hadid sported a pair of intricate earrings that matched her other articles of jewelry.

Keeping it simple: The model was seen wearing a sleeveless white dress that fell to the top portion of her thighs in the smoking shots

Changing it up: The social media personality deviated from her angelic ensemble with a pair of Yeezy Foam Runners

The model also wore a heart-shaped necklace with a red gemstone in the middle.

Hadid figure kept her gorgeous brunette locks tied back in a loose ponytail that was seen falling onto her left shoulder and backside.

She included two graphics of heavenly imagery with the sizzling snaps.

Hadid started her modeling career at an early age alongside her older sister, Gigi.

Shining bright: Hadid added several elements of shine to her outfit with numerous articles of gold jewelry

Starting young: The fashion industry personality began her modeling career alongside her older sister, Gigi, at an early age

The social media figure was first featured on various magazine covers and in media campaigns during her teenage years and has continued to do so into the present day.

Bella recently appeared on the cover of Vogue alongside numerous other fashion industry personalities, including Kaia Gerber and Madonna's daughter, Lola Leon.

She also spoke to the media outlet about the confusion that she experienced about her public appearance over the early stages of her career.

'It's like there were two Bellas—me, this person in the process of figuring out who she was, and 'Bella Hadid' the alter ego, who was, I dunno, a sexbot who goes out every night,' she noted.

Going both ways: During a recent interview with Vogue, she expressed that she was confused about her public image in the early stages of her career

Hadid also expressed that she was previously under the impression that she had to act a certain way in public in an effort to boost her career.

'I have insane social anxiety! Partying is not my thing, but I felt enormous pressure to project that image because I assumed that's all people wanted from me,' she said.

The model concluded by expressing that she has come to a point in her life where she is able to pursue her own professional goals on her own terms.

'Now I don't want to live in that box. I definitely feel like I'm allowed to speak,' she expressed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amelia Hamlin proudly displayed her gym-honed physique on Saturday in a series of sultry snapshots uploaded to Instagram.

The 20-year-old model slipped into a hot pink leopard print bra and matching panties from her go-to intimated brand Boux Avenue.

'the allure of women feat. @bouxavenue,' captioned Amelia, who posed with a copy of the famous François Baudot photo book.

Wow! Amelia Hamlin proudly displayed her gym-honed physique on Saturday in a series of sultry snapshots uploaded to Instagram

Amelia's long brunette hair was worn down and flowed down her back and chest in straightened strands.

As for makeup, Hamline highlighted her plump pout with a peach lip gloss and doused her lashes in mascara.

The youngest daughter of Lisa Rinna and Harry Hamlin was captured sitting on a chair with her copy of The Allure Of Women in hand, which features images of iconic female style muses.

One shot showed her with the book resting in her lap, as to expose the details of her chest-amplifying bra.

Some light reading: 'the allure of women feat. @bouxavenue,' captioned Amelia, who posed with a copy of the famous François Baudot photo book

While the second shot showed Hamlin covering her face with it as she sat with her legs pressed together.

Not included in Saturday's sultry Instagram snaps was Amelia's much older boyfriend Scott Disick.

Her mother Lisa recently revealed that Amelia is 'very happy right now' in her relationship with the 38-year-old Talentless founder during an appearance on Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen on Wednesday.

In love: Not included in Saturday's sultry Instagram snaps was Amelia's much older boyfriend Scott Disick; Amelia and Scott pictured in July

Rinna, who shares Amelia and Delilah Belle Hamlin, 23, with LA Law alum Harry Hamlin, 69, responded, 'How do you think I feel?,' when asked about her thoughts on the pairing.

'Listen, I will say this: Amelia's very happy right now and you really want your kids to be happy, so Harry and I are very thrilled that she's happy,' said the Bravo beauty.

The pair in February revealed they had been dating, as they have been linked since last fall.

A source in March told People that the couple has been 'getting serious,' and that their 18 years in age difference isn't a factor in the romance, as 'she grew up in the industry and knows how all this works.

'It's a different type of maturity, and they really don't feel the age difference.'

Happy: Her mother Lisa recently revealed that Amelia is 'very happy right now' in her relationship with the 38-year-old Talentless founder during an appearance on Watch What Happens Live with Andy Cohen on Wednesday

Wants what's best for her: 'Listen, I will say this: Amelia's very happy right now and you really want your kids to be happy, so Harry and I are very thrilled that she's happy,' said the Bravo beauty; Amelia pictured in June

Rinna chatted about her daughter's relationship on the Andy Cohen talk show this past May, saying of Disick, 'He was very nice, we had a very nice time ... it is what it is.'

In a June episode of RHOBH, Rinna said she was nervous over the public celeb relationship with Disick.

'Amelia has had her struggles in the press, but it's now a new headline,' Rinna said. 'No one's talking about the eating disorder anymore and you know what, thank God. As a mother, I'm like, "Good." This gives her another label to deal with.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Samuel L. Jackson looked casual when he was spotted Friday in London after working on a film set.

The 72-year-old Pulp Fiction star looked as youthful as ever in a camouflage sweatsuit as he stepped out for a ride in a chauffeured car.

Although it wasn't clear what he was filming, days earlier the actor hinted that he was about to start work on his upcoming Marvel series Secret Invasion for Disney+.

Taking it easy: Samuel L. Jackson, 72, looked as youthful as ever in a gray camouflage sweatsuit as he stepped out in London on Friday after a busy day of filming

Jackson looked cool in a camouflage hoodie and matching sweatpants decked out in an all-gray camo pattern.

He stuck to the color-free theme with a set of sporty black trainers, as well as a charcoal baseball cap.

The Captain Marvel star covered his face with a slate gray mask to help slow the spread of the novel coronavirus and the more-contagious Delta variant, along with a set of round-frame eyeglasses.

He appeared to be leaving his hotel and stepping into a black car.

Monochrome: He paired his gray camo hoodie and sweatpants with sporty black trainers and a charcoal baseball cap, plus a great mask

On Wednesday, Jackson revealed that filming for his series Secret Invasion was imminent by sharing a photo of his character Nick Fury's recognizable goatee.

The faux facial hair was pinned to a display and looked as if it was ready for use.

'Guess what time it is! Back in the box, just in The Nick of time!' he captioned his posted, adding the hashtags '#rested&readytogo' and '#whoyagoncall.'

The new series was previously reported to begin filming in mid-August in London, and it will also feature scenes shot elsewhere in the UK and throughout Europe. \

Jackson also posted a selfie of himself in a black graphic T-shirt with a coral hoodie and thick black round-frame glasses.

Iconic look: On Wednesday, Jackson revealed that filming for his series Secret Invasion was imminent by sharing a photo of his character Nick Fury's recognizable goatee

He's back! 'Guess what time it is! Back in the box, just in The Nick of time!' he wrote, while including a selfie of himself in a black graphic T-shirt and a coral hoodie

A closeup photo showed off the shirt's design, which was a reference to the end-credits scene in Avengers: Infinity War. His new Disney+ series is the long-awaited lead showcase for his character Nick Fury

A closeup photo showed off the shirt's design, which was a reference to the end-credits scene in Avengers: Infinity War, when his character (temporarily) disintegrated as he called Captain Marvel for help.

His new series Secret Invasion is the long-awaited showcase for Jackson as a lead in a Marvel property.

The show will focus on a group of Skrulls, a race of alien shapeshifters who have infiltrated life on Earth.

They were first introduced into the MCU in Captain Marvel, and Ben Mendelsohn will be reprising his role from that film as the Skrull Talos, while Oscar-winner Olivia Colman will also be making her Marvel debut in the series.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ariana Grande's fans believe that they have identified The Voice coach's mystery advisor as Broadway star Kristin Chenoweth.

The 28-year-old Bang Bang singer shared a teaser promo for the singing competition show's upcoming Battle Rounds to her Instagram page on Saturday.

'whooooooo do you all think my battle advisor is @nbcthevoice?,' Ariana wrote in the caption, prompting her following to weigh in with their guesses.

Guessing game: Ariana Grande's fans believe that they have identified The Voice coach's mystery advisor for the Battle Rounds as Broadway star Kristin Chenoweth

'i'll give you a hint: she's the greatest human being on earth,' Grande added.

The Voice judges including Kelly Clarkson, Blake Shelton and John Legend, also appeared in the video alongside their respective Battle advisors.

The mystery advisors' images were muzzed and their voice were distorted with question marks superimposed over their faces, in an attempt to conceal their identities.

Ariana, who was clad in a purple swirl triangle halter top with pearl drop earrings, was sitting beside her pixelated mentor as they held hands.

The Thank U, Next hitmaker held a white binder and read a question to her mystery advisor, giving fans a hint at her identity. She asked, 'What are some of your musical influences?'

Exciting: The 28-year-old Bang Bang singer shared a teaser promo for the upcoming episodes to her Instagram page on Saturday

Who could it be? Ariana, who was clad in a purple swirl triangle halter top with pearl drop earrings, was sitting beside her mentor as they held hands

'My musical influences range starts with Dolly Parton, Carol Burnett, Madeline Cahn, it goes into Julie Andrews, it goes all the way down to where I sit right now with you, Ariana Grande,' they answered.

'That was a beautiful answer. Hold on, I need to hug my distorted advisor,' Ariana said before leaning in to embrace her advisor.

Fans immediately guessed that Grande's advisor was Tony Award-winning actress Chenoweth based on the musical influences the 'distorted advisoer' had listed.

In 2012, Chenoweth gushed to The Baltimore Sun that 'Julie Andrews was a huge influence' on her, as well as several other well-known female industry figures.

Gave it away? Fans immediately guessed that Grande's advisor was Tony Award-winning actress Kristin Chenoweth based on her answer about her musical influences; the pair seen in 2016

The Golden Globe winner continued: And Barbra Streisand, Carol Burnett, Madeline Kahn, Dolly Parton, Beverly Sills, Sandi Patty. Those might not have been the most popular things in Broken Arrow, Oklahoma, but those were my tastes.'

Ariana and Kristin famously worked together on NBC's Hairspray Live in 2016. At the time, Chenoweth told InStyle magazine: 'I met Ariana years ago when she was just a little girl.'

'When I was in Wicked, she came backstage with her brother Frankie to meet me. We sort of just fell in love. And now we finally get to work together!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He has a stunning set of washboard abs

And Elliot Page put them on display in a new shirtless selfie he posted on his Insta Stories heading into the weekend.

The 34-year-old Umbrella Academy star, who came out as a transgender man last year, captioned the picture: 'TGIF.'

Looking good: Elliot Page put them on display in a new shirtless selfie he posted on his Insta Stories heading into the weekend

Over the past year Elliot has gone through seismic changes, announcing he was trans last December and then in January revealing he was getting divorced.

He and his estranged wife Emma Portner got married in 2018 long before Elliot's transition and apparently first split up over the summer of 2020.

After Elliot came out as trans in December his wife posted a supportive statement saying: 'Trans, queer and non-binary people are a gift to this world.'

Cheers: Elliot is pictured in a recent Instagram snap with nonbinary Canadian actor Mae Martin whose grandfather was English actor Tom Chatto

She also added: 'I also ask for patience & privacy but that you join me in the fervent support of trans life every single day. Elliot’s existence is a gift in and of itself. Shine on, sweet E. Love you so much.'

Then when fans began to speculate about Emma she wrote on Insta Stories: 'My gender identity, pronouns, and sexuality are private and not up for debate.'

Elliot and Emma have apparently amicably split and gave a joint statement to The Hollywood Reporter announcing their divorce this January.

Sweet: Elliot is pictured with his dog Mo in a recent Instagram snap

'After much thought and careful consideration, we have made the difficult decision to divorce following our separation last summer. We have the utmost respect for each other and remain close friends,' they said together.

A couple of months after his coming out Elliot gave an interview to Time where he expressed optimism about how transition would affect his acting work.

'I’m really excited to act, now that I’m fully who I am, in this body. No matter the challenges and difficult moments of this, nothing amounts to getting to feel how I feel now,' he said in the profile interview.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jared Leto was seen spending time with a mystery woman in Downtown Manhattan on Saturday afternoon.

The 49-year-old actor and his friend appeared to be enjoying each other's company as they strolled side-by-side along the metropolis' bustling walkways.

Leto has been the subject of intense media attention regarding his dating life, after having been previously romantically linked to several fellow Hollywood stars.

Time for two: Jared Leto was spotted stepping out with a mystery woman in Downtown Manhattan on Saturday afternoon

Leto sported a patterned orange shirt that remained partially unbuttoned for the length of his walk.

The 30 Seconds To Mars frontman contrasted his top with a pair of slightly loose-fitting black pants and a set of matching shoes.

He also kept a blue crossbody bag with him for the duration of the outing and wore a pair of aviator-style sunglasses.

Jared's dark brunette hair paired well with the brighter shade of his top as he strolled along Manhattan's walkways.

Baring it all: The performer kept his shirt mostly unbuttoned and sported a slightly loose-fitting pair of black pants during the outing

The mystery woman wore a floral-patterned dress and a pair of Nike sneakers.

She also kept multiple bags with her as the two enjoyed each other's company.

Leto has been romantically involved with numerous individuals over the past few decades and was rumored to have dated Soleil Moon Frye after they were seen attending a premiere together in 1991.

He later began seeing Cameron Diaz in 1999, and the pair were often spotted at high-profile events over the next few years.

Renown: Leto's dating life has been the subject of intense media attention over the past few decades; he is seen in 2019

Back in the day: The Blade Runner 2049 actor was romantically involved with Cameron Diaz in the late 1990s and early 2000s; they are seen in 2003

The two were rumored to have become engaged at one point, although they ultimately split up in 2003.

The Blade Runner 2049 actor was also linked to Scarlett Johansson in 2004, and although they split up after a year, they briefly reunited in 2012.

Leto went on to begin an on-again-off-again relationship with Ashley Olsen in 2005, with the most recent sighting of the two coming in 2011.

He was also spotted making out with Paris Hilton at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival, although they have not been seen together since then.

Working it out: Leto was also romantically linked to Scarlett Johansson, with whom he has remained friends; they are pictured in 2018

The actor also shares a close friendship with Lupita Nyong'o, who spoke about how the two developed a connection during a previous awards season in an interview with Net-A-Porter.

The actress expressed that he was 'on speed dial, because we were on that [Oscar campaign] journey together and he's so embracing of me.'

The performer, 38, also noted that, although they sparked public speculation about a potential relationship, the two became very close in other ways without becoming romantically involved.

'There was an intimacy that grew from that, that goes beyond the dating rumors, beyond all that,' she revealed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kourtney Kardashian made a bold change on Saturday as she unveiled her new jaw-length tresses via Instagram.

The 42-year-old reality star decided to ditch her signature long hair, uploading a shot to her Instagram Story of her freshly chopped strands.

Kardashian, clearly loving her new look, also uploaded several portraits to her page that showed her posing before a mirror in a black sports bra.

Bold: Kourtney Kardashian made a bold change on Saturday as she unveiled her new jaw-length tresses via Instagram

Kourtney‘s hair was now a delightful bob, ending just below her chin.

She whisked the top portion to the side for two snaps, and showed off her sleek ‘do parted at the middle for two others.

The mother of three wore a subtle matte lip and eyeshadow.

She held her smartphone up with a hand manicured with cool dark green nail polish.

New look: The 42-year-old reality star decided to ditch her signature long hair, uploading a shot to her Instagram Story of her freshly chopped strands

The eldest Kardashian sister also shared a fun snap to her Instagram Stories, showing haircutter’s shears along with some strands of her freshly cut hair on the table.

She added the caption 'chop chop' and tagged celebrity hairstylist Peter Savic, who has also worked with the likes of Madonna, Cindy Crawford, Kim Basinger and others.

Kourtney is currently involved with blink-182 drummer Travis Barker.

Closer look: Kardashian, clearly loving her new look, also uploaded several portraits to her page that showed her posing before a mirror in a black sports bra

'Chop chop': The eldest Kardashian sister also shared a fun snap to her Instagram Stories, showing haircutter’s shears along with some strands of her freshly cut hair on the table

And in a recent and since-deleted exchange with a user on a previous Instagram post, she swiftly shut down a rumor that she could be expecting her new flame's baby.

The back-and-forth happened underneath a series of selfies from the reality star's sprawling closet, in which Kourt again flaunted her bare midriff.

The images prompted one user to comment, 'SHE’S PREGNANT'.

Kourtney swiftly and pointedly responded, 'I am a woman with a BODY.'

Seen on Instagram together earlier this month: Kourtney is currently involved with blink-182 drummer Travis Barker
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He endured one of the most public celebrity breakups this year, and now has to watch as she rekindles things with a movie star ex.

But Alex Rodriguez clearly looked to be enjoying himself on Friday night, when he was spied at the Omnia nightclub partying with multiple women in Las Vegas, Nevada.

The former Yankee, 46, looked to be hanging out on the balcony or VIP section with the ladies, as he stood close to them.

Alex Rodriguez clearly looked to be enjoying himself on Friday night: He was spied at the Omnia nightclub partying with three different women in Las Vegas

The group stood close and danced as the DJ played loud music, with A-Rod hanging with the women and having a great time.

The sighting of the famous athlete comes just a few months after things ended with his former fiancée Jennifer Lopez, and her subsequent – and rather abrupt – recoupling with former flame Ben Affleck.

Rodriguez, who has since been linked with Affleck‘s ex Lindsay Shookus among others, was apparently thrown for a loop by the split from Lopez, whom he had been dating for four years.

Getting close: The former Yankee, 46, looked to be hanging out on the balcony or VIP section with the ladies

Checking her out: Alex stood close to them and apparently showed interest in one blonde woman in a bright blue dress

He was also reportedly angered to discover that JLo had been texting with Ben as early as February – before they had split up, according to TMZ.

As for Bennifer, the pair of superstar lovebirds are still hot and heavy, continuing to tour potential estates in Southern California.

Ben and Jen were first together in the early aughts, breaking off their engagement in January 2004.

Fun night: The group stood close and danced as the DJ played loud music, with A-Rod chatting the women up and having a great time

Moving on: The sighting of the famous athlete comes just a few months after things ended with his former fiancée Jennifer Lopez

That was before either of them went on to have children – Lopez with ex-husband Marc Anthony, and Affleck with ex-wife Jennifer Garner.

Now, the pair are considering moving in together, which would include JLo's twins Max and Emme, 13, along with Ben's daughters Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and son Samuel, nine.

Last month, Jen and Ben celebrated the Hustlers star's 52nd birthday in style, and are reportedly planning another lavish escape to celebrate his 49th birthday, which happens this weekend on Sunday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alec Baldwin shared one of his wife Hilaria's selfies to his Instagram account on Saturday morning.

The 63-year-old actor's spouse was seen flashing a slight smile while looking into the camera for the shot, and Alec wrote a short message in the post's caption that read: 'When this woman is happy, I am happy.'

The 30 Rock star and the yoga instructor, 37, have been married since 2012 and have welcomed six children together.

Happy husband: Alec Baldwin showed his love for his wife Hilaria by sharing one of her selfies to his Instagram account on Saturday

Hilaria was seen wearing a light purple t-shirt while she posed for the low-key selfie.

The social media personality's beautiful brunette-to-blonde hair noticeably fell onto her chest in the shot.

She also accessorized with a single silver earring that added a bit of shine to her image.

The Instagram figure also sported a wide-brimmed straw hat that obscured the top portion of her hair.

Devoted spouse: The 30 Rock star also wrote a brief message in the post's caption that rad: 'When this woman is happy, I am happy'; they are seen in 2019

The Baldwins initially met in 2011 when the two were shopping at the same store in New York City.

Prior to becoming involved with his current wife, the Cat In The Hat actor was married to actress Kim Basinger.

The two first met on the set of the 1991 romantic comedy feature The Marrying Man and began dating around the same time period.

The former pair went on to make their union official in 1993 and welcomed their daughter Ireland, aged 25, two years later.

Moving fast: The Baldwins initially met in 2011 and went on to make their union official the following year

However, Baldwin and Basinger eventually separated in 2000 and ended their marriage two years later.

The actor later moved on with Hilaria, and the two announced that they had become married the year after they first met.

The pair welcomed their first daughter, whom they named Carmen, aged seven the year after they tied the knot.

Starting a family: The pair welcomed their first child, Carmen, the year after they became married; they are seen at the June premiere of The Boss Baby: Family Business

They went on to welcome sons Rafael, Leonardo and Romeo, aged six, four and three, over the next few years.

The Baldwins' youngest son, Eduardo, was born in 2019 and their newest daughter Maria was brought into their family this past March, reportedly via surrogate.

During an interview with Rob Lowe on his Literally! podcast, the actor noted that the 26-year-old age gap between him and his spouse meant that their parenting styles were different.

Making it work: During an interview with Rob Lowe, Baldwin expressed that he and his wife have two different parenting styles due to their age difference

'We do not always agree...My wife prevails, if you will, but we do not always agree because I'm still much older than my wife,' he said.

However, Baldwin pointed out that his significant other was still an amazing parent, for whom he was grateful.

'I hit the jackpot... because I wound up having a lot of kids with a woman who's a great mom,' he remarked.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britney Spears candidly discussed her weight loss tips in an Instagram caption she posted over the weekend.

The 39-year-old pop star broke down the steps she typically takes to shed the pounds, from legs to belly to face.

However she confessed: 'I have a couple of throwback dances from this summer where I looked heavier but it's weird cause I think I was happier !!!!'

Letting it out: Britney Spears candidly discussed her weight loss tips in an Instagram caption she posted over the weekend

Britney, who is in a longtime relationship with the dashing Sam Asghari, shared: 'It’s really weird whenever I try to slim down it usually starts with my legs first ... then my stomach ... then my face … and that's when I know I’ve actually lost weight !!!!:

Her post accompanied an album of two selfies and she told her more than 33 million followers: 'When you swipe to the second pic you can actually really see how slim my face is but I’m not so sure I like it …'

She noted: 'In the old days when women were heavier they were considered more attractive to men because it was a sign of wealth !!!!'

The blonde pop star dished: 'I have a couple of throwback dances from this summer where I looked heavier but it's weird cause I think I was happier !!!!'

The process: The 39-year-old pop star broke down the steps she typically takes to shed the pounds, from legs to belly to face

Svelte: Britney is pictured modeling a figure-hugging dress while attending the Hollywood Beauty Awards in 2018

Looking fab: Britney is pictured in a recent throwback post on her Instagram page

Britney concluded her caption: 'Oh well ... sorry for my shallow talk of weight … but it is what it is you know !!!! GOD BLESS YOU ALL !!!!!'

Her post follows Thursday's court filing by her father Jamie, 69, who is finally relinquishing control of her estate, marking a huge victory for her as she battles to end a 13-year conservatorship - even though he did not immediately resign.

Britney has been known to share a wealth of content for her fans on social media, and has made more than a few pointed digs at her family members and her current situation.

Freedom: Britney danced in lace bodysuit in her latest Instagram video on Friday... just a day after father Jamie agreed to step down as conservator of her estate

Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Jamie has been paying himself $16,000 a month since 2008 to manage his daughter's estimated $60million fortune.

He announced Thursday that he would stepping down, as his daughter has long demanded, provided Judge Brenda Penny asked him to and there was a plan in place for Britney's care.

The 39-year-old pop star put on a high-energy display in black lace catsuit while striking a number of poses, captioning the post simply with three kiss emojis.

Moving on: It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators

Pointed: Immediately after the news of Jamie stepping down, Britney posted yet another dancing of herself, with a caption that said 'letting go is freedom!'

Busting a move: The singer delights her fans with her social media content

Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, said it was 'a vindication for Britney'.

'We are pleased that Mr. Spears and his lawyer have today conceded in a filing that he must be removed,' he said. 'It is vindication for Britney.'

In the court documents, obtained by TMZ, his lawyers write: 'There are, in fact, no actual grounds for suspending or removing Mr. Spears as the Conservator of the Estate ... and it is highly debatable whether a change in conservator at this time would be in Ms. Spears' best interests.

'Nevertheless, even as Mr. Spears is the unremitting target of unjustified attacks, he does not believe that a public battle with his daughter over his continuing service as her conservator would be in her best interests.'

Jamie Spears, pictured with Britney in 2015, on Thursday resigned as her conservator. He said that he was stepping down because he did not feel the continued public battle was in her best interests

It is unclear what the next steps will be, aside from Jamie preparing for a smooth transition between conservators.

Meanwhile, Britney appears to be free to continue to post as she pleases on her Instagram account.

Her friend, Paris Hilton took to Twitter yesterday, to express her relief that Britney is a a step closer to her freedom.

'I’m so happy to hear this news,' the socialite, 40, wrote with emojis of clapping hands and a heart. 'It’s been so long overdue but I’m so glad that Britney is on her way to finally being free.'

Ecstatic: Britney certainly looks upbeat after the news of her father Jamie stepping down

Twists and turns: Fans have been glued to her Instagram account amid the ongoing drama

Not so mellow yellow: The star put on an energetic display in the latest Instagram video

Happy: Britney appeared to be in a good mood in her latest video

The hotel heiress added, 'Sending so much love!' adding the now-ubiquitous hashtag #FreeBritney.

Rosie O'Donnell also took to Instagram to comment on the latest development in the case, sending her well-wishes to the pop star, as she said: 'That's right, he's stepping down, all the pressure worked, good for you Britney, being brave - tick tock you don't stop!'

Jamie, who has always insisted he was acting in the best interests of his superstar daughter, said that he will work with the legal teams to bring the complex case to an end.

'So, even though he must contest this unjustified Petition for his removal, Mr. Spears intends to work with the Court and his daughter's new attorney to prepare for an orderly transition to a new conservator,' his lawyers wrote.

Jamie, who is not believed to have spoken to his daughter since before Christmas, said that he will continue to look out for his daughter's best interests.

Jamie, 69, is pictured in 2008 leaving Los Angeles County Superior Courthouse - when her conservatorship was introduced. After 13 years, it now finally seems to be coming to an end

Mathew Rosengart, Britney Spears's lawyer, was appointed on July 14 to represent her - replacing the court-appointed Sam Ingham

'Regardless of his formal title, Mr. Spears will always be Ms. Spears' father, he will always love her unconditionally, and he will always look out for her best interests,' the lawyers said.

'If the public knew all the facts of Ms. Spears' personal life, not only her highs but also her lows, all of the addiction and mental health issues that she has struggled with, and all of the challenges of the Conservatorship, they would praise Mr. Spears for the job he has done, not vilify him.'

He said that the arrangement 'has worked as intended' and it was not surprising that Britney had felt 'constrained'.

The lawyers wrote: 'The Conservatorship has provided Ms. Spears with a structure to help her navigate the daily challenges of her personal life, family matters, medical issues, and career.

'By nature, the structure includes safeguards to protect the Conservatee from self-harm or harm from others.

'It is not surprising that Ms. Spears has often felt constrained or subject to excessive supervision.

'But, at least for the greater part of the past thirteen years, the Conservatorship has worked as intended.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kelly Clarkson was in good spirits as she took a girls trip amid her bitter divorce from Brandon Blackstock.

The 39-year-old Since U Been Gone hitmaker shared three photos from her vacation in which she was seen golfing and attending a George Strait concert with two girlfriends on Friday.

'Friends, Vegas, Top Golf, and George Strait... I dare you to have a better time than me right now,' Kelly wrote in the caption of her first post.

Fun: Kelly Clarkson was in good spirits as she took a girls trip amid her bitter divorce from Brandon Blackstock

The Texas native donned a black top as she posed with her friends at a driving range. She pulled her brunette locks into a ponytail and shielded her eyes with a pair of gold-framed sunglasses that had purple metallic lenses.

Clarkson covered her face with a colorful block print mask as she posed for a selfie with her friends. As COVID-19 cases continue to rise due to the Delta variant, the trio were all masked as they took the shot.

In her next post, Kelly wore a black cowboy hat with a feather on the cap and a leopard print top as she and her friends beamed in front of a packed arena during a George Strait concert.

Good Times: In her next post, Kelly wore a black cowboy hat with a feather on the cap and a leopard print top as she and her friends beamed in front of a packed arena during a George Strait concert

'Seeing the true King of country music tonight @blakeshelton ���� #GeorgeStrait #TexasGrown,' Clarkson gushed in the caption.

She added another photo of the country music legend on stage during his performance, writing, 'Y’all, run, don’t walk to any George Strait show coming to a venue near you! He is still the #GOAT ❤️.'

Kelly, who started her career as as country singer, performed a cover of Strait's classic song You Look So Good in Love on her talk show in April.

Big fan: She added another photo of the country music legend on stage during his performance, writing, 'Y’all, run, don’t walk to any George Strait show coming to a venue near you! He is still the #GOAT ❤️

Clarkson's vacation comes after she celebrated earlier in the week when a judge upheld the prenuptial agreement in her contentions divorce from Blackstock, 44.

And on Saturday, a report by TMZ claimed The Voice coach - who is said to be worth over £32million ($45million USD) - wants to go 'full steam ahead' in selling their Montana ranch which she owns, and where Brandon is currently residing.

Sources tell the outlet that Clarkson's attorney, famed divorce lawyer Laura Wasser, previously asked the judge for permission to sell the property, to which Blackstock's lawyers objected, with no ruling on the prenuptial agreement at the time.

Moving on: Kelly Clarkson (pictured), 39, reportedly wants to go 'full steam ahead' in selling her Montana ranch ex-husband Brandon Blackstock STILL lives in - after a judge UPHELD their prenup on Wednesday amid their bitter divorce battle

With Blackstock still living in the property, TMZ suggests Clarkson's lawyers would have to file court documents to determine conditions in which the ranch could be sold.

MailOnline has reached out to Clarkson's representatives for comment.

Clarkson had reason to celebrate on Wednesday after learning that a judge has upheld the prenuptial agreement in her bitter divorce battle with Blackstock.

Reports: Sources told TMZ on Saturday that Clarkson's attorney, Laura Wasser, previously asked the judge for permission to sell the property, to which Blackstock's lawyers objected, with no ruling on the prenuptial agreement at the time. Pictured with Blackstock in 2018

TMZ reported at the time how Clarkson was on set of The Voice when she 'let out a scream' of joy, with fellow coaches Blake Shelton and Ariana Grande joining in.

Sources told the outlet that while Clarkson was filming the singing competition, she received an email from her lawyers sharing the good news that her prenup had been kept in place, meaning she will keep the bulk of her assets and income.

Last month, Clarkson had been temporarily ordered to pay Blackstock nearly $200,000-per-month (£144,000) in spousal and child support.

The documents also revealed details into Clarkson's finances, showing that she personally earns over $2.4million (£1.8million) a month.

Reason to celebrate! Clarkson was said to have found out that her prenup with Blackstock will be upheld, while she was filming The Voice on Wednesday

TMZ reported that Clarkson will keep the lion's share of their assets including the Montana ranch where Blackstock is currently residing.

Blackstock had been contesting the prenup and wanted to split their properties 50/50, in addition to the income that she earned throughout their marriage - but a judge has reportedly stopped his request.

Sources added that Clarkson's friend and fellow coach Shelton recently cut ties with Blackstock, who had managed the country singer for a number of years.

A judge is said to have agreed with Clarkson's attorney that the signed prenup had to be taken into account.

It's over: Per reports, Clarkson has been awarded primary custody of their children - River, seven, and Remington, five (pictured above, as well as his elder kids Seth and Savannah)

Clarkson now has the right to sell the Montana ranch as she is the one who purchased it, according to the report.

The ex couple's divorce has been 'bifurcated' meaning the end of the marriage has officially been declared.

Per the report, Clarkson has been awarded primary custody of their minor children - River, seven, and Remington, five.

Earlier this week, it was reported that Clarkson would pay 70 per cent of her children's school fees and expenses but had refused to pay for the Montana ranch.

The judge had ordered that Blackstock carry the financial burden of his Montana ranch, that costs around $81,000 (£58,000) a month to run in expenses.

Cause for celebration: Blake Shelton and Ariana Grande are said to have celebrated Kelly's legal win backstage on The Voice according to a report (John Legend also pictured)

Blackstock is currently living at the ranch, and is using it as his primary residence.

Court documents obtained by TMZ confirm Clarkson will continue to pay Blackstock $150,000 (£108,000) per month whilst the divorce case continues in court as well as $45,000 (£32,000) in child support.

The permanent specifics of any spousal support is still unclear.

The singer has sold a staggering 25 million albums and 45 million singles worldwide in her career, and currently has her own hit talk show.

Kiss off: Earlier this month Clarkson asked for the courts to legally declare her single, over one year after she initially filed for divorce in June 2020 (pictured in 2018)

Clarkson first began dating Blackstock - a country music manager - back in 2011 and married him in 2013.

Blackstock also shares his 13-year-old son Seth and 17-year-old daughter Savannah with his ex-wife Melissa Ashworth.

The Piece By Piece hitmaker had sparked speculation last year that she and Blackstock could have been set to have a third child, as she confessed she had 'baby fever' after chatting to celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay.

During their chat, in which Gordon's 13-month-old son Oscar appeared, Clarkson said: 'Oh my gosh! Do not do this to me. I so want another child, and my husband is like, 'No! We have four!'

'You get baby fever when you see them and you're like, 'Oh, I miss the chubby little legs and the little face.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He's not just an acclaimed actor, but a style icon.

Michael B. Jordan hit a fashion high note as he headed to dinner at Catch LA in West Hollywood on Saturday.

The actor, 34, was spotted arriving to the hotspot wearing a green floral print crochet button down and chain necklace.

Looking good! Michael B. Jordan put his fashion forward eye for style on display as he headed to dinner at Catch LA in West Hollywood on Saturday

He teamed the top with a pair of brown slacks, sneakers, and a snazzy gold watch.

The actor was obviously in good spirits upon arriving to the eatery, as he flashed a smile while stepping out of his sleek car.

Michael was feeling the love after dinner, when he stepped outside of the restaurant to a crowd of delighted fans.

The autograph-seekers waited outside the eatery with the likes of a baseball and boxing glove for him to sign. The actor kindly obliged.

Fan favorite! Fans awaited the actor outside the restaurant with items such as a boxing glove and baseball

Let's get this show on the road! Jordan appeared in high spirits as he arrived to the LA hotspot

Michael made headlines last month when it was revealed he is developing a Black Superman project for HBO Max.

The actor is producing and developing through his Outlier Society production company and he'll possibly star as Val-Zod from the comics.

J.J. Abrams is also developing a Black Superman project with Ta'Neshi Coates set to write the screenplay, but Jordan's project is not related to that.

Lights, camera, action: The actor is currently filming A Journal For Jordan, the latest directorial effort for Denzel Washington

Packing a punch! He is also slated to return as Adonis Creed in the upcoming sequel Creed III, though it's unclear when production will begin

The actor is currently filming A Journal For Jordan, the latest directorial effort for Denzel Washington.

The film follows the true story of 1st Sgt. Charles Monroe King, who, before he is killed in action in Baghdad, authors a journal for his son intended to tell him how to live a decent life despite growing up without a father.

The project is based on Dana Canedy's article From Father to Son, Last Words to Live By.

He is also slated to return as Adonis Creed in the upcoming sequel Creed III, though it's unclear when production will begin.

As far as his personal life, Michael is in a relationship with Steve Harvey's stepdaughter Lori Harvey.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She will be releasing her latest collection, Ivy Park Rodeo, in just five days.

And Beyonce continued to drum up excitement over her new cowboy inspired line as she posted even more sexy snaps from her upcoming range.

The hit-maker, 39, looked amazing as she flashed her abs in a lilac cow print crop top and mini skirt with slit in a series of photos posted Saturday.

Giddy up! Beyonce continued to drum up excitement over her new cowboy inspired line as she posted another sexy snap from her upcoming Ivy Park Rodeo range

In one tantalizing snap, the Crazy In Love hit-maker cross her arms over her head as she put her gym-honed body on full display whilst posing before a straw display.

She was a vision of beauty with her gold-brunette tresses cascading down in loose ringlets and a touch of makeup on her complexion.

In another shot, Beyonce went for a slightly more modest tone as she wore a matching cow print jacket over her shoulders.

She also donned a pair of nude heels.

Working it! She was a vision of beauty with her gold-brunette tresses cascading down in loose ringlets and a touch of makeup on her complexion

Yee-haw! The hit-maker brought the wow factor to the glam shoot

The look was just the latest sneak peek teasing her upcoming collaboration with Adidas.

Last week the songstress sent temperatures soaring as she posted a seductive snap of herself putting her jaw-dropping body on display whilst clad in a denim jumpsuit with a blue cowboy hat atop her glossy waves.

The Crazy In Love songstress gazed seductively towards the camera with parted, glossy lips as she straddled a leather saddle.

Giddy up! Beyonce sent temperatures soaring as she continued promoting her upcoming cowboy-inspired drop earlier this week,

Wow! Beyonce put on a very sizzling display as she rocked one sexy look after another to promote her new Adidas x Ivy Park Rodeo collection

With the backdrop of the desert placed behind her, Beyonce looked every inch the stylish and sexy cowgirl.

She unveiled a touch more skin with her patterned jean jacket, which suggestively fell off her shoulder.

In a departure from the Western theme, she rocked a chunky pair of white sneakers.

Giddy-up! The 39-year-old superstar released a new promotional video for the line's latest cowboy-inspired drop last week

The superstar also released a new promotional video for the line's latest cowboy-inspired drop last week.

Beyonce set pulses racing as she bared her behind in a scoop-necked denim thong bodysuit and backless chaps.

The Single Ladies hitmaker gave viewers a glimpse of her pert derriere as she strutted toward the flames that surrounded her.

Cheeky display: Beyonce set pulses racing as she bared her behind in a scoop-necked denim thong bodysuit and backless chaps

Sultry: In another scene from the ad, the fashion mogul flaunted her ample cleavage as she hung upside down from a barrel

She completed her Western-themed ensemble with a brown belt that had a large gold buckle and a brown crystal-studded cowboy hat.

In another scene from the ad, the fashion mogul flaunted her ample cleavage as she hung upside down from a barrel.

Beyonce later whipped a lasso over her head as she modeled pink and brown cow-print leggings with a matching sports bra and long gloves.

Yeehaw: Beyonce later whipped a lasso over her head as she modeled pink and brown cow-print leggings with a matching sports bra and long gloves

Rodeo: The Crazy In Love singer, clad in a strapless denim dress with a sheer parka trench and white Adidas sneakers, turned her long blonde braid into a lasso as fireworks exploded behind her

Sexy: The bombshell posted in front of a desert landscape in a denim long-sleeved top with the signature three Adidas stripes that was tucked into tiny high-waisted shorts

Showing some skin: In one clip, Beyonce stood amongst bales of hay wearing a pair of Daisy Dukes over her bodysuit with denim chaps trimmed with white Adidas stripes

At one point, she rode on a horse from a carousel in blue workout gear

The Love On Top singer, clad in a strapless denim dress with a sheer parka trench and white Adidas sneakers, turned her long blonde braid into a lasso as fireworks exploded behind her.

The bombshell posed in front of a desert landscape in a denim long-sleeved top with the signature three Adidas stripes that was tucked into tiny high-waisted shorts.

In one clip, Beyonce stood amongst bales of hay wearing a pair of Daisy Dukes over her bodysuit with denim chaps trimmed with white Adidas stripes. She sported white converse sneakers and dangly diamond earrings that hung to her shoulders.

Superstar: Bey showed off her flawless face in the ad

All curls: The new campaign is to promote the singer's Ivy Park collection

Giddy up: The mother of three displayed her incredible physique

The Say My Name songstress showcased her slender waistline with a giant belt that had a buckle engraved with the letter 'B.'

The video also heavily featured The Wire actor and real-life rodeo champion Glynn Turman.

The Emmy Award winner wore a denim jacket with matching jeans and black cowboy hat as he rode horses in a field.

Other guest stars included Snoh Aalegra, Orville Peck, Paloma Elsesser and Tobe Nwigwe.

The collection, which is comprised of 58 women’s and unisex apparel pieces, 13 accessories and five shoes, will be released on August 19 at 2pm EST on Addidas.com.

All fired up: The ad was reminiscent of some of the megastar's pop videos

Cow girl: Bey put on a sensational performance in the new campaign
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kim Kardashian threw a private screening this Friday night of her upcoming animated film Paw Patrol: The Movie.

The 40-year-old reality TV superstar welcomed a lot of the little tykes in her family - her own four children as well as her nieces.

For her latest party Kim was casually stylish in a beige bandeau that showed off her enviably svelte midriff as she cradled her daughter Chicago, three.

Having a ball: Kim Kardashian threw a private screening this Friday night of her upcoming animated film Paw Patrol: The Movie, welcoming her children and nieces

She shares all four of her children - North, eight, Saint, five, Chicago, three, and Psalm, two - with her estranged third husband Kanye West.

The guest list at the screening include Kim's four-year-old niece Dream whose parents are Rob Kardashian and Blac Chyna.

Kim's big sister Kourtney was also spotted arriving at the fete with her nine-year-old daughter Penelope, one of three children she shares with her sizzling ex Scott Disick.

Kourtney cut a glamorous figure in a floor-length scarlet gown with a swirling embossed print, adding a snappy touch with a black leather jacket.

Fab: For her latest party Kim was casually stylish in a beige bandeau that showed off her enviably svelte midriff as she cradled her daughter Chicago, three

Family matters: She shares all four of her children - North, eight, Saint, five, Chicago, three, and Psalm, two - with her estranged third husband Kanye West

Kim and Kourtney's younger sister Khloe arrived with her smoldering ex-boyfriend Tristan Thompson and their daughter True, three.

The NBA love rat was serially unfaithful to Khloe and they have broken up for the second time now but they still amicably co-parent.

Paw Patrol: The Movie is adapted from the eponymous long-running animated TV show and features Kim as one of its voice stars.

She joins a celebrity-strewn cast that includes Tyler Perry as well as Veep actor Randall Park and Young Sheldon star Iain Armitage.

Glam: Kim's big sister Kourtney was also spotted arriving at the fete with her nine-year-old daughter Penelope, one of three children she shares with her sizzling ex Scott Disick

Shortly after the screening Kourtney's boyfriend Travis Barker posted an Instagram album of himself posing up a storm.

Travis, who rose to fame as the drummer for Blink-182, showed off his musclebound and tattoo-covered arms in a Public Enemy tank top.

'Bring the noise,' he captioned the album and Kourtney headed over to his comments section to remark that 'you are yummy.'

The dynamic duo have been dating for months and are serious enough that he has gotten her name tattooed onto his chest.

What a look: Shortly after the screening Kourtney's boyfriend Travis Barker posted an Instagram album of himself posing up a storm

He's a fan: Travis, who rose to fame as the drummer for Blink-182, showed off his musclebound and tattoo-covered arms in a Public Enemy tank top

Committed: The dynamic duo have been dating for months and are serious enough that he has gotten her name tattooed onto his chest

Kardashian later shared several videos of herself and North to her Instagram Story on Saturday.

The reality television personality was seen using several filters while laying in bed, including a setting where she looked as if she had multiple facial tattoos.

North appeared to be enjoying her time with her mother, and notably used a filter where she was seen blowing a kiss and shooting tears from her eyes.

Messing around: Kardashian shared several videos of herself and North using facial filters to her Instagram Story on Saturday
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Saweetie headlined the Can't Wait Live: Concert for Jobs, Climate and Care in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The 28 -year-old rapper (born Diamonté Harper) sizzled in a blue rhinestone-studded bra top and matching bell-bottoms as she took the stage at the Mann Center for the Performing Arts on Friday night.

The hitmaker performed several of her most well-known songs including Talkin' Bout, Fast, Tap In and My Type.

Taking the stage: Saweetie headlined the Can't Wait Live: Concert for Jobs, Climate and Care in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Saweetie's ample cleavage and taut stomach were on full display in her sexy stage outfit which she paired with a matching bucket hat and thong.

She held a crystal-embellished cane as she strutted across the stage and rapped, accompanied by her backup dancers.

Wyclef Jean, Mavis Staples, Ne-Yo, DJ Jazzy Jeff, Freeway, Beach Bunny and DJ Diamond Kuts also performed at the free show, which was attended by over 1,000 people.

Stunning: The 28-year-old rapper (born Diamonté Harper) sizzled in a blue rhinestone-studded bra top and matching bell-bottoms as she took the stage at the Mann Center for the Performing Arts on Friday night

Exciting: The hitmaker performed several of her most well-known songs including Talkin' Bout, Fast, Tap In and My Type

Sizzling: Saweetie's ample cleavage and taut stomach were on full display in her sexy stage outfit which she paired with a matching bucket hat and thong

Progressive political organizations including The Working Families Party, the National Domestic Workers Alliance, SEIU, and Move On hosted the event.

Can't Wait organizers stated that the mission of the concert was to exert pressure on Congress to pass the $3.5 trillion social policy budget resolution and the $1.2 trillion infrastructure bill.

In a statement to Teen Vogue, WFP director of partnerships and strategy Nelini Stamp said, 'We have a message for the corporate Democrats threatening to block the jobs and care our communities need.'

Star power: Wyclef Jean, Mavis Staples, Ne-Yo, DJ Jazzy Jeff, Freeway, Beach Bunny and DJ Diamond Kuts also performed at the free show, which was attended by over 1,000 people

On a mission: Can't Wait organizers stated that the goal of the concert was to exert pressure on Congress to pass the $3.5 trillion social policy budget resolution and the $1.2 trillion bipartisan infrastructure bill

'We can't wait years for jobs to come back,' Stamp continued. 'We can't wait to invest in the Black, brown, and Indigenous communities hit the hardest by these crises, and we can't wait until the next climate disaster tears our lives apart.'

Saweetie told the outlet: 'Artists have power. There's so much at stake right now, in this country and in the world, and we can't sit on the sidelines.

She went on to say, 'I think it is important for me and my peers to use our platform to spread awareness about issues that impact our community. We have a historic opportunity to build the country we want to live in, a country where all of us can thrive. We all need to come together and do our part to get it done.'

VMA Nominations: Saweetie ft Doja Cat has been nominated for Best Art Direction for Alec Contestabile at the Video Music Awards 2021

Saweetie has also been nominated for best new artist at the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards and her music video 'Best friend' ft. Doja Cat also picked up a nomination for Production Designer Alec Contestabile for best Art Direction.

Ahead of the show, Saweetie raved about her new concert outfit as she posed in the mirror for several videos that she shared on her Instagram Story.

The California native rose to fame after her song Icy Girl went multi-platinum in 2017. Her debut album Pretty Bitch Music will be released later this year.

Looking great! Ahead of the show, Saweetie raved about her new concert outfit as she posed in the mirror for several videos that she shared on her Instagram Story
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Madonna and her beau Ahlamalik Williams were spotted with three of her six children at JFK Airport this week.

The global pop diva, who will be celebrating her 63rd birthday on Monday, has been linked since 2019 to Ahlamalik, age 27.

During her latest flight she was accompanied by her twin daughters Stella and Estere, eight, and another daughter Mercy James, 15.

Off they go: Madonna and her beau Ahlamalik Williams were spotted with three of her six children at JFK Airport this week

Madonna and Ahlamalik could be spotted holding hands and gazing into one another's faces as they strolled through the airport.

The Material Girl wore her signature blonde hair in pigtails and added a splash of glitz to her casual ensemble with multiple necklaces.

Earlier this week she wished a happy 21st birthday to her son Rocco whom she shares with her ex-husband Guy Ritchie.

'We Have Been on many Trips together around the World,' wrote Madonna on Instagram alongside a throwback snap of her holding him as a child.

Travelers: During her latest flight she was accompanied by her twin daughters Stella and Estere, eight, and another daughter Mercy James, 15

'But the Greatest journey i have taken with you is the one inside my [heart]. Love you to the moon and back. Forever and Always.'

In addition to welcoming Rocco biologically Madonna and Guy also adopted their son David Banda, 15, from Malawi.

The Express Yourself singer in fact adopted four of her children - David Banda, Mercy James, Stella and Estere - from the same country.

Madonna's eldest child is her 24-year-old daughter Lourdes Leon whom she shares with her former personal trainer Carlos Leon.

History: The global pop diva, who will be celebrating her 63rd birthday on Monday, has been linked since 2019 to Ahlamalik who is in his 20s

There was a flare-up of controversy when Madonna and Guy adopted David, owing in part to the fact the little boy's father Yohane was still alive.

Yohane publicly supported the adoption at the time telling The Guardian: 'My interest is in the child's best chance for health and education.'

He confessed: 'It was a hard choice to make, but when it seemed likely that David would have a better life with a new family, I could not say no.'

Yet as Madonna recalled in a People interview a few years ago: 'Every newspaper said I kidnapped him. In my mind, I was thinking: "Wait a minute. I’m trying to save somebody’s life. Why are you all s***ing on me right now?" I did everything by the book. That was a real low point for me. I would cry myself to sleep.'

Legging it: The Material Girl wore her signature blonde hair in pigtails and added a splash of glitz to her casual ensemble with multiple necklaces

Madonna and Guy had split up by the time of Mercy's adoption - and the Dick Tracy star has claimed the divorce led Malawian officials to question her parenting ability.

She ultimately swung the adoption by taking her case to Malawi's Supreme Court Of Appeal but: 'The way I was treated - that sexist behavior - was ridiculous.'

Stella and Estere's father gave an interview to The Mail On Sunday in 2017 expressing shock at the revelation they were being taken from him permanently.

‘I was told from the start that Esther and Stella were going to a rich woman’s home abroad, that she would give them a good education, then return them to me, to live with me and help all of my family,' said Adam Mwale.

Looking fab: Madonna and Ahlamalik could be spotted holding hands and gazing into one another's faces as they strolled through the airport

'Now you are telling me the adoption is permanent. That cannot be true – I don’t want it to be true. I am their father and I will always be their father.'

He maintained: ‘The orphanage boss told me it would be a wonderful chance for my little girls, and for their brother and sisters at home. I was told to agree with everything in court. I did not believe I would never see my girls again.'

The then 40-year-old farmer, who was living in the village of Kayembe, told The Mail On Sunday: 'I was standing with my brother-in-law who signed the consent forms with me, and we just continued to believe that I would always be the twins’ father and they would be coming home to me.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They tied the knot over a decade ago.

And Ashley Graham promised to love her husband Justin Ervin for '100 more' as she celebrated their 11 year wedding anniversary on Saturday.

Taking to Instagram, the beauty, 33, gushed in the caption of a couples photo, 'I have loved you immensely for 11 years. and I'll love you for 100 more. you are my forever. happy anniversary my Justin (heart emoticon).'

'You are my forever': Ashley Graham promised to love her husband Justin Ervin for '100 more' as she celebrated their 11th wedding anniversary on Saturday

In the photo, the couple exuded cool as they posed side by side, with Ashley leaning ever-so-slightly towards her husband.

Justin also celebrated the milestone occasion on his Instagram Stories, where he posted sweet wedding day flashbacks.

'11 years ago we said, "I do..." Thank you for being my best friend, my closest confidant, the mother of my children and my bride. I love you @ashleygraham,' he gushed in a photo of the then-newlyweds.

He also shared a beautiful photo of blushing bride Ashley, beaming with joy in her wedding dress with a loose curl falling over her face.

'Thank you for being my best friend': Justin also celebrated the milestone occasion on his Instagram Stories, where he posted sweet wedding day flashbacks

Going to the chapel! He also shared a beautiful photo of blushing bride Ashley, beaming with joy in her wedding dress with a loose curl falling over her face

Ashley first met Justin in 2009 at church. The couple quickly began dating, with their nuptials occurring the following year.

They now have one-year-old baby son Isaac and another one on the way.

On Wednesday, the model put her growing midsection on display as she worked a flirty bright orange mini dress on Wednesday.

The model couldn't have looked any happier striking an array of poses upon a beachfront balcony.

Working it! Graham put her growing midsection on display as she rocked a flirty bright orange mini dress on Wednesday

The mom-to-be was a vision of glamour with her brunette tresses styled into sleek, loose waves with a glamorous side part.

She worked an array of gold jewelry, including a chain necklace, and a pair of strappy neon yellow heels which injected another playful touch to the look.

In the images, Ashley tenderly cradled her bump while flashing a silly, shocked expression for the camera.

She appeared more contemplative in a second shot capturing her gazing towards the ocean blue with her hand gently resting at the top of her belly.

Hey mama! Graham, who shares son Isaac with husband Justin, gazed contemplatively towards the ocean blue as she rested one hand on her burgeoning bump

Ray of sunshine! And a third snap captured the model looking euphoric as she posed on the balcony with her hands on either side of the railing

And a third snap captured the model looking euphoric as she posed on the balcony with her hands on either side of the railing.

Ashley announced she was expecting her second child with husband Justin a little over a year after giving birth to their son Isaac last year.

The model recently admitted her control has 'gone out the window' during her pregnancy.

Speaking with People, Ashley said she has stopped trying to 'control' her body because she knows she will 'never feel the same' as she did before she was pregnant.

Bun in the oven! Graham announced she was expecting her second child with husband Justin a little over a year after giving birth to their son Isaac last year

She said: 'I think being in control when you're pregnant, it just gets thrown out the window.

'And I learned that the hard way when I tried to control everything when I was pregnant with Isaac and I told myself that I was going to bounce right back because I was breastfeeding and everybody told me, "Oh, if you breastfeed you're going to lose all the weight." And I had a few honest women tell me you will never feel the same. So they were just blunt with me and sure enough, I haven't felt the same.

'And then boom. I was like, "Well, I just got pregnant again so maybe I'll never feel the same and I don't even know what I felt like before I was pregnant with Isaac anyways."'

Forever and ever: Graham tied the knot with her husband Justin in 2010

Ashley also heaped praise on the 'mommy community' that she joined when she was pregnant with her first child, as she now has a place to go to for advice without being shamed.

'I think that the best thing I did was find a mommy community and when I'm pregnant, I find other pregnant people to just call and ask [questions] because this pregnancy is so different from the last and different symptoms, different feelings.

'And then when the kid gets here, then you have a whole other slew of questions because they don't come with a manual, so [I'm] all about the community. And I think that if I didn't have that, I would be so lost.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He turned 29 earlier this month.

And Cole Sprouse was seen enjoying the company of some of his famous friends while celebrating the occasion in Los Feliz this week.

The Riverdale actor and former child star was also accompanied by the blonde model Ari Fournier who is his current girlfriend.

Having a ball: Cole Sprouse was seen enjoying the company of some of his famous friends while celebrating the occasion in Los Feliz this week

Cole's star-studded guest list at the party included his Riverdale castmate KJ Apa who arrived with his pregnant girlfriend Clara Berry.

KJ was seen gallantly opening the car door for Clara as they swung by his pal's birthday celebrations that evening.

Also in attendance was the sizzling The Assassination Of Gianni Versace star Darren Criss and his wife Mia Swier.

Silver fox director Taika Waititi, who at the moment is carrying on a romance with pop act Rita Ora, was spotted there too.

Looking fab: The Riverdale actor and former child star was also accompanied by the blonde model Ari Fournier who is his current girlfriend

Side by side: Cole's star-studded guest list at the party included his Riverdale castmate KJ Apa who arrived with his pregnant girlfriend Clara Berry

Tommy Dorfman, who is famously close friends with Cindy Crawford's daughter Kaia Gerber, could be spotted turning up to the fete as well.

Actor Jimmy O Yang of Silicon Valley fame was glimpsed outside the festivities with a mystery blonde at his side.

Cole went Instagram official with Ari last month when he posted a romantic snap of her and then joked on his Insta Stories: 'Time to p*** off the 14yos again.'

What a night: Also in attendance was the sizzling The Assassination Of Gianni Versace star Darren Criss and his wife Mia Swier

Hitmaker: Silver fox director Taika Waititi, who at the moment is carrying on a romance with pop act Rita Ora, was spotted there too

His current status as a teen idol has put his love life in the spotlight, including during his relationship with his Riverdale co-star Lili Reinhart.

On his actual birthday earlier this month he swapped wishes on Instagram with his identical twin brother Dylan with whom he shot to fame as a child star.

They came up together on the Disney Channel series The Suite Life Of Zack And Cody and its follow-up The Suite Life On Deck.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Halle Berry looked blissful as she celebrated her 55th birthday on Saturday.

The Academy Award-wining actress shared a video to her Instagram page that was set to a special serenade by her boyfriend Van Hunt.

'After the year we've all had, my heart is full as I'm grateful to see this August 14th,' Halle wrote in the caption of her post.

Happy Birthday! Halle Berry looked blissful as she celebrated her 55th birthday on Saturday

She continued, 'In the midst of the storm, I've managed to create happiness, find more peace, and feel more free than ever! Finally, I'm exhaling!'

'Thank you vanO for my b-day serenade,' she concluded, adding a musical note emoji. In the video, the Grammy-winning musical artist, 51, sang a soulful rendition of Smoke Gets In Your Eyes by The Platters.

Halle was sitting in the passenger seat of a moving car in the clip. She leaned her head against the frame of the window and extended her arm out to take the video.

Romantic: The Academy Award-wining actress shared a video to her Instagram page that was set to a special serenade by her boyfriend Van Hunt

The Monster's Ball star smiled softly as the wind lifted up strands of her golden-streaked brown tresses.

Last month, Berry gushed over her relationship with Hunt in an Instagram post in which she promoted a new cocktail collaboration.

'As you might know, I have a boyfriend, finally - I have a really good boyfriend, I have my person,' Halle said a clip in which she wore a black tank top and patterned head scarf.

Berry went on to say, 'When you find your person, you like to try to find things you can enjoy together,' adding that she and Van enjoy drinking wine and sipping bourbon, inspiring her collaboration, The Berry Blend.

In love: Last month, Halle gushed over her relationship with Hunt in an Instagram post in which she promoted a new cocktail collaboration called The Berry Blend

The beverage includes blueberries, lemon, lime, orange, strawberries, pineapple, jalapeño and vegan sugar, infused with a blend of alcohol, which Berry describes as a 'sweet and spicy sensation.'

The Cleveland native last fall confirmed her romance with Hunt on social media and the pair walked the red carpet at the Oscars this past April.

Berry is mom to daughter Nahla, 13, with ex Gabriel Aubry, and son Maceo, seven, with ex-husband Olivier Martinez. She was past married to David Justice between 1993 and 1997, and singer Eric Benét from 2001 to 2005.

Berry replied to an Instagram post after a user said she couldn't 'keep a man,' replying, 'Who said I wanted to keep them?

Happy: Berry was seen in a romantic shot with her boyfriend this past Independence Day

Stunning: Berry said in the clip, 'As you might know, I have a boyfriend, finally - I have a really good boyfriend, I have my person'

Summer wear: Berry wore a black tank top and patterned head scarf in the social media clip

'I'm all about living your best life, if you make a wrong move, course correct and re-spin and start again!'

In February, a source told Us Weekly that the star 'absolutely believes Van is the one for her' and that she 'can see herself settling down with him.'

The insider said that Hunt 'really brings out the fun side of' the A-list beauty, adding that he's 'creative and funny and constantly challenging Halle and making her laugh.'

The source noted, 'Van is head over heels for Halle. It's adorable to see how much his is infatuated with her.'

Halle will next be seen in the Netflix martial arts movie Bruised. The film, which stars Berry as disgraced MMA fighter Jackie Justice, is also the actress's directorial debut.

Yummy: The beverage includes blueberries, lemon, lime, orange, strawberries, pineapple, jalapeño and vegan sugar, infused with a blend of alcohol
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Shenae Grimes has given birth to her second child, a baby boy named Kingsley Taylor Beech.

The former 90210 actress, 31, announced the arrival of her second child with husband Josh Beech on Instagram on Saturday, posting several intimate snaps capturing mom and the newborn.

'Kingsley Taylor Beech,' Shenae began in the caption. 'Our littlest one made a safe and healthy arrival into the world on Friday the 13th, in true Beech fam fashion! (Jack-O-Lantern emoji).

'Our hearts are bursting with love and gratitude': Shenae Grimes has given birth to her second child, a baby boy named Kingsley Taylor Beech

'Needless to say, our hearts are bursting with love and gratitude. Me and the babe are both doing incredibly well and look forward to settling in at home soon!'

The former Degrassi actress revealed back on Valentine's Day that she was expecting her second child.

To announce the exciting news, the star shared a stunning black and white photo with one hand cradling her growing baby bump.

As she stood with her jeans unzipped and white blouse unbuttoned, she put her pregnant belly on full display for her many Instagram followers.

Oh boy! The former 90210 actress, 31, announced the arrival of her second child with husband Josh Beech on Instagram, posting several intimate snaps capturing mom and the newborn

Baby on board: Shenae revealed she is expecting her second child with her husband Josh Beech with a special post on Valentine's Day

'Here we go again!!! We're feeling incredibly blessed to be growing our family and this gift truly couldn't have come at a better time,' Shenae, who shares nearly three-year-old daughter Bowie with her husband, gushed.

The actress continued: 'We've just settled into our new house and it really feels like home now. Bowie is absolutely itching for a little sibling to play with and look out for.'

After tackling a recent cross-country move in a car 'with a toddler and a dog' during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, she is more than prepared and ready for 'Baby Beech #2.'

Future big sister: To reveal the exciting news, the 31-year-old actress shared a stunning black and white photo with one hand gently cradling her growing baby bump

Precious: As she stood with her jeans unzipped and white blouse unbuttoned, she put her pregnant belly on full display for her 459,000 Instagram followers

On her blog The Damn Thing, she provided more details about her latest milestone, including discovering she was pregnant two days before Christmas.

She prefaced the news by writing she wanted to be mindful of any couples struggling to conceive.

'While we're thrilled to share this news with our supportive community, Josh and I want to first and foremost be mindful of the sensitive nature surrounding a pregnancy announcement,' Grimes began.

'Here we go again!!! We're feeling incredibly blessed to be growing our family and this gift truly couldn't have come at a better time,' she gushed (pictured in 2019)

Read all about it: On her blog The Damn Thing , she provided more details about her latest milestone, including discovering she was pregnant two days before Christmas

She added: 'The ability to conceive naturally is a privilege and a blessing and while it's one we are extremely grateful for, we want to ensure that we acknowledge those whose family planning journeys have been more complicated than our own. We see you, we love you and we want you to know that you are in our prayers.'

In the blog, she revealed, like with little Bowie, her upcoming addition was not 'planned' but she and her man are so excited to grow their family.

The star also remarked that her latest pregnancy is 'a lot less terrifying' than her first and she will keeping fans updated with YouTube videos.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She runs her eponymous fashion line Serena.

And tennis champ Serena Williams looked fabulous as she modeled the latest wears from her collection in an Instagram post shared Saturday.

The superstar, 39, exuded sophistication in a taupe Leena Crossback Sweater Dress that clung to her incredible figure.

If you've got it! Serena Williams looked fabulous as she modeled the latest wears from her collection in an Instagram post shared Saturday

'Look back at it (peach emoji),' Serena captioned the post, along with a tag to her fashion line.

The outfit captured the attention of numerous fans - including her husband Alexis Ohanian, who commented simply, 'Ok.'

In the photos, Serena put her body on display as she worked the skintight dress while wearing a pair of coordinating heels.

Another snap captured the athlete putting her toned figure on display as she posed with her backside towards the camera.

Wow factor: Williams showed off her toned backside as she posed with her derriere towards the camera

He approves! Williams' husband Alexis Ohanian commented 'Ok' on the photo

The athlete announced the launch of her online shop Serena back in 2018.

She wrote: 'They say life is about timing. I learned this lesson at age 18, when I chose to play a light tennis schedule because I wanted to go to fashion school. Some criticized my decision, but I knew I had two loves - tennis and fashion - and had to find a way to make them coexist.'

'After 15 years of false starts, and people in fashion telling me 'no', it only only drove me to work harder. As a result, I discovered what it meant to invest in myself, and I allowed that belief in myself to drive me to reach my dream.

XOXO: The athlete has been married to Reddit cofounder Alexis since 2017

Just the girls! She shares three-year-old daughter Alexis Olympia Ohanian Jr. with her husband

'Today, I am proud to launch @serena, my own online shop. Never stop believing in yourself, you're worth it.'

Outside of her job as a fashionista, Serena is best known for her wildly successful career on the tennis court.

Recently, however, the star announced she would be withdrawing from the Western Southern Open at Mason, Ohio, dur to her right leg injury.

Serena hasn't played since hurting the leg at Wimbledon. She slipped on wet grass during a first-round match against Aliaksandra Sasnovich of Belarus and was forced to retire.

'Unfortunately, I will not be playing in the Western & Southern Open next week as I am still in recovery from my leg injury at Wimbledon,' said the 20th-ranked Williams, who won the event in 2014 and 2015. 'I will miss all of my fans in Cincinnati whom I look forward to seeing every summer. I plan to be back on the court very soon.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@KJ Apa and his pregnant girlfriend Clara Berry were spotted at Cole Sprouse's birthday party on Friday night.

The 24-year-old Riverdale star and the 27-year-old model were seen leaving the celebration for KJ's castmate and close friend in Los Feliz.

The parents-to-be were all smiles as they walked down the sidewalk to their car.

Out on the town: KJ Apa and his pregnant girlfriend Clara Berry were spotted at Cole Sprouse's birthday party on Friday night

KJ kept it casual in a white t-shirt and paint-splatted blue jeans paired with yellow Converse sneakers.

The New Zealand native wore his signature red locks tousled and sported a mustache, having shaving off his beard.

Berry turned heads in a boldly printed sweatpants with a matching jacket. She left the jacket unzipped over a leopard print cut-out sports bra.

Celebrating: The 24-year-old Riverdale star and the 27-year-old model were seen leaving the party for KJ's castmate and close friend in Los Feliz

Clara's baggy sweatpants were pulled down low on her hips, showing off her growing baby belly. She completed her dressed down ensemble with white sneakers.

The brunette beauty's long locks fell loose around her shoulders with a few strands framing her face.

Apa wrapped his arm around his girlfriend and the loved-up couple beamed as they headed out of the festivities. KJ opened the car door to help Clara into the car as the two grinned at each other.

In love: Apa wrapped his arm around his girlfriend and the couple beamed as they headed out of the festivities. KJ opened the car door to help Clara into the car as the two grinned at each other

Taika Waititi also made an appearance at Sprouse's birthday gathering. The 45-year-old director donned a vintage t-shirt under a gray coat with cropped sleeves.

The Academy Award winner sported black jeans and white sneakers. He accessorized with a silver chain bracelet and a large silver watch.

Taika's girlfriend Rita Ora did not accompany him to the party. Last week, the new couple went public as they walked the red carpet together at The Suicide Squad premiere.

Good times: Taika Waititi also made an appearance at Sprouse's birthday gathering

Earlier that day, Clara shared videos to her Instagram in which she and Apa joked around as they were being driven in a car.

In the first clip, Apa reached over from the backseat to playfully put his hand on Berry's forehead and pull her eyebrows up with two fingers as the two laughed.

'Good, good, good, good, good,' he could be heard saying as they cruised down a highway.

Clara then added a mustache filter in the next clip with the couple smiling as they wore bushy facial hair above their upper lips.

Having fun: Earlier that day, Clara shared videos to her Instagram in which she and Apa joked around as they were being driven in a car

Joking around: In the first clip, Apa reached over from the backseat to playfully put his hand on Berry's forehead and pull her eyebrows up with two fingers as the two laughed
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is a showbiz glamour queen.

And Megan Fox, 35, proved as much whilst flashing the flesh during a recent outing in sweltering Los Angeles.

The Transformers star showed off her taut midriff in a scarlet peekaboo top that also offered a generous glimpse of cleavage.

Showbiz glamour queen: And Megan Fox, 35, proved as much whilst flashing the flesh during a recent outing in sweltering Los Angeles

She teamed the top with a matching pencil skirt redolent of the 1960s and accessorized with a bag in the same color.

Letting her luxurious dark hair down she sharpened her screen siren features with makeup and balanced expertly on a sky-high pair of gold stilettos.

The sizzling sensation has been running around with the svelte blond rapper Machine Gun Kelly, aka Colson Baker, for over a year.

They met shortly before the coronavirus lockdowns on the Puerto Rico set of the film Midnight In The Switchgrass which was finally released late last month.

Off she goes: The Transformers star showed off her taut midriff in a scarlet peekaboo top that also offered a generous glimpse of cleavage

Megan leads the cast of the film alongside Bruce Willis, with Kelly as one of the supporting players amid names like Emile Hirsch and Lukas Haas.

The Irishman producer Randall Emmett, 50, directed the film and his current fiancee Lala Kent, 30, of Vanderpump Rules fame is also in the cast.

When Midnight In The Switchgrass premiered at LA Live last month Megan declined to attend - and announced as much only that day.

'Due to the recent California mask mandate and rise of COVID cases, Megan Fox will no longer be attending the premiere tonight,' her representative told Deadline.

Swanking about: She teamed the top with a matching pencil skirt redolent of the 1960s and accessorized with a bag in the same color

Lala posted Insta Stories snaps of herself at the premiere - including one where she was stood in front of the poster in such a way as to obscure Megan's face on it.

Although there were rumors the post was a dig at Megan, Lala told Access: 'I am not very subtle when I shade people. If I was upset I would have just straight up said it.'

Bruce and Kelly did not attend the premiere either and Kelly was noticeably quiet on his social media about the project.

The day after its release he cryptically tweeted: 'if i don’t talk or tweet about a movie i’m barely in it’s because it’s [trash emoji].'

There they are: She met her beau Machine Gun Kelly on the Puerto Rico set of the film Midnight In The Switchgrass (pictured) which was finally released late last month

Emile posted a screenshot of Kelly's tweet to Instagram and wrote: 'We definitely disagree here, Colson! Nothing but respect to you guys though - especially because you and Megan are so f***ing great in this movie.'

Megan recently revealed to Who What Wear that the film 'was definitely a vehicle - I’ll be honest - for me to meet Colson.'

She dished: 'I knew he was gonna be in the movie, but the universe was just like: "Go do this. There’s something about this experience that’ll be really rewarding for you."'

Megan shares three children - Noah, eight, Bodhi, seven, and Journey, five - with her estranged husband Brian Austin Green whom she is in the process of divorcing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eminem's teenaged child Stevie appears to have called out their father for not revealing that they were adopted.

In a TikTok video posted a week ago, Stevie — who came out as non-binary shortly afterward and alternates between they, he and she pronouns — seemed to recount a conversation with the 48-year-old rapper about being adopted.

The clip featured repeated denials that they were adopted, before they learned that their biological father had died last year.

Family grievances: Eminem's teenaged child Stevie appears to have called out their father for not revealing that they were adopted, after coming out as non-binary

Stevie is the biological child of Eminem's ex-wife Kim Scott and the late tattoo artist Eric Hartter, whom she was linked to during a period when she had separated from the musician. He died in 2020.

Eminem later adopted them in 2005 after he and Scott reconciled. The couple got married in 2006 but divorced again before the year was over.

Stevie sported short blonde hair and a gray hoodie in the video, which was filmed exclusively in closeup.

He lip synced along to captions that seemed to recount a real-life incident in which someone had informed him that he was adopted.

Adopted: Stevie is the biological child of Eminem's ex-wife Kim Scott and the late tattoo artist Eric Hartter, whom she was linked to during a period when she had separated from the musician; Eminem seen in January 2020 in Hollywood

Breaking the news: The teen lip synced along to captions that seemed to recount a real-life incident in which someone had informed them that they were adopted

Investigation: They appeared to recount a conversation in which Eminem falsely claimed to be their biological father after they asked about their birth

'He's not your real dad,' said the unnamed person. 'You're adopted.'

Stevie appeared to lip sync a denial, before approaching their adopted father (given name: Marshall Mathers III), though the rapper seemed to have falsely claimed to be their biological father.

'Youre my real dad right? am i adopted [sic]?' they recounted asking.

'I am your real dad,' the father figure allegedly replied.

Then Stevie claimed they were 'sent an article of my biological dads death [sic],' which they showed to their grandmother.

'im sorry they wouldn't tell you about him,' Stevie recounted her grandmother saying.

They concluded the video by lip syncing the line 'That must be so confusing for a little girl' from the Adventure Time song Remember Me, which soundtracked the video.

Too late: Stevie appeared to get confirmation that they were adopted after their biological father died, meaning they would never get a chance to speak with him

Family: Eminem adopted Stevie in 2005 after he and Scott reconciled. The couple got married in 2006 but divorced again before the year was over

Shortly after posting the video about their adoption, Stevie shared a TikTok video announcing that they were genderfluid.

The teenager asked fans to 'call me Stevie (they/she/he)'.

In a video posted on the social media site, Stevie shows their journey to being open about being genderfluid — a term for people who find that their connection to any particular gender can change over time, sometimes rapidly.

Announcement: Eminem's 19-year-old child came out as non-binary last week and asked fans to 'call me Stevie'

Audio of the teenager crying with joy is played at the start of the video before a montage of photos is shown to document their transformation over the years.

The video begins with snaps of Eminem's child being known as Whitney with 'she/ her pronouns' captioned before transitioning into photos alongside the pronouns 'they/ her' 19 seconds in.

Cutting their blonde hair short and sporting a nose piercing, Stevie then poignantly reveals their name alongside the caption 'all pronouns'.

Family: Eminem legally adopted Stevie, formerly known as Whitney, in 2005 after the rapper, 48, reconciled with Stevie's mother Kim Scott (pictured in 2015)

Tight bond: The musician has shielded his children from the spotlight but shared a rare insight into being a father as he said in an interview in 2004: 'You’ve got Daddy. And I’m here'

Stevie wrote: 'Watch me become more comfortable with myself' and 'forever growing and changing', and has used the hashtags '#genderfluid and #bi and in several posts.

He also previously used the hashtag '#nonbinary,' but it appeared to have been deleted later.

The post was liked by their sister Hailie Jade, 25, who is Eminem's biological daughter with Kim.

According to The Sun, the teenager's new name was referenced in their grandmother Kathleen Sluck's obituary last month.

It read: 'Kathleen was a exceptional mom to her two daughters; Kim and Dawn; and was overjoyed to become a grandmother to her grandchildren; Alaina, Adam, Hailie, Stevie, P.J., and Parker.'

Profile: Stevie's Tik Tok bio reads '19, any pronouns'

Journey: The video begins with snaps of Eminem's child being known as Whitney with 'she/ her' pronouns captioned

Self-acceptance: The photos transition to the pronouns 'they/ she' 19 seconds in

Self-love: Cutting their blonde hair short and sporting a nose piercing, Stevie then poignantly reveals their name alongside the caption 'all pronouns'

Gender fluid: Stevie wrote: 'Watch me become more comfortable with myself' and 'forever growing and changing'

Acceptance: Stevie wrote: 'Watch me become more comfortable with myself' and 'forever growing and changing'

Stevie came out as bisexual in 2017, and at the time their Instagram bio requested to be referred by the pronouns she/ they.

The teenager said in a now deleted post: 'Happy national coming out day!' I am bisexual???? I would like to say you’re perfect the way you are and that love is love!?????????? be yourself!'

Stevie's biological father is Eric Hartter, a tattoo artist, who died of a suspected drug overdose in 2019, after a history of substance abuse and brush ins with the law.

Kim had Stevie six months after her divorce from the rapper in 2001. Eminem was already father to Hailie at the time.

Family: Eminem adopted Stevie in 2005, after reconciling with his ex-wife Kim and spoke about how he wanted to provide a stable environment for his child (pictured with Kim in 2004)

Eminem adopted Stevie in 2005, after reconciling with his ex-wife Kim and previously spoke about how he wanted to provide a stable environment for his child.

The Slim Shady hitmaker also has an adopted daughter Alaina, 28, whose mother is Kim's late twin sister Dawn. Dawn died of a drug overdose in 2016.

The musician has shielded his children from the spotlight but shared a rare insight into being a father in a Rolling Stones Interview in 2004, where he also spoke about Kim's history with substance abuse.

'You can never let a child feel like it’s her fault for what’s goin’ on,' he said.

Supportive: Stevie's sister Hailie Jade, 25, who is Eminem's biological daughter with Kim, has shown her support by liking their sibling's TikTok posts (pictured)

'You just gotta let her know: "Mom has a problem, she’s sick, and it’s not because she doesn’t love you. She loves you, but she’s sick right now, and until she gets better, you’ve got Daddy. And I’m here".'

Kim was hospitalised following a suicide attempt on July 30, reports TMZ.

It was claimed Kim was taken to hospital to undergo a medical and psychological evaluation, but is now at home recovering.

The ex-wife of the rapper was grieving the death of her mother and penned a heartbreaking tribute saying she wished she'd died instead of her - four days before she 'attempted to take her own life'.

Grieving: Kim was hospitalised following a suicide attempt on July 30, it has been reported (pictured in her last public sighting in August 2018)

Heartfelt: The family have been devastated by the loss of Kim's mother Kathy Sluck who passed away last month, here is Kim's tribute

Her mother Kathy Sluck passed away on July 23 at the age of 65 and her funeral took place in Michigan six days later. It is not known how she died.

Kim and Eminem married in 1999, only to proceed with a nasty divorce two years later during their famously stormy romance.

They remarried in January 2006 but had broken up again by April. Their relationship and Eminem's rise to global fame inspired his hit movie, 8 Mile.

Eminem and Kim's volatile relationship is one of rap music folklore - the controversial rapper has frequently taken verbal shots at his on-off lover during his recording career - rapping about killing her, her drug use and infidelity.

For confidential support in the UK - call Samaritans for free on 116 123 or visit www.samaritans.org

For confidential support in the US - call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Matt Damon really wants Ben Affleck and Jennifer Lopez to stay together.

The Stillwater star is close friends with Ben, 48, and has said there's 'no-one' who wants to see Ben's romance with Jennifer go the distance more than him, as he really wants them both to be 'happy'.

When asked if he thought Ben and Jennifer would make it, he told The Carlos Watson Show: 'Oh man, no one's pulling harder than I am.

'No one's pulling harder than I am': Matt Damon has revealed he is rooting for his best friend Ben Affleck and his on-again girlfriend Jennifer Lopez (Damon pictured 2021)

'They're both great. I just want for their happiness. They seem pretty happy right now.'

Matt has previously spoken about his pal's relationship, as he told Extra last month he was 'so happy' for the couple amid their rekindled romance.

He said at the time: 'He's the best. He deserves every happiness in the world. I'm glad for both of them.'

Meanwhile, it was recently reported 52-year-old Jennifer – who previously dated Ben between 2002 and 2004 – is 'fully committed' to Ben, but they aren't planning on getting married.

'I just want for their happiness': Damon wants nothing but the best for his best friend and his on-again girlfriend (Ben Affleck and Jennifer pictured 2002)

A source told E! recently: 'They are fully committed to each other... They have been meshing their lives and families and don't feel the need to get engaged yet or even tie the knot.

'They have both been there and don't feel it's necessary. They are both very secure within their relationship and Ben worships her. It's truly meant to be and everyone around them thinks they are a perfect match.'

However, the pair are likely to move in together soon, and the couple have been spotted house hunting together in recent months.

Back on! The couple have recently reconciled, 17 years after calling off their engagement (pictured July 2021 in Los Angeles)

The couple were photographed this past week touring Bob Hope's $40 million Toluca Lake estate, fueling rumors that the singer is looking to relocate to the West Coast from Miami, Florida for the actor.

They were reportedly touring the five-acre property once belonging to the famous British-American comedian at around 11:30AM, and spent an hour there.

An insider told ET Online last month that their 'friends wouldn't be surprised if they move in together and ultimately end up together. They're spending all of their free time together and making each other a priority.'

Ben has three children - Violet, 15, Seraphina, 12, and Samuel, nine – with his ex-wife Jennifer Garner, whilst Jennifer has 13-year-old twins Emme and Max with her ex-husband Marc Anthony.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

They sparked reconciliation rumours in March, when they were spotted at the same restaurant, after splitting in 2018 following an 16 month relationship.

And, Jesy Nelson reunited with her ex-boyfriend Harry James, to go shopping at a local hardware store in Essex, on Sunday.

The former Little Mix star, 30, kept things casual in an Aaliyah T-shirt and leggings as she strolled along in the sunshine with the tattooed music video director.

EXCLUSIVE: Jesy Nelson, 30, reunited with her ex-boyfriend Harry James, to go shopping at a local hardware store in Essex, on Sunday

Jesy showed off her toned pins in the skin tight Adidas leggings, which boasted stripes down either side.

Pounding the pavement in black trainers, Jesy opted for an oversized band style T-shirt in honour of the late R&B star Aaliyah.

The ex Little Mix singer pulled her raven tresses into a knot and shielded her eyes with a pair of glamorous shades. Harry opted for a simple sportswear look, wearing light grey jogging bottoms and a plain white T-shirt.

Jesy Nelson's representatives confirmed to MailOnline that she and Harry are just friends.

R&B babe: Pounding the pavement in black trainers, Jesy opted for an oversized band style T-shirt in honour of the late R&B star

Looking good: Jesy showed off her toned pins in the skin tight Adidas leggings, which boasted stripes down either side

Close: The couple stayed close together during their Sunday outing

Simple: Harry opted for a simple sportswear look, wearing light grey jogging bottoms and a plain white T-shirt

In March, the former Little Mix star posted a video of a food order from upmarket sushi restaurant Roka – while Harry shared an identical snap to his Instagram stories that same evening.

Singer Jesy previously split from musician Harry in 2018 – but back in April sources told MailOnline that the pair became re-acquainted after spending time together in the studio.

A source told MailOnline: 'Jesy and Harry have been hanging out together again after reconnecting in lockdown.

'They always shared something special and are enjoying bonding over music, with Harry even joining Jesy in the studio as she works for the first time on solo material.

Looks good! Harry now sports a shorter hair style than previously

At ease: The couple appeared completely at ease with each other during their low-key day

Day out: The couple arrived at the hardware store by car, with Harry driving

'Sean and Jesy have stayed friends and all he wants is for her to be happy, he's pleased she's been able to reconnect with Harry.'

The couple originally dated for 16 months, before splitting three years ago in 2018 when Jesy was in 'work mode' with Little Mix.

Jesy and Harry even share the singer's Pomeranian, Reggie, together – describing the adorable puppy as their 'baby' on Instagram in 2017.

Inked: Jesy and her beau showed off their tattooed arms during the outing

Driver: Harry drove the pair to and from the hardware store

Pretty lady: The ex Little Mix singer pulled her raven tresses into a knot and shielded her eyes with a pair of glamorous shades

Back together: They sparked reconciliation rumours in March, when they were spotted at the same restaurant, after splitting in 2018 following an 16 month relationship

Reunited: This is the first time the couple have been photographed back together since their 2018 split

Jesy's most recent romance was with Our Girl actor Sean Sagar, 30. The couple dated for nine months before parting ways in January.

At the time, a source told The Sun: 'Jesy and Sean have decided to take some time apart. It’s such a shame as they made a lovely couple but recently things haven’t been right between them.

'Jesy just left Little Mix and is working hard on herself right now — she has to put herself first.

'Lockdown has made it really difficult too, so for now Jesy and Sean are taking time apart from each other.'

Prior to being with Sean, she was in a relationship former Love Island star Chris Hughes, 28, which ended in April 2020, after 16 months. The pair remain friends.

Date night: The former Little Mix star posted a video of a food order from upmarket sushi restaurant Roka back in March

Yum: Harry shared an identical snap to his Instagram stories while his hand also appeared in the singer's upload
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kirstie Alley has lambasted new guidelines from a worldwide organisation of doctors that encourages the use of 'gender-inclusive language' such as 'chestfeeding,' 'parent's milk' and 'human milk feeding'.

In a series of tweets on Sunday, the 70-year-old actress claimed the terms were 'degrading and nullifying of women and their abilities'.

She also insisted that she was not speaking from a 'political' standpoint but that she deemed the terminology 'insanity'.

'Gender-inclusive' language has been promoted by various hospitals to accommodate transgender men, who were born female but identify as male, and non-binary people who do not classify themselves as either gender.

'I'm tired of the degrading of women': Kirstie Alley slammed 'insane nullifying' of women's abilities in a row over the gender neutral term 'chestfeeding'

Kirstie began her lengthy Twitter tirade by posting: 'BREAST-FEEDING IS what WOMEN do. Women also bottle feed. Men bottle feed too.

'We do not have to buckle to the insanity of the minuscule minority of lunatics who make us feel guilty for not sharing their insanity. 'Chest feeding?' 'human milk feeding?' WTF STOP IT!!!'

Kirstie then shared a response from a follower who argued, 'Why do you care what other people do? Why are republicans always so concerned with what everyone is doing? They're always up in everyone's business', to which Kirstie responded, 'Blah blah blah blah blah blah blah'.

Clarifying her points, Kirstie continued: 'I'm a little tired of the degrading and nullifying of women and their abilities. Breastfeeding is one of our abilities.

'It's a beautiful and important ability. Knock off the nullifying of women fir the sake of lunatics. Equal rights does not equal insanity.

'We all have opinions. Probably the main reason social media is so popular. Especially on our own sites. I guess it's also inviting other opinions of our opinions but I don't feel obligated to be 'sweet' when people are nasty to me about my own site opinions. BlAh blAh blAh.

'It's our personal responsibility to agree or disagree with concepts. My only point here today is don't let insanity force you to pretend like you agree with the insanity. It's part of the insanity to shame you into agreement.'

Insane: Kirstie insisted that she was not speaking from a 'political' standpoint but that she deemed the terminology 'insanity'

Kirstie, a vocal supporter of Donald Trump, went on to state that her views have been shared by both republican and democrat friends.

She wrote: 'My views of this BS are not political. I have plenty of friends from both political persuasions who SHARE the view of the INSANITIES being shoved down our throats by pervs trying to degrade our society. Don't be afraid to disagree with people who seek to pervert workable morals.'

Kirstie - who boasts 1.5 million Twitter followers - then shared a response from a follower that read: 'No one asked you to speak for cis women's breasts or bodies in general. This is about feeding babies, something that isn't even a concern of yours or your titties.'

The Cheers star fired back: 'I don't need to speak for 'cis' women. I am a woman and feel comfortable just calling myself a woman and having a woman's point of view. I don't need to be ASKED to speak Deb. We handled that pretty well in 1920.'

Speaking out: In a series of tweets on Sunday, the 70-year-old actress claimed the terms were 'degrading and nullifying of women and their abilities'

Kirstie concluded: 'For the record I don't care what people call themselves or categorize their identity. Just leave mine alone. I'm happy with woman, mother, actress, sister, daughter, grandma and gurley to name most of my handles.'

Kirstie's comments come after the Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine urged the use of 'gender-inclusive language' such as 'chestfeeding,' 'parent's milk' and 'human milk feeding' in new guidelines.

Guidelines published on July 29 read: 'ABM recognizes that not all people who give birth and lactate identify as female, and that some of these individuals identify as neither female nor male.'

The document was co-authored by eight doctors, with contributor Dr. Laura Kair of the UC Davis Children's Hospital, releasing an accompanying a statement, in which she said 'language has power.'

The statement read: 'The language that we use should be as inclusive as possible when discussing infant feeding. When working with patients it is best to ask them their affirmed terminology.

'When communicating medical research, language should accurately reflect the population studied so as not to mask research needs.'

Shared views: Kirstie, a vocal supporter of Donald Trump, went on to state that her views have been shared by both republican and democrat friends

Kirstie's comments come after a slew of Hollywood stars spoke out about concerns over the suppression of speech surrounding the trans debate.

Last year, JK Rowling was subjected to bitter attacks from transgender activists following the publication of her latest novel, Troubled Blood.

The novel was published under Rowling's pseudonym Robert Galbraith and features a 'transvestite serial killer', which sparked furious backlash online a day before the book's release on September 15.

A collection of over 50 actors, writers, playwrights, journalists joined together to pen a letter in response to 'hate speech' directed against the author.

Signatories of the letter include Booker winner Ian McEwan, actor Griff Rhys Jones, actress Frances Barber and playwright Sir Tom Stoppard.

It was was triggered in response to the hashtag #RIPJKRowling trending at number one on Twitter and said Rowling was a victim of 'an insidious, authoritarian and misogynistic trend in social media'.

The letter wrote the hashtag declaring her dead on social media was 'just the latest example of hate speech directed against her'.

Following her ordeal, JK called for an end to the 'climate of fear' around the trans debate after being sent 'heart-breaking' letters from women who had irreversible gender reassignment surgery.

The Harry Potter author, 56, said she 'had a huge postbag' with hundreds of letters following her comments over the summer, adding that 90 per cent of them were in support of her stance.

Speaking out: Kirstie's comments come after a slew of stars spoke out about concerns over the suppression of speech surrounding the trans debate after there were calls to 'cancel' JK Rowling over her stance

She told Good Housekeeping magazine: 'Many women are concerned about the challenges to their fundamental rights posed by certain aspects of gender identity ideology.'

JK called for 'a more nuanced conversation' about the 'huge increase' in the number of girls and young women seeking to transition.

She added: 'I've had a huge postbag since speaking up on this issue and more than 90 per cent of the letters and emails have been supportive.

'My correspondence have included medical staff, social workers, prison workers, workers in women's refuges and members of the LGBT community, including trans people.'

She said people were 'afraid to speak up' and called for a 'more nuanced conversation' around women's rights.

Controversial: In June, JK sparked controversy when she questioned the use of the phrase 'people who menstruate' instead of the word 'woman'

It came after JK sparked controversy when she questioned the use of the phrase 'people who menstruate' instead of the word 'woman' and went on to insist that the concept of sex is real.

Reacting to an article, she tweeted to her 14.5m followers: 'I'm sure there used to be a word for those people. Someone help me out. Wumben? Wimpund? Woomud?'

Her stance led to a massive backlash with criticism coming from fans and Harry Potter stars including Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson, Rupert Grint, and Eddie Redmayne.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Binky Felstead has sparked a debate over whether you should sterilise a baby's bottle before using it or just put it through the dishwasher.

The mother-of-two welcomed her son Wolfie in June and on Monday prepared for her first foreign holiday with her new arrival, daughter India, four, and husband Max Darnton.

Taking to Instagram she shared sweet snaps of the family boarding the plane as she explained how they had surprised India with the trip - prompting several in the comments to ask for her advice on travelling with children.

Discussion: Binky Felstead has sparked a debate over whether you should sterilise a baby's bottle before using it (pictured with husband Max and children India, four and Wolfie, six weeks)

One wrote in the comments: 'I'd love to know how you packed for a baby? We want to go away with our baby but have no idea what to do about packing for him...Things like sterilisers, bottles, pram set etc?'

Binky then replied directly to the woman, saying: 'I personally don't sterilise anymore as feel the dishwasher does the trick! But ovs lots of bottles, muslins, sun hat, cream, nappies & I packed a few little summer rompers but to be honest it's so hot he's just in nappies most of the time!! So really simple!!'

NHS guidance on sterilisation states dishwashers will clean feeding equipment but not sterilise it.

The comment over sterilising then sparked a debate under the post with one writing: 'Milton tablets are excellent for sterilising and super small to pack. All you need is a large bowl or bucket where you are staying (should sterilise bottles until you stop using formula).'

Another wrote in response to the suggestion of using Milton tablets: 'Really great advice esp about continuing to sterilise bottles.'

A third penned: 'The dishwasher will clean but doesn't sterilise. Little ones tummy's are so sensitive to bacteria and upset you should sterilise until 12 months. The dishwasher doesn't reach high enough temperatures to sterilise.'

Debate: Under her holiday post Binky was asked for advice on travelling with children to which she responded that she uses a dishwasher instead of sterilising Wolfie's bottles

Opinions: The comment over sterilising then sparked a debate under the post with one writing: 'The dishwasher will clean but doesn't sterilise. Little ones tummy's are so sensitive to bacteria and upset you should sterilise until 12 months'

NHS guidance on sterilising baby bottles It's important to sterilise all your baby's feeding equipment, including bottles and teats, until they are at least 12 months old. This will protect your baby against infections, in particular diarrhoea and vomiting. Before sterilising, you need to: Clean bottles, teats and other feeding equipment in hot, soapy water as soon as possible after feeds. Use a clean bottle brush to clean bottles (only use this brush for cleaning bottles), and a small teat brush to clean the inside of teats. You can also turn teats inside out then wash them in hot soapy water. Do not use salt to clean teats, as this can be dangerous for your baby. You can put your baby's feeding equipment in the dishwasher to clean it if you prefer. Putting feeding equipment through the dishwasher will clean it but it does not sterilise it. Make sure bottles, lids and teats are facing downwards. You may prefer to wash teats separately by hand to make sure they are completely clean. Rinse all your equipment in clean, cold running water before sterilising. The advice above applies to all your baby's feeding equipment, and whether you are using expressed breast milk or formula milk. Source: NHS Advertisement

NHS guidance on sterilisation states: 'It's important to sterilise all your baby's feeding equipment, including bottles and teats, until they are at least 12 months old.

'You can put your baby's feeding equipment in the dishwasher to clean it if you prefer. Putting feeding equipment through the dishwasher will clean it but it does not sterilise it.

'This will protect your baby against infections, in particular diarrhoea and vomiting. There are several ways you can sterilise your baby's feeding equipment. These include: cold water, sterilising solution, steam sterilising, boiling.'

Off we go! Binky shared a sweet picture in the post holding her baby as India beamed up at the camera

Binky explained in the caption about preparing for her trip, penning: 'FAMILY VAY- KAY • ☀️

'When I was about India's age my parents packed my bags in the car whilst I was asleep & when they woke me up in the morning they told me we were going to drop daddy off at the airport for one of his usual business trips!

'It wasn't until I was actually on the plane that they had to tell me it was actually a holiday we were going on.. and I still remember how excited I was!!

'So … Max & I told India the day before we left that we were going to pack her bag & pretend we were going to go on a holiday. We packed the car when she was sleeping. In the morning we woke up the kids, put them in the car & told India we were going to take her to the park.

Surprise! Binky explained in the caption that they hadn't told India that they were going on a family holiday

'We got to the airport, put her on the luggage trolley & she had the biggest smile on her face ( clearly brighter than I was) … we told her it wasn't actually a pretend holiday and that we were going on a airplane & she let out the biggest squeal and skipped through the airport saying ' hi! ' to everyone.

'Needless to say travelling with two compared to one is slightly different … at least Wolfie can't walk yet- much easier! He did sleep most of the way and I made sure he sucked on his dummy (or my finger) to help pop his ears! We had India in the middle between Max & I & Wolfie was on my lap!

'I actually traveled from London to Bali with India the day after her 2nd Birthday on my own & it was actually okay, just made sure I was super prepared! Advice travelling with kids hasn't changed from my post I did back then. Make sure there are plenty of snacks, stickers, colouring books & toys! Spread the toys out throughout the flight… and promise ice cream when you land!! ☀️ … oh and think of that G&T!

… also, this little bag India is on in the last pic is brilliant for plonking them on whilst waiting around for check in & running through airports when late for your flight!'

Advice: Binky explained in the caption about preparing for her trip as she told how it was different having to travel with two children

Binky and Max tied the knot during an intimate civil ceremony at Chelsea Old Town Hall on Friday 23 July.

Their surprise ceremony took place seven weeks after Binky and Max welcomed their son Wolfie.

Binky also shares daughter India with ex-boyfriend Josh 'JP' Patterson, who Max is doting stepfather to.

Announcing the news in HELLO! magazine, Binky called it 'the most perfect day', with Max adding: 'It's amazing. To be honest, it felt official when Wolfie was born because of him and India being siblings, but getting married has cemented it.'

Love: Binky and Max tied the knot during an intimate civil ceremony at Chelsea Old Town Hall on Friday 23 July

He went on: 'Binks looked incredible. India swung the door open just before she walked down the aisle so I got a sneak peek, but I pretended I didn't.'

After the ceremony, Binky called on the likes of her former Made In Chelsea star Ollie Locke to get the party started as they headed back to their home for drinks and dancing.

Binky and Max will also host a bigger ceremony in Corfu next summer, with Max telling the outlet that they plan to have a BBQ on the beach and go snorkelling.

They have already hired a 'big boat to sail around the coves' and have also secured a cliffside venue for their wedding.

Max added that they've rented a private beach where they can enjoy a meal after the ceremony with their loved ones.

Images shared with the magazine reveal that Binky opted for a beautiful silk dress that featured lace detailing across her shoulders.

Businessman Max also opted for white, with his suit being a slightly darker shade to Binky's stunning dress.

Writing about the big day in an Instagram post, Binky penned: 'BLIMEY- WE ARE MARRIED!!!! @max_fd

Doting parents: Their surprise ceremony took place seven weeks after Binky and Max welcomed their son Wolfie into the world

'Had one of the most special days of my life marrying my best friend. My gorgeous, beautiful daughter being my flower girl, passing/dropping us the rings …my big brother giving me away… and Wolfie sleeping the whole way through!

'This was an intimate family day given all of the ever changing rules… Bring on next year when we do it all again to celebrate & party with all our loved ones and friends!!☀️ We’ve found a perfect sunny location!!'

The pair revealed they were engaged to be married after 19 months of dating in a sweet Instagram post shared in September 2020 after meeting at Soho Farmhouse.

She revealed the good news via Instagram as she shared a picture of her kissing the businessman while holding up her hand to show off the sparkling diamond ring.

Gushing about the proposal, which took place after he asked her daughter, for permission to pop the question, she wrote: 'The easiest "Yes" EVER!'

In the sweet snap, Binky passionately kissed her beau after she had accepted his proposal, which took place in a picturesque field at the Long Man of Wilmington.

In November, Binky admitted she wouldn't be with Max if 'marriage wasn't in the plan', but insisted she didn't 'mind' when the couple decide to tie the knot.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She never fails to put on a stylish display when she steps out.

And Frankie Bridge looked stunning in an all-green linen ensemble as she left the BBC breakfast studios on Monday morning following a TV appearance.

The former The Saturdays star, 32, beamed as she headed to her taxi after filming in London's dreary weather.

Gorgeous: Frankie Bridge looked stunning in an all-green linen ensemble as she left the BBC breakfast studios on Monday

Frankie paired a relaxed fit shirt, that she kept half unbuttoned, with a pair of chic front pleat trousers.

The emerald outfit was cinched in at the waist by two large statement white buttons which fastened with a belted detail.

The singer completed the look with a pair of dusty pink heels and kept off the chill by wrapping a black leather jacket around her shoulders.

Frankie accessorised with a pair of large silver hoops, a daity chain necklace and toted an enviable Louis Vuitton holdall.

Stepping out: Frankie paired a relaxed fit shirt, that she kept half unbuttoned, with a pair of chic front pleat trousers and completed the look with a pair of dusty pink heels

The glamorous outing comes after Frankie opened up on Loose Women last week about how her and her sister have emotionally supported each other in the past.

Speaking to co-hosts Charlene White, 41, Jane Moore, 59 and Brenda Edwards, 52, The Saturdays star began: 'My sister stepped up when I had my breakdown.'

Frankie continued: 'I don’t even remember her being there and I can’t remember I was much conversation.

'I had a panic attack at dinner': The glamorous outing comes after Frankie opened up on Loose Women last week about how her and her sister have emotionally supported each other

'I remember we were out for dinner and I had this panic attack and she just went along with that.'

Frankie suffered a mental health breakdown in 2011 at the age of 23, which resulted in month-long admission at London's Nightingale Hospital.

After Frankie revealed how Victoria had been there for her in a time of need, she then reflected on the times she repaid the favour.

Frankie said: 'I kind of did the same for her with her IVF journey recently. Her husband was in Bermuda and she was here and I went to a lot of appointments with her and there were times when she would cry and I didn’t know how to deal with it.

Bond: Frankie appeared on the panel of Thursday's Loose Women as they discussed sibling relationships, with Frankie detailing her special bond with elder sister Victoria

'I’m a hugger and talk about my feelings but she’s the complete opposite. It’s hard to know how to be there for someone like that.'

Victoria - who welcomed twin boys in October - has been candid with her fertility issues after previously speaking about how she had suffered three miscarriages while trying for a baby.

Frankie added that she and footballer husband Wayne Bridge, 41, always tell their children to always be there for their siblings because of her own experiences.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They welcomed their first child - a boy named Sonny - six weeks prematurely last August.

And Coronation Street star Sam Aston and his wife Briony have revealed that it was 'a bit of a shock' and 'stressful' when their little one arrived early.

Speaking to Ok! the pair told how the yoga instructor stayed in hospital for nine days after her labour while her little one was tube fed and recovered from jaundice.

Candid: Coronation Street star Sam Aston and his wife Briony have revealed that it was 'a bit of a shock' and 'stressful' when their son Sonny arrived six weeks prematurely last August

Sam, 28, - who has played Chesney Brown in Corrie since 2003 -, said: 'It was a bit of a shock for me. Everyone at work knew he wasn't due until September.'

Briony, 26, added: 'It was hard at the time but looking back now I'd do it all again tomorrow. It was so nice to get home though.'

Their situation was made even more difficult due to the fact that Sam was only allowed to visit the pair in hospital for one hour a day due to the pandemic.

Firstborn: Speaking to Ok! the pair revealed that the yoga instructor stayed in hospital for nine days after her labour while her little one was tube fed and recovered from jaundice

Sam explained: 'An hour felt like 10 minutes, especially early on as Briony was emotional as I was trying to be there and spend time with Sonny.'

Briony added that having time constraints on their time together was the most 'stressful' part and that she would usually 'sob for an hour' and then Sam would have to leave.

The couple added that his development has caught up in the last year and his breathing has returned to normal.

Sam and Briony tied the knot in 2019, two years after the couple announced their engagement.

Doting parents: Sam, 28, - who has played Chesney Brown in Corrie since 2003 -, said: 'It was a bit of a shock for me. Everyone at work knew he wasn't due until September'

The couple first announced they were expecting a boy when speaking with OK! magazine, saying: 'We're having a boy! It was a massive surprise when we found out, as there are loads of girls in our families, so we were adamant we were having a girl.'

The new mother often shares insights into her life and how she is coping with the arrival of her son.

Late last year Briony conducted a Q&A session on her Instagram story, answering questions from her 13,000 followers.

When asked to share her 'last photo', Briony posted a candid snap of herself breastfeeding Sonny, which she captioned 'tired but besotted'.

Loved-up! It comes after late last year Briony shared a selection of her son Sonny's milestone moments on her Instagram Stories during a Q&A

In the image, Briony flashed a smile for the camera while her young son fed.

Briony also shared a picture moments after Sonny's birth as she cradled him on her chest while lying in a hospital bed following her labour.

She wrote: 'My amazing midwife actually got videos/photos of him being born and I can't help but look back at them most days.

'It helps me process just how miraculous the human body is. But there definitely TMI so this is the first suitable photo. [sic]

Briony also posted the 'first picture' of Sonny, which was an ultrasound scan at seven weeks and five days, she quipped: 'Technically this is it - our little blueberry'.

Also included in the series of photographs was the first time Sam held his son in his arms, as Briony wrote: 'Ohh good one! This is the first photo I have from when he's a day old, Sam might have some from earlier. But look at how tiny Sonny's head was.'

Last month Briony proclaimed motherhood has turned her into a 'lioness' shortly before sharing a breastfeeding snap.

The new mum proudly shared an image while feeding Sonny and then shared a snap of his feet alongside a message about an exchange she had with a midwife.

Milestone moments: Briony, who welcomed her son prematurely, asked her followers which photographs they would like her to share on the page

In the touching caption which marked World Prematurity Day, she penned: 'Before we left the hospital after having Sonny, a midwife said to me “Briony, do you realise that the minute you leave this hospital you’ll become a lioness?”...

'And I can honestly say never before have I felt so powerful, protective and proud, and never has a sentence been so true. My boy, my cub, my premature baby'.

Briony revealed that Sonny's birth was 'calm' despite him being born six weeks premature. They had been trying for a baby for little over a month before getting the result and Briony revealed that nothing prepared her for the joy of parenthood.

She said to her social media followers in August: 'Nothing could have truly prepared me for your entrance into this world'

'A journey of complete surrender and the most intense surges of energy I have ever felt in my life. But I understand now that it had to be this way. How else could my heart come to live outside of my body?'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Judi Love has recalled the terrifying moment that she woke up on top of her baby daughter while they were co-sleeping.

The comic, 40, divulged the details of the scary incident on Monday's episode of Loose Women as the panel were discussing whether its cruel to leave your baby to cry.

'I was lying on my baby... I just remember crying for hours,' the star recalled of the traumatic experience.

'I just remember crying for hours': Judi Love revealed on Monday's episode of Loose Women the terrifying moment that she woke up on top of her baby while they were co-sleeping

Judi, who has a son, 11, and a 16-year-old daughter, explained in full: 'So, I had her in the bed with me and I must have been in and out of sleep and I woke up and that exhaustion...It was an exhaustion that I've never experienced before in my life.

'I woke up and I remember looking at the cot thinking "a cot? Who's had a baby?" It had clean gone out of my mind that I'd had a baby.

'And then I was like "what is that?"... I was lying on my baby. It was literally for like 10 seconds and I jumped up cause she was kind of moving and I grabbed her.'

'I just remember crying for hours,' Judi admitted as the other panelists gasped at the story.

'It had clean gone out of my mind that I'd had a baby': She divulged the details of the scary incident while the panel were discussing whether it was cruel to leave your baby to cry

Judi is a single parent to her two children and mostly keeps them out of the spotlight.

However, she previously discussed her relationship with her son on Loose Women in the wake George Floyd's death.

She explained: 'As a black parent, having to have that conversation with my son at seven years old and explaining to him, "you're a young black boy, and you might be put in a situation where you are judged solely on the basis of your skin" is heartbreaking.”

Is co-sleeping safe? Advice and tips from The Lullaby Trust Co-sleeping advice Babies should be slept in a clear sleep space, which is easy to create in a cot or Moses basket. We know however that families also bed share, and so recommend making your bed a safer place for baby whether you doze off accidentally, or choose to bed share. Our advice on co-sleeping with your baby will tell you how. For safer co-sleeping: Keep pillows, sheets, blankets away from your baby or any other items that could obstruct your baby’s breathing or cause them to overheat. A high proportion of infants who die as a result of SIDS are found with their head covered by loose bedding. Follow all of our other safer sleep advice to reduce the risk of SIDS such as sleeping baby on their back Avoid letting pets or other children in the bed Make sure baby won’t fall out of bed or get trapped between the mattress and the wall When not to co-sleep It is important for you to know that there are some circumstances in which co-sleeping with your baby can be very dangerous: Either you or your partner smokes (even if you do not smoke in the bedroom) Either you or your partner has drunk alcohol or taken drugs (including medications that may make you drowsy) Your baby was born premature (before 37 weeks) Your baby was born at a low weight (2.5kg or 5½ lbs or less) Never sleep on a sofa or armchair with your baby, this can increase the risk of SIDS by 50 times You should never sleep together with your baby if any of the above points apply to you or your partner. Source: The Lullaby Trust Advertisement

It comes after it was revealed on Friday that Judi will be joining this year's Strictly Come Dancing line up.

During the announcement on Loose Women show, she said: 'I don't have any moves yet. I'm so nervous it's so out of comfort zone, but what an opportunity to learn a new skill.

'I've known a few weeks. My friends were asking who it was but I couldn't say anything. I'm overwhelmed with excitement.

'I don't know his name but the one with long hair I'd like to be paired with. This is something very new for you I am thrilled.'

'I just remember crying for hours,' Judi admitted as the other panelists gasped at the story which came out while they were debating whether you should leave babies to cry alone

The comedian said in a statement: 'I think I am still in shock that I will be part of this amazing show.

'I’ve watched it for many years and admired the phenomenal abilities of these dancers and celebrities that have taken part and dedicated themselves to learning a new craft.

'I’m truly looking forward to pushing myself in something that I could have only dreamed of doing and now it’s actually coming true! I can’t lie I’m soooo nervous but excited at the same time!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Katya Jones performed a crazy stunt with two time Olympic snowboarder Aimee Fuller, 30, which she shared to her Instagram page on Monday.

The Strictly Come Dancing pro-dancer, 32, wore a white robe before wiping it off to reveal a stunning gold and black sequins costume.

Katya attempted to wake surf on Aimee's shoulders - who was also wearing a white robe - for the daring TikTok challenge.

Skills: Katya Jones, 32, performed a crazy stunt with two time Olympic snowboarder Aimee Fuller

Amazingly the duo pulled off the incredible stunt seamlessly and the dancer even de-robbed while on Aimee's shoulders.

The slopestyle snowboarder wore black bikini bottoms and a pink crop top under her robe.

The beauties posed for some snaps after the stunt and jumped back into the water.

The stunt comes days before the Strictly cast enter their bubbles ahead of the new series.

Wow! The Strictly Come Dancing pro-dancer wore a white robe before wiping it off to reveal a stunning gold and black sequins costume

Go girls! Katya attempted to wake surf on Aimee's shoulders- who was also wearing a white robe- for the daring TikTok challenge

Well done: Amazingly the duo pulled off the incredible stunt seamlessly and the dancer even de-robbed while on Aimee's shoulders

So cool! Aimee after the Ladies' Slopestyle Snowboard Final during day three of the PyeongChang 2018 Winter Olympic Games in South Korea

The new series of the BBC One show is starting to gear up again as a handful of the new famous faces have been announced.

The cast of 2021 will include Tom Fletcher, AJ Odudu, Robert Webb, John Whaite and Rhys Stephenson.

CBBC presenter Rhys said he is 'buzzing' to be a part of Strictly and 'can't wait' to start rehearsals for the show, set to air this autumn.

Looking amazing: Katya on Strictly Come Dancing in 2019

Pose: The slopestyle snowboarder wore black bikini bottoms and a pink crop top under her robe

Fun! The beauties posed for some snaps after the stunt and jumped back into the water

New faces: Katya's stunt comes as many famous faces have been announced for the 2021 line up of the BBC One show, including McFly's Tom Fletcher (pictured)

The presenter revealed his signing on Newsround on Friday and said: 'I have dreamt about being on this show, and I know for a fact that it is going to exceed every expectation.

This year is historic as the Great British Bake Off winner John revealed he will be one-half of the show's first all-male partnership.

After much controversy during the show's 17 year run over the prospect of a same-sex pairing, Strictly is finally addressing the call for change with John delightedly praising the 'great step forward in representation and inclusion'.

Exciting: AJ Odudu is also among those who have been signed up for the show

Can't wait: CBBC presenter Rhys Stephenson is also set to appear and has said he is 'buzzing' to be a part of Strictly and 'can't wait' to start rehearsals for the show, set to air this autumn
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She gave birth to her first child, Brody, back in May.

And Georgia Kousoulou admitted in a post on Instagram that she has been feeling self conscious about her post baby body, and that her first thought when jetting off on holiday was that her 'body isn't the same.'

The TOWIE star, 29, hoped to inspire her 1.4 million followers by normalising 'stretch marks and belly rolls' as she donned a yellow swimsuit and took the selfie in the mirror.

Postpartum: Georgia Kousoulou, 29, admitted in a post on Instagram that she has been feeling self conscious about her body after giving birth

Self conscious: The TOWIE star penned a heartfelt message in an attempt to inspire her followers to 'normalise stretch marks and belly rolls'

She was glowing in the snap, as she posed with her leg extended and her hand on her hip.

Her blonde locks were swept back into a bun on top of her head, revealing her radiant visage.

Penning the heartfelt message, she said: 'STRETCH MARKS! First holiday post baby .. my first thought , ah my body isn’t the same, I can’t wear my usual high leg swimsuits because I can see my stretch marks on both sides' [sic]

Normal: In the second image she zoomed in on the marks on her upper thigh, as she penned: 'STRETCH MARKS! First holiday post baby .. my first thought , ah my body isn’t the same'

She caught herself thinking these things and decided to don the costume anyway, writing: 'than I re looked at myself & looked down at my happy baby boy & thought WHY not? There just an extra accessory I have to bling up my swimsuits …' [sic]

Continuing on: 'Sometimes we just need to remind ourselves we are superwomen, we grew a HUMAN, we can do what the hell we like! Let’s normalise stretch marks & belly rolls [three sun emojis]'

Noting on the end of the message: 'p.s this swimsuit is very flattering from Zara ! I think it holds my belly in [crying laughing face] or it’s the pose' adding a red love heart on the end.

In the second image she zoomed in on the marks on her upper thigh, which sat just below the one-piece.

The post is just one of many snaps that Georgia has posted to social media and she shared an empowering message about her post-baby body back in June.

She shared candid photos of herself in a white crop top and grey sweatpants, referencing her stretch marks and c-section scar in the post's caption.

Candid post: The post is just one of many snaps that Georgia has posted to social media and she shared an empowering message about her post-baby body back in June

Georgia admitted that while she 'cried' upon seeing her stretch marks after the birth, she now feels 'proud' at having grown a beauty healthy baby', and encouraged other mothers to not feel pressure in 'bouncing back' quickly.

'THE REALITY.. all I heard when I was pregnant was 'you'll bounce back, you're young" etc. It got in my head and I probably did think I would to an extent,' Georgia began.

'So you can imagine the first time I looked in the mirror eight weeks ago, I'm not going to lie.. I freaked out, my body wasn't my body I was used to no more. I had big stretch marks, I am wider and obviously a c-section scar, I remember just crying.'

Georgia went on to reveal how she's now feeling 'proud' at what her body has achieved, nearly two months after giving birth.

'NOW eight weeks on this is me, I've done no exercise and ate what I want, when I can. I now look at my body and I'm proud. I'm proud I have grown a beautiful healthy baby, I'm proud I have got through the first eight weeks,' she said.

She went on to say that while she would love to fit into her size 10 Zara clothing, she's giving herself 'minimum a year' to drop the pounds as she's focusing on herself and her baby.

From baby bump to baby Brody! The post comes after Georgia and her millionaire beau Tommy Mallet the first trailer for their new spin-off show showing new family life

Honest: Tommy is heard admitting 'this is pretty daunting' and that this 'it's an emotional rollercoaster' in the trailer

The reality star urged society to 'stop using these phrases' of bounce back for women, and encouraged other mothers to not feel any additional pressure.

'It's taken us nine months to grow a baby, why are we expecting our bumps to go straight away? Let's just encourage mum to look after themselves, their mental health and their babies.

'Let's stop adding more pressure on women, it's hard enough!' she continued.

Georgia and Tommy are now set to share their pregnancy and first weeks as parents with fans in a spin-off show.

In a first look trailer for the upcoming two-part special, called Georgia & Tommy Baby Steps, the couple are seen preparing to welcome their son in hospital and sweetly joking that the little one takes after his dad.

In the teaser, the couple are seen sitting on their sofa while Georgia is still pregnant with the clip then showing them with beloved dog Monkey and their baby son.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her sun-soaked hen party getaway will feature in an ITVBe special titled Jess Wright: The Wedding.

And Jess, 35, along with her younger sister Natalya, 21, proved that celebrations continued to be in full swing as they partied the weekend away in Ibiza on Sunday.

Flashing her bronzed pins in a shimmering white sarong and bra co-ord, Jess fanned herself with a 'bride' diamond embellished fan, while donning a pair of shades.

Sun-kissed: Bride-to-be Jess Wright, 33, and her lookalike sister Natalya, 21, flashed their bronzed pins on Sunday as the former's Ibiza hen party filming for ITVBe continued

The former TOWIE star had styled her luscious chocolate tresses into twin braids and wore a touch of silver glitter on her cheeks for the afternoon of fun.

Appearing to be in good spirits, the barefoot beauty sported a pair of full-looking eyebrows and her highlighted visage glowed in the sunlight.

Jess's mini-me Natalya, who was just ten-years-old when her big sister shot to fame on the ITV2 reality show, wore a similar ensemble in black.

Having a blast: Flashing her bronzed pins in a shimmering white sarong and sleeved bra-top co-ord, Jess fanned herself with a 'BRIDE' diamond embellished fan

Appearing to be enamored with her phone, she had slung a gold handbag over her shoulder for the day trip.

The influencer protected her eyes with a pair of gold-rimmed sunglasses, which complemented her chunky hoops in the same colour.

Her dark brown locks had been tied back in a middle parting and she seemed to be wearing minimal makeup.

Joining the pair for the extended hen do are close female friends and family members, including mum Carol, 61.

From fiancée to wife! The 90-minute special titled Jess Wright: The Wedding, will chronicle the build up to her big day with fiancé William Lee Kemp, 34

It comes as ITV told MailOnline that filming is well underway for a 90-minute special which will chronicle Jess's build up to her big day with fiancé William Lee Kemp, 34.

The show, which will likely air in late autumn according to the TV network, will follow Jess' journey to the altar as she and William set about staging their dream wedding, a star studded event on the paradise island of Mallorca.

Having already delayed their nuptials once already, and with travel restrictions constantly changing due to Covid-19, there is much for the pair to navigate.

Last hurrah! Jess is currently in Ibiza on her hen do with close female friends and family members including her sister Natalya, 21, and mum Carol, 61

William popped the question on the snow capped peaks of Courchevel, France, in February 2020 after 13 months of dating.

Jess previously told Hello! that her sister-in-law Michelle Keegan, the actress wife of her brother Mark, would be one of the bridal party, as well as her sister Natalya.

TV personality Mark, 34, who tied the knot with Michelle in 2015, has been drafted in to serve as the master of ceremonies on his sister's big day.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Coronation Street and The Two Ronnies star Dilys Watling has died in her Clapham home at the age of 78 after suffering from a long illness.

Dilys was a Tony Award nominated actress and famously played Merle Baker in Coronation Street in 1966. She passed away on August 10.

Dilys has four half-siblings, including the late Dr Who actress Deborah Watling - who passed away in 2017 aged 69 - and Clacton MP Giles Watling, who confirmed her death in a statement on Friday.

Sad news: Coronation Street and The Two Ronnies star Dilys Watling died on August 10 at the age of 78 after suffering from a long illness (pictured in 1977)

Giles told the Wandsworth Times: 'Dilys was a much-loved sister and was the eldest of the five of us.

'She led the way and was a real trailblazer for the rest of us.

'She took Broadway by storm in the late 1960s, playing the eponymous role of Georgy – and we were proud when she was nominated for a Tony Award.

'She also released a couple of singles, including Don't Say You Love Me, which made it into the charts in 1964.

Coronation Street: Dilys famously played Merle Baker in Coronation Street (pictured on the soap in 1996)

Nominated: Dilys was a Tony Award nominated actress and passed away on August 10 (pictured on The Benny Hill show in 1975)

'She was eccentric in many ways, but was always incredibly generous, warm and loving.

'In her last few days, she recounted stories of her life that we thought she had long-since forgotten.

'After a long illness, she passed away peacefully.'

Half brother: Dilys' half-brother, Clacton MP Giles Watling, confirmed in a statement: 'After a long illness, she passed away peacefully' (pictured in 1992)

Dilys leaves behind son Ion, who she shared with her ex, Line of Duty, actor Owen Teale.

She received a Tony Award nomination for her performance in Georgy on Broadway in 1970 and went on to appear in Sweeney Todd and musical Time in 1986.

Dilys also starred in The Morecambe & Wise Show, as Flossie, and appeared in Minder in 1994 (marking her last TV appearance) as well as an episode of The Bill in 1991.

Dilys was born in 1943 in Fulmer Chase, Buckinghamshire, to parents Ion Rhys Jones and Patricia Hicks.

Place of birth: Dilys was born in 1943 in Buckinghamshire, to parents Ion Rhys Jones and Patricia Hicks (Dilys pictured with her sister - the late actress Deborah Watling - in 1995)

Family: Dilys leaves behind son Ion, who she shared with her ex, Line of Duty, actor Owen Teale (pictured in 2019)

Her father Ion was a Lancaster Bomber pilot and was killed in action during WW1 with her mother going on to marry actor Jack Watling.

Dilys attended St Mary's Convent School in Essex and later performed at the Bristol Old Vic.

The late star's film credits include the 1963 crime film Calculated Risk and 1967's horror Theatre of Death, which also starred Christopher Lee and Julian Glover.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Manchester City's £100m man Jack Grealish liked a string of Love Island star Lillie Haynes' sexy bikini pictures on Instagram – before swiftly removing the interaction days later.

The England footballer, 25, currently in a relationship with model Sasha Attwood, also 25, showed his appreciation for Casa Amor bombshell Lillie's glamorous photos by liking the snaps from his verified profile.

Lillie, 22, was flattered after noting the likes from Jack on her pictures, including one of her wearing a skimpy white bikini that was shared days after she entered the rival Love Island villa.

'Flattered': Manchester City's £100m man Jack Grealish liked a string of Love Island star Lillie Haynes' sexy bikini pictures on Instagram before swiftly removing the interaction days later

A source told MailOnline: 'Lillie couldn't believe Jack even knows who she is, let alone took the time to like her uploads on Instagram.

'It was disappointing he unliked the photos days later, but it's possible he didn't want his girlfriend finding out.

'She was complimented nonetheless, and hopes one day they'll cross paths so she can ask him about it.'

The footballer liked a photo of Lillie in a bikini that was shared while she was in Casa Amor on July 26, as well as a snap of the reality star enjoying a glass of bubbles to celebrate her 'freedom' after returning from Mallorca and quarantining for five days.

MailOnline has contacted Jack and Lillie's representatives for comment.

'Stunner': The England footballer, who's in a relationship with Sasha Attwood, showed his appreciation for Casa Amor bombshell Lillie's photos by liking the snaps from his profile

Undo: The likes on Lillie's photos were from Jack's verified Instagram profile, and were captured in the days before he removed the interaction from her account

Jack, who completed his record British transfer from Aston Villa earlier this month, recently admitted he's a 'big fan' of Love Island, even saying if he wasn't a footballer, he'd be a contestant on the ITV2 dating show.

In April, Jack joked during an interview alongside ex-Villa teammate John McGinn, 26, he'd be 'on Love Island or working as a promotor or DJ' if he failed as a sportsman.

He also shared an image of him and the England lads watching Love Island on a large screen in a communal room inside the team's Euro accommodation last month and joked dumped Islander Hugo Hammond, 25, looked like the spit of defender Ben White, 23.

Jack has previously shown his admiration for former Love Island contestants, after he was caught hitting on reality star Natalia Zoppa, 22, by her boyfriend.

In a video shared on TikTok 2020 Islander Natalia's partner Hass Saleh claimed: 'As if today couldn't get any weirder, the best player in the Premier League tried to chat up missus,' while sharing the alleged Instagram message from Jack, a waving hand emoji.

Couple: Jack is in a relationship with model girlfriend Sasha Attwood after the childhood sweethearts reportedly reconciled in June following a brief split (pictured in Croatia in August)

It was reported in June that Jack and his childhood sweetheart Sasha had got back together following a brief split, and he considered the model his 'secret weapon' off the pitch.

The couple, who were pictured on holiday together in Croatia last month, met while they were teenagers at St Peter's Roman Catholic Secondary School in Solihull, West Midlands.

Lillie found fame on the current series of Love Island when she lured Liam Reardon, 21, away from partner Millie Court, 24, during his stay at Casa Amor.

Millie was faced with Liam's betrayal when she met Lillie for a catch-up arranged by producers, where she didn't hold back on the gory details.

Days later, Millie forgave Liam for passionately kissing Lillie on multiple occasions, with the couple still going strong ahead of the upcoming Love Island final.

'First day of freedom': Lillie was flattered after noting the likes from Jack on her pictures, including one of her smiling while enjoying a glass of bubbles on a night out earlier this month

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?

When is the Love Island Finale 2021?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kaz Kamwi

Name: Kaz Kamwi

Age: 26

Location: Essex

Occupation: Fashion Blogger

Who is their type on paper? 'I like meeting new people, I'm ready to be in a relationship. Why not be in a place where people are looking for the same things as me?'

Chloe Burrows

Name: Chloe Burrows

Age: 25

Location: Bicester

Occupation: Financial Services Marketing Executive

Who is their type on paper? 'I like a good build. I go to the gym. I want someone who is funny. Really funny and caring and will do nice little things for you.'

Faye Winter

Name: Faye Winter

Age: 26

Location: Devon

Occupation: Letting Manager

What is her type on paper? 'Someone that will put me in my place. Someone that makes me laugh. But also someone that takes my banter. I’m like a five-year-old in a playground, if I like you, I will make a mockery of you and laugh and joke. That is my really terrible flirting skills. I need someone who can take that.'

Rachel Finni

Name: Rachel Finni

Age: 29

Location: London

Occupation: Luxury travel specialist

Why did you sign up for Love Island? I've scraped the bottom of the dirtiest barrels, that’s how I describe my dating life. So I thought "why not? Let’s apply. If it happens, it happens".'

Lucinda Strafford

Name: Lucinda Strafford

Age: 21

Location: Brighton

Occupation: Online fashion boutique owner

Which boy do you have your eye on? I really fancy Brad. And then possibly Liam. But obviously I’m open to getting to know any of the other boys.

AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Name: AJ (Andrea-Jane) Bunker

Age: 28

Location: Hertfordshire

Occupation: Hair extension technician

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I’ve had the worst luck with men. I feel like this is the one thing I haven’t tried. I thought why not? Let’s give it a go.'

Georgia Townend

Name: Georgia Townend

Age: 28

Location: Essex

Occupation: Marketing executive

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I've been single for a really long time. Five years. I haven’t done the maths but it’s at least that. I feel like I’ve exhausted all the other options on how to meet people.'

Mary Bedford

Name: Mary Bedford

Age: 22

Location: Wakefield

Occupation: Model

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I have the worst luck, ever, with boys. Genuinely the worst ever. I always get dragged into the same circle of boys. So I was like, I need to go in another direction.'

Kaila Troy

Name: Kaila Troy

Age: 28

Location: Dublin

Occupation: DJ

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'Real life dating has not been doing me any favours at all. I’ve had it.'

Matthew Macnabb

Name: Matthew Macnabb

Age: 26

Location: Belfast

Occupation: Strategic Marketing Consultant

Why did you sign up for Love Island? 'I feel like I’m pretty chilled and very adventurous. I’m very laid-back in the sense I like to laugh and I don’t care too much about what people think.'

Amy Day

Name: Amy Day

Age: 25

From: Surrey

Occupation: Performer

Why have you signed up for Love Island: I’m clearly not very good at dating myself. I’m looking forward to the experience and the potential of finding someone I might not have met.

Lillie Hayes

Name: Lillie Haynes

Age: 22

From: South Shields

Occupation: Trainee accountant

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’ve definitely got my eye on Jake. He’s 100% the type of boy I would go for at home. It’s too good of a match not to just go for. Liam is definitely a dark horse for me, he’s like James Bond when you look at him, absolutely gorgeous. So he could be a very close second.

Jack Barlow

Name: Jack Barlow

Age: 26

From: East Sussex

Occupation: Racing driver/coach

Who have you got your eye on in the villa? I’m very much a connection type of person so I’ll be able to tell more in person. From what I’ve seen and going off their energy, Chloe has been top of my list. It’s been nice to see her be herself and not care what anyone thinks. I think she’ll be a lot of fun.

Jack Barlow

Name: Aaron Simpson

Age: 24

From: Kent

Occupation: Footballer

What is it like dating as a footballer? Does it make things easier or does it stand in the way? A lot of people have an assumption of me as being a typical player, but I got all of that out of my system when I was younger and now I’m a lot more laid-back when it comes to dating. A lot of people would assume that I go on lots of dates but I’m actually quite picky when it comes to who I date. Sometimes it can be hard to know if someone is genuine or not. My mum is really protective over me. The approval is always needed from mumsy, for sure.

Brett Staniland

Name: Brett Staniland

Age: 27

From: Derbyshire

Occupation: PhD student and model

Why have you signed up to Love Island? I've never had a serious relationship and the last 18 months has been really stagnant in terms of meeting new people and dating. Lots of my friends have settled down, had kids. I'm kind of the one that's left back from all of that. Now is the right time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Johnny Depp said that he's being boycotted by Hollywood amid 'an unpleasant and messy situation' in his split with ex-wife Amber Heard.

The 58-year-old actor spoke with The Sunday Times about his new drama Minamata, which has not yet secured a U.S. release.

The Kentucky-born actor chalked up the professional difficulties to the 'absurdity of media mathematics' in the wake of a 'surreal five years' following his 2016 split with Heard amid allegations of domestic violence.

The latest: Johnny Depp, 58, said that he's being boycotted by Hollywood amid 'an unpleasant and messy situation' in his split with ex-wife Amber Heard, 35. He was snapped last year in Zurich, Switzerland

The actor, who's played roles such as Edward Scissorhands, Willy Wonka and Jack Sparrow, last year lost a libel case against the outlet The Sun over their reporting of the split, labeling him a 'wife-beater.'

Amid the headlines, MGM has suspended the release of Minamata, which is directed by Andrew Levitas and in which Depp plays the role of photojournalist W Eugene Smith, in his 1970s work in Japan.

Last month, Levitas wrote a letter to MGM accusing it of 'burying' the motion picture as result of Depp's legal issues, Deadline reported. The movie was acquired by MGL last fall, via its American International Pictures, after its February 2020 debut at the Berlin International Film Festival.

Depp told The Sunday Times: 'Some films touch people and this affects those in Minamata and people who experience similar things. And for anything … for Hollywood’s boycott of me? One man, one actor in an unpleasant and messy situation, over the last number of years?'

Details: The actor last year lost a libel case against the outlet The Sun over their reporting of the split, labeling him a 'wife-beater'

Depp plays the role of photojournalist W Eugene Smith in Minamata, which details his 1970s work in Japan

Depp, who was replaced in the Fantastic Beasts anthology last year by Warner Bros., said he was 'moving towards' bringing 'things to light.'

Amid the career crisis in the U.S., Depp is set to be honored by Spain's San Sebastian film festival next month, and the Czech Republic's Karlovy Vary International Film Festival later this month.

The Karlovy Vary International Film Festival stated it would 'recognize and pay tribute to the acclaimed actor’s extensive career and lasting legacy on the film industry globally.'

For the San Sebastian film festival, Depp is set to be given the Donostia Award for his 'outstanding contributions to the film world.'

Amid the career crisis in the U.S., Depp is set to be honored by Spain's San Sebastian film festival next month, and the Czech Republic's Karlovy Vary International Film Festival later this month

That decision came under scrutiny from female filmmakers organizations in Spain.

The country's Association of Female Filmmakers and Audiovisual Media's president Cristina Andreu last week told the AP that the decision 'speaks very badly of the festival and its leadership, and transmits a terrible message to the public: "It doesn’t matter if you are an abuser as long as you are a good actor."'

Depp in March was denied an appeal in the Heard case, with a British court saying his efforts had 'no real prospect of success.'

He also remains in litigation in the states in a $50 million suit against Heard, which has been delayed until next year.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Phoebe Dynevor and Pete Davidson have reportedly called it quits on their romance after five months of dating.

The Bridgerton actress, 26, and comedian, 27, were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon.

However a source has now claimed that the duo have split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship.

Claims: Phoebe Dynevor and Pete Davidson have reportedly called it quits on their romance after five months of dating (pictured at Wimbledon in the UK in July)

A source told The Sun: 'Pete and Phoebe's romance was a real whirlwind and from the start they were both totally committed.

'It was pretty telling when Phoebe headed to Croatia with her mates this week rather than going to see Pete in America.

'It was wild while it lasted... But the distance has put a strain on them. They will remain close but unless something drastic changes their relationship won't recover.'

The source continued that both of the stars have very busy schedules at the moment, with Phoebe filming Bridgerton series two in the UK and Pete working on Saturday Night Live in the US as well as filming a movie called Meet Cute.

All over? The Bridgerton actress, 26, and comedian, 27, were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon (pictured at the tennis)

It is also thought that travel restrictions have added a further pressure to their romance as it isn't easy to just 'jump on a plane' and see each other.

MailOnline has contacted Phoebe and Pete's representatives for further comment.

Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April.

In exclusive pictures obtained by MailOnline the duo were seen enjoying a stroll in Stoke-on-Trent during his visit to the UK.

Busy: A source has claimed that the duo split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship and added that they both having busy schedules making it hard to see each other (Phoebe is pictured on Bridgerton)

It has been previously reported that Pete fell for her after watching her raunchy love scenes on Bridgerton.

The Saturday Night Live star is said to have told pals he thought the actress was 'hot as hell' over her character Daphne's intimate scenes with Simon, The Duke of Hastings (Regé-Jean Page).

A Los Angeles based friend of Pete's told The Mirror: 'Pete just loved Bridgerton and just got totally tripped out by Phoebe.

'She was totally his type - fresh faced, youthful, innocent looking beauty.

'We all joked with him about the naughty scenes, and of course he confessed he found them hot. He binge watched the show and felt it was his destiny to meet her.'

Cosy: Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April

Sun: It comes after Phoebe enjoyed a girls' trip to Croatia with her Bridgerton co-star Sabrina Bartlett this week

MailOnline contacted a representative for Pete Davidson for comment at the time.

The reports of their break-up come as Phoebe enjoys a sun-soaked break in Croatia with her co-star Sabrina Bartlett.

In snaps shared on Instagram, the actress wowed in an orange bikini as she took a bike ride before having cocktails with pal, 29, who plays Siena Rosso in Bridgerton.

The pair also enjoyed an Aperol Spritz in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together before heading out on a fun boat trip.

Fun: The pair enjoyed an Aperol Spritz during their day trip in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together

The stars - who are both based in the UK - will not have to quarantine when they come home as Croatia is currently on the green travel list.

Filming on the second series of Bridgerton was recently delayed yet again after a Covid outbreak on set.

The stalling is said to be causing Netflix 'an expensive headache'.

Due to a previous case, shooting had only just resumed again - but a day after cast and crew returned to the period drama things are once again on ice.

The likes of Phoebe and co-star Jonathan Bailey, who plays Viscount Anthony Bridgerton, have had to cease work while various members of the production isolate.

Farewell: Phoebe is currently working on series two of Bridgerton (pictured with Regé-Jean Page who bade farewell to in April– to the dismay of his many fans)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Griff proudly wore the Team GB cardigan knitted poolside by Tom Daley at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics as she led the stars at the athletes' homecoming event on Sunday.

Olympic champion diver Tom, 27, gained an army of new fans for his knitting antics at the delayed games, and was seen was seen crafting the cardigan poolside as he attended the Tokyo 2020 men's 3m springboard diving final.

And the singer, 20, was sure to show her support as she donned his handmade garment over a yellow dress and posed up a storm at The SSE Wembley Arena.

Amazing! Griff wore the Team GB cardigan knitted poolside by Tom Daley at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics as she led the stars at the athletes' homecoming event at Wembley on Sunday

Nice touch: The singer, 20, proudly flaunted the impressive garment on the red carpet (left) which was carefully created by the diver, 27, during his time in Tokyo (right)

Griff looked sensational for the celebratory evening, ensuring to work all her angles and show off the cardigan as she posed for the cameras.

The beauty beamed a smile as she looked over her shoulders, displaying the perfectly knitted Team GB on the back.

Continuing with the Tokyo theme, the star's bright yellow dress featured further references to the sporting event.

She completed her look with a selection of jewellery including several necklaces and a touch of sparkling eyeshadow.

Showing it off! Griff pointed to the impressive jumper and put on an animated display as she posed on the red carpet

Proud: The singer styled the handmade garment with a yellow Tokyo dress and fluffy shoes styled with white socks

Speaking about why he knitted the impressive garment, gold medallist Tom posted on his Made With Love knitting page, wrote: 'When I got to Tokyo, I wanted to make something that would remind me of the Olympics to look back on in the future.

'I designed a pattern for the colour work that would signify everything about these games!

'On the back I went for a classic @teamgb logo, the shoulders have a flag and GBR on them. For the front I wanted to keep it simple and I tried my best to embroider TOKYO in Japanese! What do you think?!' he wrote.

The diver, who has previously auctioned off a jumper in aid of The Brain Tumour Charity, is now fundraising again in memory of his beloved father Robert Daley, who died following a battle with brain cancer in 2011 aged 40.

He said: 'Since my knitting page is gaining momentum, I wanted to take the opportunity to try and raise some money for the @thebraintumourcharity in memory of my Dad! Any donations would be greatly appreciated.'

Multitalented: Keen knitter Tom showed off his finished Team GB cardigan at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics last week

He'd be so proud: The star, who has previously auctioned off a jumper in aid of The Brain Tumour Charity, is now fundraising again in memory of his beloved father Robert Daley, who died following a battle with brain cancer in 2011 aged 40 (pictured 2010)

Putting his skills to full use, Tom has also knitted an emotional keepsake to forever remind him of his first gold medal at Tokyo 2020 - a customised gold medal pouch.

The British sportsman broke down in tears as he and diving partner Matty Lee triumphed in the 10m synchronized platform event - his first gold medal in four Olympic games.

Tom has previously spoken about the cathartic effect knitting has on his mindset during competitions.

He said: 'When we went to Japan for the test event I actually took my knitting with me and was doing it during my competition because sometimes there's 45 minutes in between each dive so I'd sit there and knit and just take my mind off the competition completely. I'm obsessed!'

Daley activity: Tom has gained an army of new fans for his knitting antics at the delayed games, and was seen was seen crafting the cardigan poolside as he attended the Tokyo 2020 men's 3m springboard diving final on Tuesday

And smile! Boris Johnson was also seen at the event on Sunday, posing for some selfies with the Olympians

Chic: Singer Anne-Marie posed with Team GB gymnasts Alice Kinsella, Jennifer Gadirova, Jessica Gadirova and Amelie Morgan, who won the bronze team medal

Performance: Nile Rodgers and Laura Mvula rocked the stage as they provided entertainment during the fun-fulled evening

The diving duo Tom and Matt looked in very good spirits at the Team GB homecoming event.

Daley and Lee were not expected to win, with China the favourites, but they never dropped out of the top two and finished with a score of 471.81 following an exceptional forward four-and-a-half somersaults pike when the pressure was on in the final round.

'It's kind of unbelievable. I dreamt, as has Matty, since I started diving 20 years ago for this moment,' said Daley.

Congratulations: Daley and Lee were not expected to win, with China the favourites, but they never dropped out of the top two and finished with a score of 471.81 following an exceptional forward four-and-a-half somersaults pike when the pressure was on in the final round

Winners: The diving duo Tom and Matt looked in very good spirits at the TEAM GB homecoming event

Gold medallists: 'It's kind of unbelievable. I dreamt, as has Matty, since I started diving 20 years ago for this moment,' said Daley

Prime Minister Boris Johnson, 57, showed his support at the ceremony and delivered a speech.

Getting in amongst the Team GB spirit, the Conservative party leader wasn't afraid to stand in a selection of group photos with the delighted Olympians.

Boris also posed for some selfies, in one snap holding an Olympic medal.

Big appearance: Prime Minister Boris Johnson, 57, showed his support at the ceremony

PM duties: Boris delivered a speech at the homecoming event as well as snapping selfies with the athletes

Team GB spirit: The Conservative party leader wasn't afraid to stand in a selection of group photos with the delighted Olympians

Showing support: Chevon Clarke was among the Olympians who snatched up a chance to be photographed with the PM

Photos galore: The 57-year-old held an Olympic medal in one of the snaps taken by an Olympian on their phone

Political figure: Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer also arrived to show his support for the UK's athletes on Sunday

Anne Marie wore a white tea dress with puffy sleeves for the celebratory affair, hosted by the National Lottery, where is set to perform later in the evening.

The chic star paired her dress with Prads shoes as she posed with Team GB gymnasts Alice Kinsella, Jennifer Gadirova, Jessica Gadirova and Amelie Morgan, who won the bronze team medal.

Stylish: Anne-Marie, 30, looked glamorous as she arrived at the homecoming event in London in a white dress with puff sleeves

Looking good: The singer wore a quirky eye make up look of diamante and black winged liner, and she the statement look with a sweep of nude lipstick

Gorgeous: The 2002 hit maker looked sleek as she slicked back her candy pink hair into a low up-do as she posed with weightlifter Emily Jade Campbell, 27

The 2002 hit maker looked sleek as she slicked back her candy pink hair into a low up-do, as she posed with 27-year-old weightlifter Emily Jade Campbell.

The singer wore a quirky eye make up look of diamante and black winged liner, and she complemented the statement look with a slick of nude lipstick.

By way of accessories, she kept it simple by wearing multiple hoops in her ears, and a gold chain with a coin pendant hanging on it.

The minidress showed off her toned pins, and revealed a tattoo the singer has on her left knee which reads: 'Confidence,' in cursive lettering.

Gracing the stage: The Alarm hitmaker looked proud to be on the stage and beamed a smile as she stood infront of the flag

Cute: She wore a white tea dress with puffy sleeves for the celebratory affair where is set to perform at the star-studded event later in the evening

Showstopper: Anne-Marie is set to stun audiences with a fully immersive performance in collaboration with the English National Ballet

Anne-Marie is set to stun audiences with a fully immersive performance in collaboration with the English National Ballet.

She is amongst many artists to perform at the event, including Rag'n'bone Man, Nile Rodgers, Laura Mvula, and Yungblud who will perform alongside the best of Britain's dance and theatre artists.

Yungblud will sing David Bowie's iconic hit anthem Heroes alongside a dance circus performance from Motionhouse.

Ivor Novello winner Laura Mvula will pair up with the esteemed contemporary dance company Rambert to perform a solo set.

Songstress: The star looked glowing for her performance, sporting a slick of pink blusher and matching glossy lipstick

Popstar: Anne Marie's hit singles include 2002, Ciao Adios and Our Song, which she undoubtedly treated the audience to a rendition of

Set: The stage design was stunning, with beautiful flowers all around Anne-Marie as she performed her hit tunes

The moving 90 minute concert to welcome home Team GB athletes will be hosted by Radio One presenters Greg James and Clara Amfo and also feature music from Bastille and Nile Rodgers with his band Chic.

KSI is also set to perform at the event, and he showed off his edgy style on the red carpet wearing a baby pink silk shirt and a black combat trousers

Singer Griff was also in attendance wearing the cardigan Tom Daley knitted poolside, paired with a yellow slip dress with her hair slicked back into a bubble pony tail.

Smart: Nile Rogers cut a dapper figure for the event in a white suit and black tie as well as a matching hat

Bright: The recording artist teamed her eye-catching ensemble with semi-sheer neon yellow shoes

Backing dancers: Laura was joined by the Rambert School of Ballet and Contemporary Dance for her impressive set

Dazzling: Mica Paris performed with Chickenshed, with the singer belting out some tunes for the star-studded audience

Showstopping: Nile and Mica, who sizzled in a black dress, looked sensational on the red carpet before they took to the stage

Speaking ahead of the event, Greg James said: 'As always with the Olympics, I've become an expert in events I only think about every four years.

'I can't wait to celebrate our extraordinary Team GB athletes and be in front of an actual crowd again.

'It's been a long time coming – it's going to be a brilliant night. Anyway, must go, I'm off to practice shot put,' he joked.

Excited: Presenter Greg James (left) said 'I can't wait to celebrate our extraordinary Team GB athletes and be in front of an actual crowd again' before singer KSI (right) took to the stage

Proud: Co-host Clara Amfo gushed of the much-loved Team GB athletes: 'It would be understatement to say that the road to Tokyo 2020 has not been easy for Team GB but their dedication and passion to the sports they love has been nothing short of inspiring!'

Achievements: Clara also added: 'Every single athlete deserves the very best homecoming and what better place than Wembley with these world class artists!'

Success story: Married couple Jason and Laura Kenny are Britain's most successful male and female Olympians

Job well done: Alice Kinsella and Amelie Morgan were in high spirits as everyone celebrated Team GB

Co-host Clara Amfo gushed of the much-loved Team GB athletes: 'It would be understatement to say that the road to Tokyo 2020 has not been easy for Team GB but their dedication and passion to the sports they love has been nothing short of inspiring!

'I am so honoured to be hosting Team GB Homecoming Concert with Greg, on what promises to be a brilliant show full of celebration and love!

'Every single athlete deserves the very best homecoming and what better place than Wembley with these world class artists!'

The celebration will re-unite Team GB with their friends, family and fans for the first time since Tokyo 2020, which closed with an emotional ceremony on Sunday.

Team GB finished the Games with the same number of medals as at London 2012 but were beaten by the USA, China and Japan for the top spots.

Fashion forward: KSI is also set to perform at the event, and he showed off his edgy style wearing a baby pink silk shirt and a black combat trousers

Switching it up: The singer changed his look when he graced the stage, donning a fashionable cream suit

Superstar: Rag 'n' Bone Man was also amongst the stars who took to the stage at the ceremony and performed some hits

Incredible voice: The successful star's latest album, Life By Misadventure, was released in May

Jason Kenny's record breaking gold medal moved GB up to 64 medals on Sunday, while Lauren Price victory in the middleweight final allowed them to replicate history.

As a result, Team GB finished fourth in the Tokyo medals table with 22 gold, 21 silver and 22 bronze medals for a total of 65.

It made Tokyo their second-most successful Olympics overseas after the contingent won 67 medals in the Rio de Janeiro Games five years ago.

Talent: Gold medal winning diver Tom Daley, 27, was all smiles as he posed at the homecoming event. Tom's knitting went viral on Tik Tok, Twitter and Instagram throughout the games

Pride: Athletes arrived at the event wearing their Team GB kit including gymnast Joe Fraser, 22

Britain's chef de mission Mark England hailed the team's achievement as the greatest in their Olympic history, saying: 'Following Beijing we had no idea that British athletes would deliver 65 medals in London.

'We knew we were in great shape for Rio but it had never been done before, matching and then surpassing London's number of medals.

'I just think that finishing this Games with two gold medals, and for this team to deliver 65 medals, is absolutely extraordinary.

Team: Cyclist Matt Walls, 33, was in attendance for the big night of celebrations and musical performances

Medal winner: Gymnast Bryony Page, 30, wore her bronze and silver medals with pride while Bradly Sinden donned his silver

Prize winner: The cyclist Ryan Owens, 25, wore his silver medal for the star studded event

'Not only has the team made history but it has probably made history on the back of the most complex and most challenging and difficult environment that we will face certainly in my lifetime.

'It has been against all the odds and I think it is the greatest achievement in British Olympic history. It has been the miracle of Tokyo and it has been wonderful to be here.'

Team GB looked in high spirits as they arrived for the event wearing their kit, and some wore their medals.

Good times: Swimmer Tom Dean, 21, looked proud as he posed for the camera with his arms behind his back

Proud: 26-year-old Jack Laugher wore his bronze medal round his neck and beamed a smile for some pics

Medallist: Cyclist Josie Knight, 24, arrived at the event and proudly showed off her medal for the cameras

Team: Gymnasts, Jessica Gadirova, 16, Alice Kinsella, 20, Amelie Morgan, 18 and Jennifer Gadirova, also 16, posed for a group shot at the affair

Power couple: Cyclists, Laura Kenny, 29, and Jason Kenny, 33, were in attendance and also donning their Olympics kit

Happy: Gold medal winning gymnast Max Whitlock, 28, wore red white and blue with pride at the event

Amazing: Rower Helen Glover, 35, arrived at the event in her GB kit and posed up a storm on the red carpet
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two-time Oscar-winning filmmaker Ben Affleck celebrated his 49th birthday on Sunday by reuniting with his three children in LA's Pacific Palisades neighborhood.

The Berkeley-born, Cambridge-raised triple threat wore a blue T-shirt, black jeans, and sneakers for the low-key family outing.

Ben fathered daughter Seraphina, 12; son Samuel, 9; and daughter Violet, 15; from his decade-long marriage to former Daredevil leading lady Jennifer Garner, which ended in 2018.

Family time: Two-time Oscar-winning filmmaker Ben Affleck celebrated his 49th birthday on Sunday by reuniting with his three children in LA's Pacific Palisades neighborhood

Last Thursday, TMZ reported that Affleck might be planning an 'out-of-town trip' with his ex-fiancé Jennifer Lopez, whom he first dated between 2002-2004.

The Justice League action star reportedly began texting the Bronx-born 52-year-old in February before making their rekindled romance public in late April.

'Bennifer' were last seen Wednesday grabbing dinner at West Hollywood hotspot Craig's alongside her 13-year-old daughter Emme (from her third marriage to Marc Anthony).

Celebrating Daddy! The Berkeley-born, Cambridge-raised triple threat wore a blue T-shirt, black jeans, and sneakers for the low-key family outing

Amicable exes: Ben fathered (from L-R) daughter Seraphina, 12; son Samuel, 9; and daughter Violet, 15; from his decade-long marriage to former Daredevil leading lady Jennifer Garner, which ended in 2018

Jetting off? Last Thursday, TMZ reported that Affleck might be planning an 'out-of-town trip' with his ex-fiancé Jennifer Lopez, whom he first dated between 2002-2004

Lopez and Affleck have also been house hunting Toluca Lake and Beverly Hills properties in the $40M and $80M range - according to TMZ.

The two-time Grammy nominee officially ended her two-year engagement to Fox Sports commentator Alex Rodriguez on April 15, and has since wiped him from her social media.

JLo is The Way Back actor's first public relationship since Ana de Armas ended their year-long fling in January over the phone.

Down low: The Justice League action star reportedly began texting the Bronx-born 52-year-old (pictured Sunday) in February before making their rekindled romance public in late April

Still going strong! 'Bennifer' were last seen Wednesday grabbing dinner at West Hollywood hotspot Craig's alongside her 13-year-old daughter Emme (from her third marriage to Marc Anthony)

Getting serious: Lopez and Affleck have also been house hunting Toluca Lake and Beverly Hills properties in the $40M and $80M range

Things are going to be awkward when Ben and the Cuban 32-year-old have to reunite in January to promote their roles as a couple in Adrian Lyne's erotic thriller Deep Water.

But first, Affleck reunited with BFF Matt Damon to co-write, co-produce, and co-star in Ridley Scott's 14th century revenge drama The Last Duel, which hits US/UK theaters October 15.

Adam Driver and Jodie Comer also star in The Last Duel, which will have its world premiere at the Venice Film Festival in September.

Good Will Hunting duo: The Way Back actor reunited with BFF Matt Damon (L) to co-write, co-produce, and co-star in Ridley Scott's 14th century revenge drama The Last Duel, which hits US/UK theaters October 15
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Gogglebox star Ellie Warner has been giving fans an insight into her huge home renovation project, which she's completing with her boyfriend Nat.

The reality star, 28, is doing up her 1930s semi-detatched house in Leeds and has already garnered a staggering 40 thousand followers with her decorating updates.

Self-proclaimed 'lovers of colour & second hand finds,' Ellie most recently wowed her followers with a striking orange radiator in her living room.

DIY team : Gogglebox star Ellie Warner has been giving fans an insight into her huge home renovation project, which she's completing with her boyfriend Nat in their semi-detached house in Leeds

New home: Ellie announced she'd bought her home with Nat back in March and couldn't wait to gush to her followers about the purchase

Ellie wrote on her home account @throughmykeyhole: 'Lil sneaky peak of my living room. Things are starting to take shape now and hopefully I’m gonna have a fully functioning living room after tomorrow night.

'Can’t wait to share it in all it’s glory. The radiators, the paper, the blue I’m just living for it all. Everyone thought I was mad when I said I was getting bright orange radiators but how effing cool are they?!?!'

The Gogglebox star's unique interior taste was certainly eye-catching, with vibrant orange radiators positioned against limited edition coral, blue, brown and cream wallpaper from Graham and Brown.

On the non-papered walls, Ellie contrasted the vibey heating appliance with a subtler grey blue paint from Valspar.

Dining room: Ellie had sourced a gorgeous bespoke table made from reclaimed scaffold boards with two benches that could slide underneath

'Everyone thought I was mad when I said I was getting bright orange radiators but how effing cool are they?!?!' Ellie gushed of her striking lounge decor choices

But it hasn't all been smooth sailing for the couple as they work towards creating their dream home together in Leeds.

Ellie admitted in a seperate post: 'Been at a bit of a stand still the last couple of weeks with working/ things going wrong.

But progress is finally being made this weekend!! Sneaky peak of the colour that’s going in the living room! Hoping to finish all the painting that needs to be done in the living room today.

'Wish me luck on the hottest weekend of the year so far! Already sweating me tits off.'

In their dining room, Ellie sourced a gorgeous bespoke table made from reclaimed scaffold boards with two benches that slide underneath.

The star explained she might also get three chairs to go on one side of the table and save the second bench for when they need extra seating.

Behind the table, Nat had chipped off old plaster from their original chimney to reveal the exposed red brick underneath.

Ellie told her followers: 'Still don’t have a clue what else I’m gonna do in here but I just knew I had to get this out of the way first as it’s such a messy job! I’ve got dust in places I never knew dust could reach.'

Hard at work: Behind the table, Nat had chipped off old plaster from their original chimney to reveal the exposed red brick underneath

Ellie announced she'd bought her home with Nat back in March and couldn't wait to gush to her followers about the purchase.

She wrote at the time: 'Soon to be our home… We're looking at exchanging [at the] end of May/June time. I'm so excited.'

Posting a photo of the 1930s semi-detached house, Northerner Ellie added: 'We're so lucky the current owners have kept it in immaculate condition so we can move straight in and just do things as we go along!'

Before: ' Still don’t have a clue what else I’m gonna do in here but I just knew I had to get this out of the way first as it’s such a messy job! I’ve got dust in places I never knew dust could reach,' Ellie told her followers of the renovation work

Ellie also joked that her partner has banned her from browsing online retailer Facebook Marketplace.

'Nat has banned me from looking on Facebook Marketplace, but can't wait to get in and start making this house our home,' she quipped.

Sharing a second photo hours later, Ellie showed off the property's back garden, thanking fans for their overwhelming response.

She shared: 'This is the view from the back garden! I can't wait to be sat on that patio in the sunshine with a nice cold beveragino!'

Ellie also said her beloved pet dogs would love the outdoor space, but explained she won't be posting any photos of her new home's interiors just yet, out of respect for the current occupants' privacy.

Detailing the home's layout, she continued: '@mickmadgeandmorris are gonna love playing in the garden and brucey bonus it's already doggy secure as the current owners have small dogs too!

'The dorma room is the master bedroom with en suite and hopefully one day when we've saved enough pennies we can extend out the back, bifold doors, velux windows you know the drill!

Ellie, who appears on the Channel 4 show alongside her sister Izzi Warner, has been dating boyfriend Nat for more than two years, and tends to keep her relationship out of the spotlight.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rylan Clark-Neal, 32, has sparked hopes that he could reconcile with husband Dan Neal, 41, following their split.

According to The Sun, former policeman Dan has been spotted back at the property they share in Essex, with his Range Rover parked on the drive.

An insider said: 'It was a very sad period but after it all came out into the open they seem to be in a better place and Dan has been back at the home at times.

Reuniting? Rylan Clark-Neal's 'husband Dan was seen back at their home sparking hopes they could reconcile after split'

'Everyone who knows them likes them very much, so hopefully things are working out.'

MailOnline has contacted a representative for Rylan for comment.

The star, who rose to fame on X Factor nine years ago, revealed in June that he and Dan had split after six years of marriage.

Marriage breakdown: The star, who rose to fame on X Factor nine years ago, revealed in June that he Dan, had split after six years of marriage (pictured above in 2016)

Rylan thanked fans for their support and revealed he is working towards returning to his jobs.

He made the decision to step down from presenting stints such as Eurovision and his BBC Radio 2 show after his marriage broke down.

Taking to Instagram in July, he penned: 'I just wanted to write a message to thank you all for the love and kindness you have shown us.

'We are currently prioritising our mental health and looking after the ones around us we love the most. I am working towards getting back to the jobs I love in due course. Thank you for being patient with me X'.

Grateful: The star took to Instagram at the beginning of July to write a message to his 1.4million followers following his marriage breakdown

With the return to work on the star's radar, Rylan is reportedly set to make his television comeback on Strictly Come Dancing's spin-off It Takes Two.

According to reports in The Sun, Rylan will return to the BBC2 show after co-presenting it alongside Zoe Ball for the past two years.

With 50-year-old Zoe quitting It Takes Two back in May, Rylan will allegedly sit alongside Strictly professional Janette Manrara, 37, for the extra ballroom dancing instalment which is starting next month.

Television return? With the return to work on the star's radar, Rylan is reportedly set to make his television comeback on Strictly Come Dancing 's spin-off It Takes Two

A source revealed to the publication that Rylan has missed working and is 'hopeful' be back on fans' screens soon.

They said: 'Rylan’s spent time away from the spotlight focusing on his wellbeing surrounded by friends and family.

'It’s all looking positive and the team at It Takes Two always have a lot of fun filming. It’s a joyful show to work on.

'Of course, everyone backstage wants what’s best for Rylan and aren’t putting pressure on him.'

MailOnline contacted representatives for Rylan and Strictly Come Dancing for comment at the tine.

Taking a break: Rylan made the decision to step down from presenting stints such as Eurovision and his BBC Radio 2 show after his marriage broke down (him and Dan pictured above in 2016)

Comeback: According to reports in The Sun, Rylan will return to the BBC2 show after co-presenting it with Zoe Ball for the past two years - but Zoe quit back in May (pictured in 2019)

Last month it was revealed that former Pussycat Doll Nicole and Simon Cowell are 'amongst the stars rallying around the presenter' who is in a 'very dark place' amid the breakdown of his marriage.

It was reported that Katie Price, 43, has 'been his rock' as he comes to term with what has happened, while Ruth Langsford has also been offering her support.

A source told Closer: 'Katie Price in particular has been his rock over the last few weeks, and given she's been through three marriage splits herself, she understands the torment he's going through.

'Nicole has also been messaging him and has given him a list of books that have helped her through painful break-ups.'

The source further revealed to the publication that Rylan was in a 'very dark place' but found it 'hugely comforting' to have his friends supporting him.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is expecting her first child with fiancé Andre Gray.

And Leigh-Anne Pinnock, 29, looked radiant as she showed off her growing baby bump in a beautiful Instagram post on Saturday.

The Little Mix star posed for a slew of empowering naked snaps, telling fans in the caption: 'It's nearly time'.

The beauty embraced her changing body and oozed confidence in the series of pictures shared with her 7.1 million followers.

In the sweet snaps she is seen cradling her bump as she enters the final stages of pregnancy with her first child with footballer fiancé Andre.

The mum-to-be concealed her breasts with her hands and hair was styled in long braids.

Leigh-Anne captioned the post: 'I have dreamt of the moment I get to meet you, hold you guide you teach you It’s nearly time.'

Stunning: Leigh-Anne Pinnock, 29, showed off her growing baby bump in beautiful Instagram post on Saturday

Incredible: The star's pals were quick to comment on her stunning post, with Rochelle Humes calling the singer a 'goddess'

Fans and celebrity pals were quick to comment on the star's paired back post.

This Morning presenter Rochelle Humes commented 'Goddess'.

X Factor contestant Fleur East declared that the Little Mix star looked 'so beautiful!!!'

Leigh-Anne is one of the two Little Mix stars due to give birth later this year.

Her bandmate Perrie Edwards also revealed she was expecting her first child with Liverpool footballer Alex Oxlade Chamberlain shorty afterwards.

Beautiful: The Little Mix star posed for a slew of empowering naked snaps which celebrate her growing baby bump

Her stunning pictures come as Little Mix made chart history as they became the first girl group to score 100 collective weeks in the Top 10 Official Singles Chart three weeks ago.

The pop group, made up of Perrie, 28,Jade Thirlwall, 28, and Leigh-Anne, hit the landmark with their latest single Heartbreak Anthem in collaboration with Galantis and David Guetta.

After the achievement, Leigh-Anne told Little Mix fans on Official Chart: 'Wow! It’s amazing, and we wouldn’t have done this without you guys.'

'You never fail to blow us away – you’re just incredible and we wouldn’t be here without you. Thank you.'

Girl power: Her bandmate Perrie Edwards also revealed she was expecting her first child with Liverpool footballer Alex Oxlade Chamberlain shorty afterwards

A collective 100 weeks in the Top 10 far exceeds any other girl group in UK chart history.

Girls Aloud were the closest to hitting the landmark with 61 weeks in the singles chart, with iconic Motown group The Supremes just behind with 59 weeks.

And even the iconic British girl power group Spice Girls couldn't hit the record as they only managed 50 weeks in the top 10 singles chart.

Little Mix have landed 18 UK top 10 singles to date, including five number ones - with Sweet Melody topping the charts most recently in January this year.

The landmark comes after it was reported that the show that launched their career, the X factor, had been axed on Wednesday evening.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jake Cornish and Liberty Poole faced yet another obstacle in their relationship during Sunday's instalment of Love Island - which resulted in Jake walking out of the villa.

Jake, 24, who confessed to Lib, 21, that he loved her during Friday's episode, found out from Toby Aromolaran that the girls were doubting the sincerity of his feelings.

Toby told Jake that people were thinking his 'I love you' revelation was a 'cop out' to avoid the rocky week him and Liberty had just faced.

'I need to get out of this place!': Frustrated Jake stormed out of the villa on Sunday night after the girls doubted his feelings for Liberty

Growing increasingly frustrated, Jake snapped: 'I need to get out of this place.'

The water engineer stuck to his word and, despite a concerned Toby following him, he sat on a wall outside the villa to collect his thoughts.

The couple have been together since day one of this year's series, and have even made it official.

However Liberty had her doubts after it was revealed Jake wasn't sexually attracted to her in the movie night challenge, and continued to act icy towards her in the Villa.

Being honest: Toby told Jake that people were thinking his 'I love you' revelation was a 'cop out' to avoid the rocky week him and Liberty had just faced

Stressed: The water engineer stormed out of the villa to collect his thoughts

The girls had earlier voiced their concerns about Jake's feelings to a smitten Liberty, who was delighted to tell the girls about her conversation with her beau in which he'd revealed he loved her.

Chloe Burrows responded to her frankly: 'You're going to hate me. Do you not think he's telling you what you want to hear?'

In the conversation with her pals, Liberty looked round at all of them to ask: 'Is that what you all think?'

To which Faye Winter tentatively replied: 'I don’t know baby.'

Unsure: The girls had previously voiced their concerned about Jake's feelings to a smitten Liberty, who was delighted to tell the girls about her conversation with her beau in which he'd revealed he loved her

Supporting her friend: Faye told Jake in an honest chat that it was the 'worst' time he could tell her Liberty loved her

Liberty seemed a little confused, and asked for advice from her friends: 'Do you think I’m being an idiot?'

Chloe told the beauty: 'I don’t think he would say something if he didn’t mean it but I also think is it convenient that he said it this evening after all of this?'

Chloe and Faye were later pulled for a chat by Jake, who revealed to Toby and Teddy that he wanted to know 'who the f**k' had questioned his feelings for Liberty.

In an honest yet calm chat, Faye told him: 'Tonight was the worst time to tell her you loved her,' to which he replied, 'I totally understand.'

Once again, Jake and Liberty managed to iron out their issues.

Referring to his confession of love, Jake gushed to his girlfriend: 'I've been waiting to say those words for a long time.'

A more relieved-looking Liberty said: 'I trust you to believe that you meant it.'

Love Island continues on Monday on ITV2.

Reassuring: Referring to his confession of love, Jake gushed to his girlfriend: 'I've been waiting to say those words for a long time'

Love Island 2021 - Meet the contestants

Which Love Island couples are still together?

Where are the Love Island winners now - and what are they worth?

When is the Love Island Finale 2021?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Billie Faiers showed off her slender physique as she continued to soak up the sun on her family getaway to Greece.

Taking to Instagram to post a slew of sunny snaps to her Instagram, the former TOWIE star, 31, cosied up to her husband Greg Shepherd as they enjoyed some time on a boat.

Billie looked amazing as she posed in a 60s style high waisted white bikini which complemented her freshly tanned body.

Sweet: Billie Faiers, 31, showed off her slender physique as she continued to soak up the rays in a while bikini on her family getaway to Greece on Instagram on Monday

Holiday: She shared the images alongside a caption which read: 'Special days like this' with a blue love heart, anchor and wave emojis

The two-piece matched with her 35-year-old husband's trunks, as they smiled for the camera.

The couple kept the Greek sun at bay by both donning oversized aviator style sunglasses.

She shared the images alongside a caption which read: 'Special days like this' with a blue love heart, anchor and wave emojis.

In other images, the family can be seen doing various holiday activities, including a snap of her six year old daughter Nelly chilling on the boat.

Cute: Taking to Instagram to post a slew of sunny snaps to her Instagram, the former TOWIE star cosied up to her husband Greg Shepherd as they enjoyed their time on a boat

Arthur, three, also appeared in the post, looking cheeky as he sat at the back of the vessel.

In later snaps, Nelly and Greg can be seen having a ball on a paddle board with the idyllic Greek landscape as a backdrop.

Arthur and Suzanne also posed for a sweet snap of them cuddling on the boat as they lapped up rays in the sunny location.

The last photo on the post was a shot of the group, they looked in high spirits smiling in the image with friends Johnny and Sian Glover.

Chilled: The family seem to be making the most of the sunny getaway and Billie's six-year-old daughter Nelly sat on the back of the boat

How sweet! Three year old Arthur also appeared in the post, looking cheeky as he sat at the back of the vessel

The holiday comes a month after it was announced Billie's sister Sam, 30, has quit their joint reality show Mummy Diaries after seven years.

After the news was revealed, Billie posted on Instagram to confirm the show's new title The Family Diaries and thanked her fans for their support after Sam said she 'needed a break' from the show.

Billie wrote: 'As one journey ends another begins …. And What an incredible journey it has been ❤️ filming with my sister and family for the past 7 years has been the most wonderful experience and we truly have made the BEST memories all together Filming @mummydiariesoffical.'

Fun times: In later snaps, Nelly and Greg can be seen having a ball on a paddle board with the idyllic Greek landscape as a backdrop

Adorable: Arthur and Suzanne also posed for a sweet snap on the boat as they lapped up the rays in the sunny location

Alongside the post, Billie shared several snaps of herself with husband Greg Shepherd along with Mummy Diaries shots with Sam and her partner Paul Knightley.

Billie and her husband Greg have landed their very own series, Billie & Greg: The Family Diaries.

After an eventful year, which saw Billie take part in Dancing On Ice, the episodes will capture milestone moments for the family as they continue to make new memories.

Sam & Billie: The Mummy Diaries is currently available on BritBox.

Family time: The last photo on the post was a shot of the group, they looked in high spirits smiling in the image
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Robbie Williams has reflected on the mental health battles he faced at the height of his fame.

The singer, 47, discussed the struggles he faced with depression and anxiety after landing a spot in Take That at the age of 16.

Speaking to Chris Difford, 66, on his I Never Thought It Would Happen podcast, the 18-time Brit Award winner divulged into his own experiences with depression and anxiety with the Squeeze bandmember.

'I hated myself': Robbie Williams admitted he felt guilty for suffering with depression and anxiety after being given a 'golden ticket' into Take That

Robbie said he couldn't enjoy his career despite being given a 'golden ticket' at the age of 16 when he was chosen to be in the superstar band Take That.

He admitted: 'I couldn't jot down one nice thing about myself.

'I hated myself... the high bits [of my career] were married with a really, really dark depression and deep anxiety. And none of it was enjoyable.

'The fact that none of it was enjoyable made me deeply unhappy because I'd been given the golden ticket. This isn't an uncommon story.'

Troubled: Robbie said he couldn't enjoy his success in Take That due to his mental health struggles (pictured with Howard Donald, Gary Barlow, Mark Owen and Jason Orange in 1991)

Opening up: Speaking to Chris Difford, 66, (right) the popstar (left) divulged into his own experiences with depression and anxiety with the Squeeze bandmember

After notoriously exiting the five-piece in 1995, he thought he would be playing at Knebworth, where rival band Oasis had performed to a 250,000-strong crowd.

The issue was that the Staffordshire-born singer hadn't even written a song by that point.

Becoming visibly emotional, Robbie spoke of his overconfidence as he decided to embark on a solo career.

Despite wanting to be like Radiohead, Oasis and Blur, he described himself as more of a 'cabaret act' and couldn't help but be 'musical theatre'.

Overconfident: After exiting the five-piece in 1995, Robbie thought he would be playing at Knebworth, where rival band Oasis had performed to a 250,000-strong crowd (pictured in 1996)

Robbie praised his wife for creating stability in his life and claimed family life is a 'different level'.

The Rock DJ hitmaker began dating actress Ayda Field, 42, in 2006 and they welcomed their first child, Theodora, eight, in 2012.

They are also proud parents to Beau, one, Colette (Coco), two, whom they welcomed via surrogate and son Charlton Valentine Williams, six.

The I Never Thought It Would Happen podcast series, from the charity Help Musicians, features the likes of Sting, Billy Bragg, Yungblud and Tom Odell shining a light on the highs and lows musicians face.

The full episode is available from all the major podcast providers now.

Help Musicians offers mental health support for anyone working in music. Visit musicmindsmatter.org.uk or call 08080 802 8008.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nicole Scherzinger made sure her week got off to a glamorous start on Monday when she shared a sizzling new series of Instagram selfies.

Showing off her new shorter hairstyle, the Pussycat Doll, 43, put on a fierce display for her followers, working her best angles while wearing nothing but a plush white robe.

Looking to the week ahead with a positive mindset, the star captioned her post: 'Savage. Let's get it Monday. New week. New mood. New mana.'

Wow: Nicole Scherzinger, 43, made sure her week got off to a glamorous start on Monday when she shared a sizzling new series of Instagram selfies debuting shorter hair

Nicole looked beautiful wearing a full face of expertly-applied makeup in the snaps.

The Don't Cha hit-maker's glossy hair appeared a good few inches shorter than usual, and the star flashed her fans a playful wink.

In the second photo shared by Nicole at the beginning of the week, she shot a sultry stare down the camera's lens.

Although this is the first time Nicole has shown off her new shorter hairstyle on social media, the raven-haired beauty was seen rocking the new look after Sunday's taping of The Masked Singer in LA.

Best angles: The Pussycat Doll put on a fierce display for her followers, working her best angles while wearing nothing but a plush white robe

Nicole wrote: 'Savage. Let's get it Monday. New week. New mood. New mana'

The Pussycat Doll left the series' studio wearing a sparkly green dress and show-stopping yellow heels.

She has been involved with The Masked Singer ever since its inception in 2019.

The show is based on the Korean show King of Mask Singer, which initially premiered in 2015.

The performer regularly appears alongside fellow panellists Ken Jeong, Robin Thicke and Jenny McCarthy in all of the episodes, with Nick Cannon serving as a host.

Joel McHale has appeared in every season of the hit Fox show since its inception.

New look: Nicole's hair was looking significantly shorter in the photos shared by her on Monday (pictured in July)

During an interview with Entertainment Weekly, Nicole expressed that she was heavily invested in The Masked Singer's success for a very personal reason.

She remarked, 'with doing a lot of these talent-searching shows, I do get very emotional because music is the best way of communication and connection to me'.

The actress also gave the media outlet her take on why the program has become so well-known with audiences and lauded the series' unorthodox take on competition shows.

'I think that's what's so bizarre and so special about our show is that you're looking at these crazy costumes and these faces that don't move. And yet you're moved by these contestants, you're moved by their performances,' she said.

The hit-maker also expressed that she saw The Masked Singer as a way for the performers to let out their deepest feelings without fear of ridicule.

'I feel like with that mask on, it gives them the courage to let go more, but they're really revealing all from the inside out,' she noted.

Nicole concluded by expressing that she was happy to be one of the program's main figures and stated that she enjoyed a close relationship with her collaborators.

'It doesn't even feel like a job. It's the best job in the world. I get to go to work with the panellists, who are my close friends that I adore and love,' she said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He had gastric sleeve surgery just 16 weeks ago.

And James Argent, 33, showed off his slimmed down physique on Monday while on holiday in Marbella after losing seven stone in weight.

The former TOWIE star stripped to his underwear for a swim after forgetting to pack his trunks for a boat trip with co-star Elliott Wright.

Looking good! James Argent, 33, showed off his slimmed down physique on Monday while on holiday in Marbella after losing seven stone four months after gastric sleeve surgery

The reality star oozed confidence in red underwear before jumping into the sea while Elliott filmed the moment.

In the clip shared to Instagram the business mogul wrote: 'Who goes on a boat trip and forgets trunks? @Real_Arg that's who lol.'

Arg laughed while holding on to a railing of the luxury yacht before jumping into the sea.

Doctors had previously ordered James to 'lose weight or die' after he weighed in at a whopping 27 stone.

Oops: The former TOWIE star stripped to his underwear for a swim after forgetting to pack his trunks for a boat trip with co-star Elliott Wright

Jump! The reality star oozed confidence in red underwear before jumping into the sea while Elliott filmed the moment

James penned on Instagram earlier this year: 'Back on solid foods. I'm Delighted with the results, 5 1/2 Stone weight loss so far! Thanks to the team @wearetransform who have been guiding me on the how to integrate solids back into my diet.

'I'm aiming to stick to nutritionally packed foods as part of a well balanced diet to help me reach my weight loss goals.'

In June, the reality star appeared on Steph's Packed Lunch where he talked about his weight loss journey.

In the clip shared to Instagram the Elliott wrote: 'Who goes on a boat trip and forgets trunks? @Real_Arg that's who lol'

Scary: Doctors had previously ordered James to 'lose weight or die' after he weighed in at a whopping 27 stone

The television personality has been working hard on losing weight by upping his fitness and is training for two charity swims.

He explained: 'It felt horrible, I was always extremely uncomfortable, I couldn't look at myself in the mirror.

'It felt depressing and it just wasn't me. Now I'm starting to feel like myself again and I'm excited about what the future is going to bring.'

The reality star went on: 'It was scary being 27 stone… It was serious, doctors were telling me how dangerous it was… I knew it was something I had to address pretty quickly.'

Amazing work: The television personality has been working hard on losing weight by upping his fitness and is training for two charity swims (pictured in 2019 before the surgery)

The former TOWIE star reached 27st during lockdown and previously said he wanted to lose a total 10st but now wants to shed 15st, more than half his previous body weight.

James reportedly hoped to 'lose at least a stone every month between now and 2022' and has enlisted the help of close friend and fitness fanatic Mark Wright.

A source told The Sun: 'It's a lot but he's determined to do it because he is feeling so much healthier following his operation. He's been getting a lot of support from Mark.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She's known to draw attenion while making her way to and from work in Leicester Square.

And Monday was no exception as Myleene Klass, 43, looked stylish as ever while heading home after her show at Global Radio Studios on Monday morning.

Following her Smooth FM show, the singer looked flawless as she hit the city centre in a green-and-blue floral maxi dress from her own Next collection.

Wow! Myleene Klass turned heads in a tropical blue-and-green maxi dress on Monday as she headed to the Global Radio studios

Complete with mid length sleeves and a tropical palm print, the showstopping number caused onlookers to stop and point at the brunette beauty.

The mum-of-three carried a shiny black leather handbag, which she matched with her classic strappy heels.

Donning an unmissable gold-faced watch on her left wrist, Myleene accessorised her right with a black-and-silver bangle.

Fashion forward: She's known to cause a commotion in London's West End whenever she makes her way to work

Talented: Arriving in time to present her Smooth FM show, the singer looked flawless as she hit the Big Smoke in a green-and-blue floral maxi dress from her own Next collection

Classy: Myleene's luscious walnut tresses had been straightened into a sleek side-parting and she populated her neck with a trio of gold delicate necklaces

Flawless: The mum-of-three carried a shiny black leather handbag, which she matched with her classic strapped heels

Blingy: Donning an unmissable gold-faced watch on her left wrist, Myleene accessorised her right with a black-and-silver bangle

Stunning: The model's ruby red-painted lips popped against her sparkly white teeth and her makeup had been kept to a minimum

Her luscious walnut tresses had been straightened into a sleek side-parting and she decorated her neck with a trio of gold delicate necklaces.

The model's ruby red-painted lips popped against her sparkly white teeth and her makeup had been kept to a minimum.

Framing her face, the former Hear'Say bandmember donned a pair of oversized gold-rimmed shades.

Myleene shares daughters Ava, 13, and Hero, nine, with her ex-husband Graham Quinn, while she has son Apollo, two, with fiancé Simon Motson, 46.

Standing out: Myleene demanded attention in the unmissable outfit

Chic: She looked ever-elegant as she strutted her way to the studio

Who's that? Complete with mid-forearm length sleeves and a tropical palm print, the showstopping number caused onlookers to stop and point at the brunette beauty

Myleene got engaged to Simon last September. The couple's engagement delighted Myleene's daughters who have been determined to see them walk down the aisle.

Simon's children, a 13-year-old son and nine-year-old daughter, were also said to be thrilled.

The happy couple began dating in 2015 and welcomed son Apollo in August 2019.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Charlotte Church has marked her daughter Frida's first birthday by sharing a heart-melting clip of herself singing to the little girl.

Belting out an impressive rendition of Happy Birthday in both Welsh and English, Charlotte, 35, showcased her impressive vocal range in the clip, which appeared to be filmed outside her home in Dinas Powys, Wales.

Looking gorgeous in a floaty bright orange dress, the brunette beauty peered lovingly into her little girl's eyes while serenading her and captioned the post: 'Happy 1st birthday to my baby girl Frida for yesterday!'

Sweet: Charlotte Church, 35, has marked her daughter Frida's first birthday by sharing a heart-melting Instagram clip of herself singing to the little girl at her Welsh home

Charlotte's loved ones could also be heard in the clip, and birthday girl Frida had been kitted out in a sweet pink dress to mark the occasion.

Looking around at guests while sitting in her mother's arms, Frida looked slightly perplexed by the situation.

Charlotte beamed from ear to ear in the footage and was every inch the proud mum.

She shares Frida with her musician husband Jonathan Powell.

Impressive: Belting out an impressive rendition of Happy Birthday in both Welsh and English, Charlotte showcased her impressive vocal range

Charlotte wrote: 'Happy 1st birthday to my baby girl Frida for yesterday!'

Doting mother: Looking gorgeous in a floaty bright orange dress, the brunette beauty looked lovingly into her little girl's eyes while serenading her

Charlotte, who is also mother to Ruby, 13, and Dexter, 12, with her ex Gavin Henson, first announced she was pregnant to fans in a low-key tweet in March 2020.

Holly Willoughby had let slip the same day in March that Charlotte had welcomed her third child during an appearance on This Morning, saying to her: 'You've got three kids now!'

She said: 'You've got the three kids now. How is home schooling?', as Charlotte replied: 'I've been homeschooling my own children now for a few years now.'

Charlotte's latest post comes a week after she shared a hilarious video pleading with Instagram to verify her account after having her application for a blue tick rejected nine times, with the singer having since received verification.

The star mimicked Dr. Evil from Austin Powers by slowly stroking her dog while making her plea in video shared on the platform.

Speaking softly against a background of classical music, she mused: 'Instagram, why won't you verify me? I've tried nine times now and you just keep telling me that I don't meet the criteria.'

Charlotte added: 'I wonder if there are any other Instagrammers out there who've had a similar problem that can help me figure it out. I would dearly, dearly love a blue tick'.

Family: Charlotte shares Frida with her musician husband Jonathan Powell (pictured together in 2015)

Cupping her face with her hands, the singer then quipped: 'I really am Charlotte Church!'

Captioning the video on social media she wrote: 'Hello darlings! Please help me get verified on @instagram' with a sobbing emoji.

'I'm having trouble getting verified and wanted to prove I was really me! If anyone has any advice, I'd greatly appreciate it ❤️ x'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She has been holidaying with her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, 33, in Spain.

Yet Bella Hadid's romantic getaway came to an end on Monday as she was spotted leaving Ibiza on a private jet.

The couple have been inseparable during recent weeks with some passionate displays of affection during their time together.

Jet setting: She has been holidaying with her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, 33, in Spain. Yet Bella Hadid 's romantic getaway came to an end on Monday as she was spotted leaving Ibiza

The runway star, 24, was sporting a navy Adidas jumper and floral leggings which she paired with white trainers.

Sartorially in sync with his girlfriend, Marc also opted for comfort in a navy T-shirt and matching black face mask.

The pair wore protective face masks entering the airport due to the ongoing threat of COVID-19.

Casual: Sartorially in sync with his girlfriend, Marc also opted for comfort in a navy T-shirt and matching black face mask

On Sunday, the supermodel gave fans an insight into her romantic getaway as she shared a bikini-clad snap while enjoying pizza and board games.

The runway star was sporting a mysterious bruise on her right thigh as she draped her toned leg over a blue patterned cushion.

Bella, who was laying next to a backgammon board, captioned her post: 'Undefeated.'

Fun in the sun: On Sunday, the supermodel gave fans an insight into her romantic getaway as she shared a bikini-clad snap while enjoying pizza and board games

The Vogue cover star is a backgammon enthusiast and was spotted picking a new board during a trip to Paris last month.

Bella stunned in a pink and maroon triangle top showcasing her taut midriff.

The brunette beauty's long waves spilled over her shoulder as she reclined next to a glass of white wine and a pepperoni pizza.

Prior to becoming romantically involved with art director Marc, Bella was in a long-term relationship with The Weeknd, which ended for good in 2019.

Bella and Marc went Instagram official with their relationship this past July with a now-deleted post made to the model's Instagram page.

However, a source recently spoke to Page Six and noted that the two had been seeing each other ever since last summer, with the insider noting that the two 'hid it well.'

Wow! Bella stunned in a pink and maroon triangle top showcasing her taut midriff as she shared snaps from her romantic trip

The source also elaborated on the pair's methods that they used to keep their relationship a secret in its early stages.

'If they went out, he would come out first, get the car, and then she would get into the car. They would drive to a location, and he'd drop her off but not get out and go park the car,' they specified.

They went on to note that the pair 'were very diligent about not being seen on a public street at the same time.'

The source expressed that the two kept things toned down in public and opted for dates that included her friends.

According to the individual, Bella and Marc never shared 'any PDA...and most of the time they were with other people, which of course made it difficult to prove that they were dating.'

However, the source noted that many people began speculating that the model was seeing her now-boyfriend when his car began being regularly seen at her residence.

They said: 'This new guy [at the time] was driving her around in his Porsche, and then the Porsche was [at her place] overnight multiple times...So it was like, "She's got to be hooking up with this dude."'

The insider concluded by speaking about their Instagram picture, which was later deleted, and noted that the two waited a year before going public with their romance.

'They basically came out on their anniversary — or somewhere around it,' the source noted.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They've been enjoying a sun-soaked break in Ibiza together.

And Dua Lipa and her beau Anwar Hadid headed to a private jet to fly out of the party destination on Monday as their trip came to an end.

It came as the singer, 25, marked the end of the holiday with a photo dump on Instagram where she planted a kiss on her 22-year-old model boyfriend.

Home time: Dua Lipa and her beau Anwar Hadid headed to a private jet to fly out of the party destination of Ibiza on Monday as their trip came to an end

Heading to the private jet Dua flashed her abs in a green crop top and high-waisted black jeans while accessorising with a black bucket hat.

Meanwhile Anwar dresses casually in white jogging bottoms and a long-sleeved T-shirt as he carried the couple's luggage.

In her photo dump Dua had her toned abs on display yet again as she donned a sheer green crop top which she teamed with shiny trousers of the same hue.

Cute: It came as the singer, 25, marked the end of the holiday with a photo dump on Instagram where she planted a kiss on her 22-year-old model beau

Style: In her photo dump Dua had her toned abs on display yet again as she donned a sheer green crop top which she teamed with shiny trousers of the same hue

The beauty completed her look with a green cap, bright pink handbag and neon green high heels.

In other pictures from the fun-filled trip she twerked with friends as they stood outside their villa before posing with two more brunette beauties.

She playfully captioned the snaps: 'like a little slice of keylime pie'

Travel: Heading to the private jet Dua flashed her abs in a green crop top and high-waisted black jeans while accessorising with a black bucket hat

Larking about: In other pictures from the fun-filled trip she twerked with friends as they stood outside their villa

The Levitating singer and model began dating in June 2019.

Dua and the younger brother of Bella and Gigi Hadid have given fans a glimpse of their romance on social media ever since.

Talking about her romance with Anwar to Rolling Stone magazine, the star recently said: 'I'm very comfortable in the relationship, more so than any others.'

Stunning: She was also pictured posing with two more brunette beauties during the sun-soaked trip away

Dua also discussed how the couple spent part of 2020 isolating on Anwar's family farm in Pennsylvania, admitting that she loved the quiet pace of life and also used the opportunity to improve her horse riding skills.

She said: 'Wake up around 9:00, 9:30, shower, get dressed, have a bit of breakfast, take the dog out on a really nice long walk, maybe do some yoga, make some lunch, hang out, watch a movie, play with the animals.'

The hitmaker also spoke about boyfriend Anwar in a recent issues of British Vogue, saying that she tries to balance 'being so excited and in love', while keeping their romance private.

Dua told the magazine of posting their relationship on Instagram: 'We have all these incredible memories and experiences, and if there's something that we want to share together, then OK that's fun.'

She added: 'But at the same time, we're quite private - we'll only show you as much as we want you to see.

'It's a little bit of give and take, trying to find the right balance of being so excited and being in love, and wanting to share that with the people around me, but at the same time not wanting to put too much out there.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eamonn Holmes has joked that he regrets not keeping his hip bones following his double hip surgery in 2016.

The 61-year-old's hilarious comments were made during Monday's This Morning, when he was interviewing Alison Hawthorn, who makes jewellery using her own breast milk.

Reflecting on the idea of turning parts of the human body into wearable pieces, Eamonn hilariously quipped: 'I always regret when I got my hips replaced that I didn't keep them. You'd have mounted something for me, wouldn't you?'

Regrets: Eamonn Holmes, 61, joked on Monday's This Morning that he regrets not keeping his hip bones following his double hip surgery in 2016

Eamonn's co-host and wife, Ruth Langsford, struggled to stop smiling, while his comment also left Alison, 30, grinning.

Of his hips, Eamonn added: 'You'd have got something sorted out for those.'

During the interview, Alison told Eamonn and Ruth, also 61, that she's 'loving' the process, adding: 'The orders are coming through.'

Alison decided to try and make her first 'keepsake' last year using her own breastmilk while feeding her twin sons, now aged 17 months.

After the pretty trinket - a keyring - turned out well, she began offering her services to others who wanted to transform their own breastmilk into something they can keep forever.

Funny: Eamonn's hilarious comments were made when he was interviewing Alison Hawthorn, who makes jewellery using her own breast milk

Craftswoman: Alison, 30, makes jewellery using her own breast milk and made her first 'keepsake' last year using her own breastmilk while feeding her twin sons

After expanding the business to make jewellery from ashes, pet fur and human hair, she claims she has been inundated with orders.

To make the jewellery, a customer sends at least 10ml of expressed breastmilk, double bagged and in a padded envelope to Alison.

From there, she uses a double boiling method and adds preservation powder, before leaving it to dry for a few days on greaseproof paper.

After this, Alison crushes it into a fine powder with a pestle and mortar and adds it to the resin to create the jewellery.

Eamonn's side-splitting comment comes after he left This Morning viewers bewildered after comparing Dr Zoe Williams hair to an alpaca's during Thursday's show.

Oh dear: Eamonn's side-splitting comment comes after he left This Morning viewers bewildered after comparing Dr Zoe Williams hair to an alpaca's during Thursday's show

What?! Eamonn left Dr Zoe in hysterics as he said, 'Your hair reminds me of an alpaca today! You just want to pet it, don't you? It's very alpaca-ish' before gesturing with a petting motion

The Irish presenter was running through the programme's topics as he introduced the doctor who said via video chat that she would be discussing, 'how your health can be benefited from gardening and even alpacas'.

Quick to jump in, Eamonn remarked: 'Your hair reminds me of an alpaca today! You just want to pet it, don't you? It's very alpaca-ish' before gesturing with a petting motion.

Collapsing with laughter, Dr Zoe, 41, exclaimed, 'Don't touch my hair!' as she pointed her pen at the camera.

While Dr Zoe took the joke in her stride, viewers were left shocked at the comments, taking to Twitter to pen: 'Uh Eamonn what tf was that about? Have u learnt nothing?! U never talk about petting a black woman's hair. And saying it looks like an Alpaca?! #thismorning'.

Come again? While Dr Zoe took the joke in her stride, viewers were left shocked at the comments and took to Twitter to voice their shock

'Did @EamonnHolmes just tell a black woman her hair reminds him of an alpaca and he wants to pet her or am I hallucinating?! Persevering face #ThisMorning'; '@thismorning did @EamonnHolmes just compare the doctors Afro to an alpaca?!?';

'Jesus, Mary and Joseph and the wee donkey Eamonn what did you just say to Dr Zoe? Have you learnt nothing?! never talk about petting a #blackwoman's #hair. Never ever say it looks like an Alpaca?! #thismorning I don't watch 'normal' telly, only on holiday, now I know why.'

Eamonn was quick to clear up that he meant no offence, taking to Twitter himself to pen: 'Hey everyone out there.

'If my attempt at being humorous with my friend @DrZoeWilliams was misjudged I am mortified and humbly apologise to anyone who was offended.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Actress Emily Atack was suffering from a terrible hangover after enjoying a boozy night for a friend's wedding in Manchester on Sunday.

The Inbetweeners star, 31, left the hotel she was staying in wearing dark sunglasses, her tracksuit bottoms, complete with an orange hoodie and light blue ripped jeans.

Emily later took to Instagram Stories to say she had a bad headache, and that she felt like death (by posting skull emojis), while her mother Kate Robbins played loud music from her car.

Rough night? Actress Emily Atack, 31, was suffering from a terrible hangover after enjoying a boozy night for a friend's wedding in Manchester on Sunday

Emily's bright blonde locks were pulled back into a messy bun, and she completed the casual ensemble with white and red Adidas Stan Smith trainers.

Emily looked ready to return home from the northern city as she dragged her huge blue suitcase behind her, and totted a black handbag on her arm while she clambered into a black Peugeot.

Taking to her Instagram stories, she documented the hangover with a string of videos begging her mum to turn down the radio as to not hurt her sore head, sarcastically saying: 'could you please turn it up mum?'

Keeping it casual: The Inbetweeners star left the hotel she was staying in in the northern city wearing her comfies, complete with a baggy orange hoodie and light blue jeans

Hangover: Making sure she blocked out the light, Emily wore oversized black Gucci sunglasses after the fun filled trip before sarcastically asking her mum to turn up the music in the car

In another snap, she looked laid back in the car, with her hoodie covering half her face, as she admitted to feeling under the weather and captioned the post: 'Ouch.'

Clearly not doing so well, she looked exasperated as she held her hand on her head and simply penned for the caption a string of skull emojis.

The Celebrity Juice captain turned heads on Saturday as she captured her sexy outfit in a mirror selfie which she posted to her Instagram.

Sore head? In another snap, she looked laid back in the car, with her hoodie covering half her face, and admitted to feeling under the weather as she captioned the post: 'Ouch'

Oh no: Clearly not doing so well, she looked exasperated as she held her hand on her head and simply penned for the caption a string of skull emojis

Standing out from the crowd in the drape-neck number, she clutched a red velour purse in her left hand along with her phone in her right.

From her earlobes swung a pair of oversized red-and-orange floral earrings and her makeup had been applied flawlessly.

Emily wore her sandy tresses in a middle parting, which she had tied behind her head, and flashed her bronzed arms in the unmissable outfit.

She elevated her height in a pair of neon orange heels and wore a pair of bangles on her wrist.

Looking good: The Celebrity Juice captain turned heads the night before as she captured her stunning outfit in a mirror selfie which she posted on Instagram

The outing comes a week after she appeared to be resurrecting her part as 'Charlotte Big Jugs' in The Inbetweeners.

Reprising her role 13 years on, Emily dressed as a schoolgirl, filming what appears to be a skit for ITV2's The Emily Atack Sketch Show.

In a clip shared to Instagram while on a break, she joked that she looked like she was 45-years-old in the white shirt and striped tie.

Her blonde locks in pigtails, Emily then used a device to inflate her bust - truly bringing her Inbetweeners character back to life.

She found it hilarious, giggling with those around her at the gag.

'Charlotte Big Jugs having a break down 13 years on!' she joked in the caption.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

Married At First Sight UK is back - and this series promises to be more sexy, shocking and scandalous than ever before.

Ahead of the series six launch, the 16 singletons who will be walking down the aisle have been revealed - with seven females and nine males making up the eight couples, meaning the show is set to welcome its first gay couple.

While the pairings are yet to be announced, the diverse line-up sees football influencer Amy, 34, on-call firefighter Luke, 36, and veterinary nurse Morag, 31, lead the contestants - who will be followed over 21 episodes on their quest for love.

One to watch: Meet the Married At First Sight UK contestants: A football influencer, Linford Christie's nephew and a party-mad veterinary nurse lead the line-up - with the show also set to welcome its first gay couple

The series has been revamped to follow the Australian format, and rather than legal marriages, the couples will make a lifelong commitment to one another at a glamorous ceremony, overseen by a wedding celebrant, that includes guests, bridal gowns, dancing, speeches and cake.

After the ceremony and celebrations are over, true love is well and truly put to the test, as they embark on a luxurious honeymoon, before moving in with each other and their fellow couples.

Relationships will be put under the microscope, by fellow brides and grooms at weekly dinner parties – as well as by the experts, at recurring commitment ceremonies, where couples choose whether they want to stay in or leave the process.

Here come the girls: (L-R) Amy, Alexis, Megan, Nikita, Marilyse, Tayah and Morag make up seven of the 16 singletons who will be walking down the aisle when season six of the show launches later in the year

All this will build to a dramatic series finale: glossy, high-stakes vow renewals, in which each couple must decide if they will recommit to their partner or go their separate ways.

No-nonsense Married at First Sight Australia expert Melanie Schilling and Sex and Relationship Therapist, Charlene Douglas will be joining returning star Paul C. Brunson (Celebs Go Dating) for this brand-new series.

Mel and Paul will be tasked with matching a group of singles hoping to find love when they meet for the first time at the altar, whilst Charlene works with the couples as they navigate their new relationships and get to know their partners on a more intimate level.

Here come the boys: (L-R) Franky, Daniel, Adam, Jordon, Ant, Matt, Joshua, Luke and Robert make up this year's male contestants, with two of the men set to form Married At First Sight UK's first gay couple

Ahead of the series airing, influencer Amy said: 'With Married At First Sight UK, either I'm going to find the love of my life or I'm going to learn a really big lesson from it, which might lead me to the love of my life.'

Amy was raised in Cornwall by her parents alongside her grandmother who championed her 10-year glamour modelling career.

With sports in her genes, she soon made it her main passion in life and now works as a sports presenter, using various platforms to discuss football and her favourite team, Chelsea FC.

Amy sees Married at First Sight UK as an opportunity to finally try and let down her guard. She wants to learn what love is and take off the veneer of sassiness that has protected her from letting another person in.

Amy and Luke: Amy said, With Married At First Sight UK, either I'm going to find the love of my life or I'm going to learn a really big lesson from it', while fireman Luke, 36, who has been described as the ' perfect gentleman'

Others who are looking to wed thanks to the show include care home manager and fireman Luke, 36, who has been described as the 'perfect gentleman'.

He said: 'I already have more in common with this person than I would do meeting them on dating apps or in the pub. Because they’ve done the same thing, they must be in a similar circumstance to me.'

Luke is struggling with self-esteem issues after his relationship crushed his confidence and he’s spent the last year rebuilding himself. Now he thinks he’s ready to move on at this perfect junction in his life with someone who’ll love him for him.

Morag and Megan: Veterinary Nurse Morag said, 'I want the experts to help because I've got high expectations of myself and what I want from my partner', while wellness coach Megan, 26, needed professional help due to her own 'terrible taste' in men

Veterinary Nurse Morag is hoping for some help from the show's experts, and explained: 'I want the experts to help because I've got high expectations of myself and what I want from my partner. I want them to help me open up and let someone in.'

She's considered the life and soul of the party and learned that from 'the best', her dad, with whom who she spent an unconventional upbringing between Essex and Ibiza.

Unapologetically confident and loud, a normal 9-5 was not for Morag, so a career change in her mid-twenties saw her chase her dreams of being a veterinary nurse in Australia.

In 2019, Morag returned to the UK when her dad fell ill and recently passed away. Now, she’s more determined than ever to find love and is looking for a man who is ready to embrace her big laugh.

She is looking for a man that wants to begin a committed relationship but doesn’t want to settle down; they must be adventurous, fun and spontaneous, and still love to party.

Marilyse and Matt: Personal trainer Marilyse, 37, would be 'disappointed' if she didn't find The One by the end of the show, while charity worker Matt, 39, is 'really excited' about potentially meeting someone he can start a family with

Wellness coach Megan, 26, admitted she needed professional help due to her own 'terrible taste' in men.

She explained: 'My dating history is horrendous, I have terrible taste. Of course, it is a good option to get someone to do it for me. It just felt like an opportunity I couldn’t miss. Each step of the way has felt more and more right.'

Megan sees herself as a constant entertainer and loves to sing, dance, and share her ‘good energy’ with everyone she meets.

With her dad passing away when she was only eight, she was faced with grief at a young age, but used her experience to chase down her dream job and she now helps young children with their mental health.

It’s important that her partner is kind and polite and she would love them to be creative, ambitious and confident. Humour is top of Megan’s list, it’s essential that he makes her laugh and can make other people laugh too; she wants him to be able to walk into a room and light it up.

Adam and Ant: Electrician Adam, 26, said 'I’m only going to take positives from it. Hopefully I’ll find the right one', Ant, 28, is very confident in his ability to influence situations and he believes he has a lot of sway on people

Personal trainer Marilyse, 37, would be 'disappointed' if she didn't find The One by the end of the show.

She said: 'I would love to go through to the experiment to the very end and still be with the guy.

'That is what I want to happen and what I expect to happen. I will be a bit disappointed if it doesn't happen, but we'll have to wait and see.'

The Yorkshire-born trainer describes herself as strong, switched on and very positive and needs an old-fashioned 'manly man' who is full of passion and energy otherwise she gets bored.

She wants to find her teammate in life who she can conquer the world with, but the mother-of-two said they’ve got to get her two sons’ approval first, who are keen for their mum to be with someone, but they have a lot of thoughts on who that should be.

The perfect guy for Marilyse would be a man who is strong minded and strong-willed. She is looking for her best friend and soul mate.

Daniel and Nikita: Salesman Daniel, 27, said the show 'will allow me to shift my pattern in terms of relationships', while Nikita, 26, mused, 'Ideally, we all want our Prince Charming who we are going to be with until the day we die'

Charity worker Matt, 39, is 'really excited' about potentially meeting someone he can start a family with.

He said: 'The reason I've come onto the show is because I'm really wanting to meet that special person that I can start building a life with and have a family. I'm really excited.'

After a messy break up, which left him feeling heart broken and needing to re-discover himself, Matt now feels like he’s ready and it’s time to find the one.

It’s not the first time he has had to rebuild himself. After his dad got diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2004, Matt quit his corporate career and focused his work in the cancer charity sector, which he loves.

With a big verve for life, he’s a highly outgoing person who, in his limited spare time, goes to choir practice and has even performed in a Take That tribute band.

Matt constantly gives a lot of himself to others, but admits he got lost in that and is now highly conscious that at his age he would like to have kids and settle down. Matt would like someone who wants the same things and somebody to grow old with.

Robert and Alexis: Robert, 26, is a fun-loving guy who’s desperate to share the limelight with his future partner while Alexis, 28, is described as 'bold, lively and an incredibly strong'

Electrician Adam, 26, had a great mindset ahead of the show, saying he was 'forcing myself into the situation where I have to be with someone – I’m only going to take positives from it. Hopefully I’ll find the right one.'

The Doncaster-born star said he has never had time to find himself a proper partner, dividing the majority of his time between work and the gym.

He is super competitive and, for the right person, he’d not only make time for them, but would work hard at the marriage to ensure it’s successful.

With a positive outlook on life, Adam is super relaxed when it comes to his preferences. His ideal match would have nice eyes and be naturally pretty. They must be ambitious, spontaneous and positive.

Adam loves pushing himself, being challenged and trying new things, so wants to see his potential partner challenge him in a new way.

Business development worker Ant, 28, has braced himself for whatever the outcome, saying: 'The best that could happen is that the experts find me a match and it works out perfectly and find our happily ever after. The worst case is it doesn’t work out and I make some new friends and I learn a bit about myself as a person.'

The social butterfly is very confident in his ability to influence situations and he believes he has a lot of sway on people.

He’s learnt the hard way to not take life for granted and wants to get better at being honest and opening up emotionally.

Franky and Tayah: Franky, 47, said 'all my life has been about challenges. I don’t like to do the normal,' while estate agent Tayah, 25, has starting a family high on her list of priorities as she 'always wanted to be a young mum'

The perfect person for Ant would be someone who is a funny, bubbly, ambitious person and up for exploring and adventure.

Salesman Daniel, 27, said of the opportunity: 'Married At First Sight UK is a big experience and quite nerve racking in many ways, however it is something that will allow me to shift my pattern in terms of relationships and it is a blessing to have the professional and scientific advice that will help me'.

Daniel wants to share his passion for hiking, meditation, cold water swims and vegetarian living with others. Of course, Dan doesn’t want to do this alone; he is looking for someone open minded, who shares his passion for the outdoors.

Jordon and Josh: Personal trainer Jordon, 27, said he's misunderstood by people who don't realise he is a 'gentle and very positive soul', while Josh 26, said 'I think marriage has always been on my cards'

Also working in sales is Nikita, 26, who mused: 'Ideally, we all want our Prince Charming who we are going to be with until the day we die. I just think that if I meet someone who blows me away and we’re on the same wavelength and have proper banter it will be great.'

Described as emotionally charged, stubborn and wearing her heart firmly on her sleeve, Nikita finds that people tend to misjudge her.

Nikita has already planned her wedding and picked her children’s names and believes that because she has fallen in love twice already, that this is her third time lucky.

Business protection specialist Robert, 26, goes by the nickname 'Big Bob' owing to his big personality. He said: 'I want to have fun all the time, so I want someone who wants to go out and do things. Someone who is on my wavelength with how I look at life.'

Robert is a fun-loving guy who’s desperate to share the limelight with his future partner and is after someone with a big personality who loves to have a laugh.

Model Alexis, 28, is described as 'bold, lively and an incredibly strong', and said: 'I’ve applied to this to find the good guy, to find someone genuine and someone who wants commitment.

Guess who's back: Married at First Sight Australia expert Mel Schilling has over 20 years of experience as a qualified specialist in human behavioural performance and purpose, and is now joining the UK version of the show

'I give my all and I’m very supportive. I’m looking for someone on my wavelength and I want someone who is going to take the reins a little bit.'

Over the last two years, she took a break from boyfriends and realised she needed to work on herself and she’s now ready to make the space and time for what she hopes will be the last man in her life.

Alexis wants an ambitious, well-educated, well spoken, family orientated husband. He needs to be understanding, compassionate and affectionate. He must know how to communicate and be in touch with his emotions. But mostly she wants a best friend kind of relationship as she’s never had that before.

Former army man Franky, 47, said: 'All my life has been about challenges. I don’t like to do the normal. If anything is normal then I find it boring. I’m not captured unless I’m entertained and challenged - and Married At First Sight UK is a bloody big challenge.'

The strength and conditioning coach fought for his country for 15 years and lived as an expat for 15 years in Dubai, and now wants to find his soulmate who’ll be happy to join him overseas.

Estate agent Tayah, 25, has starting a family high on her list of priorities, saying: 'My happy ever after would be that I’ve always wanted to get married and wanted kids. I’ve always wanted to be a young mum.

'My end goal is to have that family and have that family unit. So that would be an ideal situation to come from this.'

Tayah wants to find someone who takes care of themselves and will look good standing next to her. She likes a confident guy, someone who knows themselves and who has 'a bit of something' about them.

Experts: Last year, for the U.K.’s fifth series Paul Carrick Brunson had a 75% success rate, with three of the four matched couples still together, and he will return alongside Charlene Douglas, an experienced Sex and Relationship Therapist

Personal trainer Jordon, 27, said he's misunderstood by people who don't realise he is a 'gentle and very positive soul.'

He said: 'My happily ever after would be to learn stuff about myself that I didn’t know before. I want to become stronger as a person and to obviously walk away with a partner and with some new friends.'

Cardiff-born Jordon was raised on the traditions and values of his grandmother, and also strongly believes in God and spirituality. He would love to bring a partner home to meet his grandmother, but mostly he’s looking for someone with whom he can raise the family he never had.

Completing this year's line-up is Josh, 26, who works in insurance, said: 'I think marriage has always been on my cards, but I could never see myself getting on one knee, so this is a fast track!

'Sometimes I need to be kicked into the deep end so for me this is the start of a new chapter.'

He describes himself as having ambition, competitiveness and drive which have all made him succeed at anything he turns his hand to; from his sporting ambitions, to working hard as a teenager when his dad passed away.

He’d like somebody who can understand him, but also put him in his place sometimes. He’d like someone with a good balance between social and work life, who works hard, likes fitness, but also doesn’t take themselves too seriously.

While an official launch date is yet to be announced, Married At First Sight UK is coming to E4 very soon.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jess Wright has landed her own reality show.

The bride-to-be, 35, has inked a deal with ITVBe and ITV Hub for a 90-minute special titled Jess Wright: The Wedding, which will chronicle the build up to her big day with fiancé William Lee Kemp, 34.

Filming is well underway, but the date the show will air is yet to be confirmed with ITV telling MailOnline it will likely be late autumn.

The Wedding! Jess Wright, 35, has landed her own reality show with ITVBe and ITV Hub

The show will follow Jess' journey to the altar as she and William set about staging their dream wedding, a star studded event on the paradise island of Mallorca.

Having already delayed their nuptials once already, and with travel restrictions constantly changing due to Covid-19, there is much for the pair to navigate.

Jess Wright: The Wedding is made by Potato, part of ITV Studios, the producers behind Ferne McCann: First Time Mum, Sam and Billie: The Mummy Diaries and the forthcoming Billie and Greg: The Family Diaries.

From fiancée to wife! The 90-minute special titled Jess Wright: The Wedding, will chronicle the build up to her big day with fiancé William Lee Kemp, 34

Jess is currently in Ibiza on her hen do with close female friends and family members including her sister Natalya, 21, and mum Carol, 61, as she prepares to walk down the aisle.

In an interview with Hello! Magazine, the amateur singer admitted she and William had considered scrapping plans to exchange nuptials in Mallorca and have a smaller ceremony in England, as pandemic regulations affect travel.

Noting that she's far from alone in her dilemma, Jessica told the publication: 'I really feel for all brides out there. Every day, we have been back and forth trying to decide what to do – I've been driving myself insane with it.'

Of their autumn wedding, she explained: 'It gives more time for things to get back to normal and for all our nearest and dearest to be there.

Last hurrah! Jess is currently in Ibiza on her hen do with close female friends and family members including her sister Natalya, 21, and mum Carol, 61

'I have definitely relaxed since setting the new date. I can't wait to wear my dress – I just want to do it now.'

William popped the question on the snow capped peaks of Courchevel, France, in February 2020 after 13 months of dating.

Jess previously told Hello! that her sister-in-law Michelle Keegan, the actress wife of her brother Mark, would be one of the bridal party, as well as her sister Natalya.

TV personality Mark, 34, who tied the knot with Michelle in 2015, has been drafted in to serve as the master of ceremonies on his sister's big day.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

He's best known for his appearance in Netflix's Selling Sunset alongside his twin brother.

And Brett Oppenheim, 44, enjoyed a break from filming on Sunday when he worked up a sweat in the sunshine, getting stuck into a game of volleyball with his bikini-clad partner Tina Louise, 40.

The duo – who packed on the PDA - were joined at the beach by FBoy Island stars CJ Franco and Sarah Emig.

Beach day: Brett Oppenheim, 44, worked up a sweat in the sunshine on Sunday, getting stuck into a game of volleyball with his bikini-clad partner Tina Louise, 40

Australian model Tina showcased her enviable physique in a hot pink bikini top and striped bottoms, making sure all eyes were on her impressive collection of tattoos.

Tina wore her bright blonde hair pulled back into a short ponytail.

Property mogul Brett opted for a bright pair of multi-coloured swimming trunks and appeared in high spirits while lapping up the balmy California weather.

It comes after Tina hinted that her romance with Brett was over in a telling social media post shared in June.

Hot pink: Australian model Tina showcased her enviable physique in a hot pink bikini top and striped bottoms, making sure all eyes were on her impressive collection of tattoos

Trunks: Property mogul Brett opted for a bright pair of multi-coloured swimming trunks and appeared in high spirits while lapping up the balmy California weather

Hair up: Australian model Tina wore her bright blonde hair swept back into a ponytail

Chatting away: Enjoying each other's company, Brett and Tina were seen chatting away in the sunshine

Tina spoke about her dating life while using a quirky filter that made it look like a man was hugging her from behind.

'A lot of you guys have been asking if I have been seeing anyone,' she said.

'And, well, there's this one guy, Steven, who is super clingy, and yeah, Steven,' she added, referring to the filter.

Staying hydrated: Brett sipped on a drink and made sure to stay hydrated in the hot weather

Sunshine at bay: Tina kept the sunshine at bay behind a stylish pair of sunglasses and could barely stop smiling

All in the details: The blonde bombshell accessorised with a delicate necklace and wore bracelets on each wrist

However, weeks after she shared the post her and Brett were seen enjoying a double date with Brett's Selling Sunset co-stars Mary Fitzgerald and Romain Bonnet at Westlake Village Inn in Los Angeles.

Tina and Brett nestled into each other while sitting at a table with the reality TV crew.

The couples were later seen in a model car, which Romain joking that it was the crew's new 'whip'.

Phone in hand: While conversing with her partner Tina held her phone in her right hand

Ripped: Brett showed off his ripped physique while enjoying a game of volleyball

Friends: Brett was seen chatting away to TV star Sarah Emig

Wow: Sarah, 25, wowed in a skimpy, nude-hued string bikini

Hair down: Sarah wore her bright blonde hair loose and beamed while talking to friend Brett

'Last night was a blast! So much fun and different from our usual night in WEHO! Thanks again @brettoppenheim for ride in your new whip!!,' he wrote.

Tina confirmed her relationship with Brett in April when they went 'Instagram official' on holiday.

The swimsuit-clad duo looked playful as they strolled along the golden sand in photos shared on their respective accounts.

Rings: Tina also wore gorgeous rings when she enjoyed a beach day at the end of the week

Giggling: Tina and CJ Franco, 30, shared a joke while relaxing in the sand

Headphones: CJ wore headphones while strolling across the beach with Tina

It's unclear how long they have been a couple.

Over the last year, Tina has been linked to a number of high-profile men, including Brian Austin Green and P. Diddy.

Tina and Brian were first linked in May 2020 after the actor separated from his estranged wife Megan Fox.

In October, she was spotted making out with rap mogul Sean Combs on a Malibu beach, but it's unclear if they were ever an official item.

Taking a breather: Sarah enjoyed a short break from her game of volley ball by sitting on a blue towel

Back at it: It wasn't long before Sarah stood back up with the volleyball

Unreal: The blonde bombshell looked beautiful in the skimpy two-piece
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They tied the knot in 2015 and share children Theodore, four, and Amelia, seven.

And Peter and Emily Andre enjoyed a romantic evening out without the kids on Sunday at the Shangri-La hotel in London, to celebrate Emily's 32nd birthday.

The Mysterious Girl singer, 48, made sure to document their dinner date at restaurant Tíng at The Shard before he and his wife, 32, headed to their swanky hotel suite to unwind.

Sweet: Peter and Emily Andre enjoyed a romantic evening out without their kids on Sunday at the Shangri-La hotel in London, to celebrate Emily's 32nd birthday

The handsome couple posed together at the upmarket restaurant with a mojito on-hand.

Peter looked dapper in a black suit and unbuttoned white shirt while Emily opted for a black ensemble and she looked positively radiant for the outing.

The father-of-four wrote on Instagram: 'Someone’s birthday tomorrow … loads of pics coming in a few hours. Hope you don’t mind'.

He also captured the magnificent views across the capital as Emily delivered a subtle smile towards the camera from their dining table.

'Happy birthday': The Mysterious Girl singer, 48, made sure to document their dinner date at restaurant Tíng at The Shard before he and his wife, 32, headed to their swanky hotel suite

A light tipple: The handsome couple posed together at the upmarket restaurant with a mojito on-hand

Celebration: The father-of-four wrote on Instagram: 'Someone’s birthday tomorrow … loads of pics coming in a few hours. Hope you don’t mind'

Room with a view! He also captured the magnificent views across the capital as Emily delivered a subtle smile towards the camera from their dining table

The couple splashed the cash on multiple dishes including perfectly cooked scallops, Singapore curry laksa, lobster benedict and a sumptuous rice dish.

'This one was so yum omg,' Peter wrote alongside a snap of one of their meals.

Updating his followers once more on Monday, Peter shared a video from inside their stylish suite, complete with panoramic views across the London skyline.

Gold balloons which spelt 'happy birthday' were hung above one window and the dinner table featured two bottles of alcohol, chocolate dipped strawberries and other decadent sweet treats.

Scrumptious: The couple splashed the cash on multiple dishes including perfectly cooked scallops, Singapore curry laksa, lobster benedict and a sumptuous rice dish

Delicious: 'This was so yum omg,' Peter wrote alongside a snap of one of their meals

East meets West: One of their dishes comprised of a wholemeal crumpet, spiced butter, lobster and a poached egg

Tuck in! Peter captured the moment a waiter poured a light sauce over Emily's scallops

'This room though,' Peter penned. 'The Shard in London. Let’s have fun. [starry eyed face emoji] Happy birthday Emily.'

Peter and Emily share two children together while the singer is also the father to son Junior, 16, and daughter, Princess, 14, with his ex-wife Katie Price.

And his eldest son proved that the apple doesn't fall far from the tree when he joined his dad on stage at the Fantasia Festival in Maldon, Essex on Saturday.

Dressed head-to-toe in a grey camouflage tracksuit and a black checkered man bag, the son of glamour model Katie, 43, leaped at the opportunity to perform alongside Peter as an on-stage surprise.

Take it all in: Updating his followers once more on Monday, Peter shared a video from inside their stylish suite, complete with panoramic views across the London skyline

Tasty: The dinner table in the room featured two bottles of alcohol, chocolate dipped strawberries and other decadent sweet treats

Caption: 'This room though,' Peter penned. 'The Shard in London. Let’s have fun. [starry eyed face emoji] Happy birthday Emily'

Blended family: Peter and Emily share children Theodore, four, and Amelia, seven, while the singer is also the father to son Junior, 16, and daughter, Princess, 14, with his ex-wife Katie Price

Donning a pair of vertical razor slits on his left eyebrow and silver studs on both of his earlobes, the teen ensured that his hair had been freshly trimmed for the crowd of thousands to see.

After throwing his hands around for a few moments, the born-famous boy took his dad's microphone and spoke to the audience before sharing an embrace with the denim-clad Mysterious Girl singer.

He was in good company as Tony Hadley and Boyzlife also performed at the event.

Born famous: And his eldest son proved that the apple doesn't fall far from the tree when he joined his dad on stage at the Fantasia Festival in Maldon, Essex on Saturday
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her first child, Consy, tragically passed away at four weeks old in 2019.

And pregnant Malin Andersson has revealed she is expecting another girl with boyfriend Jared, and has told that the baby is due on same date as her late daughter Consy.

The former Love Island star, 28, hosted a gender reveal party over the weekend for 80 friends at her Cambridgeshire home, with a plane flying overhead releasing pink smoke to reveal that she is carrying a girl.

It's a girl! Malin Andersson, 28, has revealed she is expecting another girl with boyfriend Jared, and has told that the baby is due on same date as her late daughter Consy

Malin told OK! 'From the get-go I knew it was a girl, I had this gut feeling. So I was super happy. It just made sense to me.'

'Even though I knew what the gender was, because I went to the scan myself, when I saw the smoke it brought up loads of emotions.

'It made me feel really emotional. It confirmed it was real, in a weird way. It was like a little miracle and a blessing.

'To make it even more special, my new baby shares the same due date as my daughter Consy.'

Exciting: The former Love Island star, 28, is expecting a baby girl with boyfriend Jared

Last week, Malin shared a nude photo of herself in the bathtub as she wrote a passionate message about domestic abuse.

Malin explained how she was living through domestic abuse at the hands of her ex Tom Kemp when she was pregnant with her first child, who sadly passed away.

She wrote: 'It isn't until you are amongst peace that you realise what your life used to be like.

'Sometimes my life right now feels too good to be true. I don't like delving into my past unless it's to make a point & help you all to understand transition and strength - and this time I would like to compare how different my pregnancies are.

'Firstly, I have never been with anyone so loving and attentive.. that makes my soul shine and brings out only the best in me.

'I know this sounds so cringe as I write it - but when something so pure lands into your life, it almost feels alien if you've never experienced it before.

Radiant: Last week, Malin shared a nude photo of herself in the bathtub as she wrote a passionate message about domestic abuse

'My pregnancy so far has been stress free, calm and peaceful.. and a lot of that is down to me having a loving and stable relationship. One that has great communication and understanding - and most of all patience.

'I look back 3 years ago to when I was pregnant with Consy, and how volatile my relationship was then; and how I would wake up each day with severe anxiety, panic attacks and stress.

'With every argument and attack would come the tensing of my stomach and the knowing that my little girl could feel all the pain I felt too.

'It saddens me to think that I thought that was 'love' - and it breaks my heart knowing I let myself endure the emotional and physical pain whilst carrying something so precious - but this is what you call domestic abuse.'

Malin encouraged any of her followers who may be experiencing domestic abuse to go and seek help.

Candid: Malin explained how she was living through domestic abuse when she was pregnant with her first child Consy who tragically passed away at four weeks old in 2019

She wrote: 'Domestic abuse does not discriminate. If you are pregnant it can actually get worse.

'Domestic abuse during pregnancy puts a pregnant woman and her unborn child in danger. It increases the risk of miscarriage, infection, premature birth, low birth weight, foetal injury and foetal death.

'If you are pregnant and being abused, there is help. Your abusive partner is not only potentially endangering your life, but also the life of your unborn baby.

'With this, I am sending you all so much love. The transition my life has endured has been surreal - I never thought I would make it through the heartache and agony.

'But I'm here. I'm thriving. I'm smiling. And I've survived it.'

Speaking out: It comes after Malin revealed she was scared to reveal her pregnancy and sometimes fears her baby won't make it after she tragically lost daughter Consy

It comes after Malin revealed she was scared to reveal her pregnancy and sometimes fears her baby won't make it after she tragically lost daughter Consy.

Malin said she has been going to therapy to deal with 'unresolved feelings' around her daughter's passing.

She wrote: 'Hey. It feels like I've been here with you before. I have. I'll be honest, 3 years ago feels like a blur to me.. but feeling a new human growing inside me again feels so familiar. It scares me.

'So I'm here to welcome you on my journey with my rainbow baby. I know that sharing how I feel resonates.. and I want those that are struggling to conceive, or have lost a baby and are trying, pregnant with their rainbow baby or feel like their happy ending hasn't come yet - to see a clearer view through my life.

'And that actually we must trust the timing in everything. I haven't spoken to you much yet on how I've felt.. to be honest it's been a very weird journey so far. I was hesitant to even reveal my pregnancy.

'I have this inner hurt, this pain & that voice in my head that tells me this isn't real.. that my child won't survive - that something bad will happen. I've been very quiet.

Pregnancy: The star also shared a photo of herself in a vest and leggings on her Instagram Stories and wrote: 'Boobs - sore, big, veiny and for some reason the feeling of pregnancy feels so magical.'

'Malin quiet? That's strange - the queen of positive thinking.. waking up each day with not much to say. Just hope in her heart that baby will make it another day..'

Malin added that she appreciates every minute of life and is hoping for the best, adding that Consy is 'integrated' in her.

She said: 'See the reality is, we never really know what life can throw at us - we must remain present & mindful.. appreciate every minute. For sure I hope for the best, but I can't help past trauma creep up on me. She's integrated in me.

'Consy lives through me each day. I see her brown eyes open one last time.. and it gives me fear.. fear of the unknown. So what do I do? I've been going to therapy; remaining consistent.

'This has brought up a whole lot of unresolved feelings & pain that I seemed to have blocked out.. don't get me wrong I have the most amount of love and joy in my heart - but as I said.. I'm only human.'

The reality star added that she gets 'goosebumps' when she thinks about welcoming her child.

Relationship: Malin said she has been going to therapy to deal with 'unresolved feelings' around her daughter's passing (pictured with her boyfriend Jared)

She wrote: 'We tend to always think the worst. When I realise what's growing inside me, I get goosebumps, I have to have a double take. Isn't it sad that sometimes things seem too good to be true? Well maybe, just maybe they aren't.

'I keep telling myself that this is my time.. And for f****n' sure - it is. Believe in your time. I'm here to tell you that your ending is only your beginning. Ma.'

The star also shared a photo of herself in a vest and leggings on her Instagram Stories and wrote: 'Boobs - sore, big, veiny and for some reason the feeling of pregnancy feels so magical.'

Malin revealed she was expecting a baby earlier this month when she a snap of her baby bump, with her hands and her boyfriend Jared's hands resting on it.

Consy was born seven weeks premature in December 2018 and was being treated at Great Ormond Street hospital, but sadly passed away aged four weeks on 22 January 2019.

Malin wrote: 'I have this inner hurt, this pain & that voice in my head that tells me this isn't real.. that my child won't survive - that something bad will happen'

Since then Malin has struggled with further strife, reportedly left terrified after her violent ex recently broke his licence conditions meaning he has been sent back to prison.

Tom Kemp, 28, was jailed at Aylesbury Crown Court in September after admitting to actual bodily harm, which left the reality star 'black and blue' but was released three months later in January.

The Sun recently reported that Tom - who was serving the remaining term on Home Detention Curfew - recently visited the area that the Love Island star lives.

He was then reportedly sent back to prison after failing to comply with the rules he was set as he continued to serve part of his sentence in the community.

A source told the publication: 'Malin was really shocked when she heard he had been in her area.

Tragic: Her daughter Consy was born seven weeks premature in December 2018 and was treated at London's Great Ormond Street hospital, but sadly passed away on 22 January 2019

'She had really hoped his prison sentence would mark the end of having to think about him ever again.

'The whole thing has been incredibly stressful, but Malin is very strong and just hopes he's learnt his lesson now.'

A source also told MailOnline: 'Malin was glad to hear that Tom had been sent back to prison for breaching his license conditions, but to learn that he only returned for a week due to his sentence coming to an end concerns her.

'She feels that far too often the justice system fails survivors of domestic violence and ultimately believes that this contributes to the reason why perpetrators continue to abuse.'

Tom, was jailed at last year after following an attack in which he broke her hand.

Scary: Malin has struggled with strife, reportedly left terrified after her violent ex Tom Kemp recently broke his licence conditions meaning he has been sent back to prison (pictured together in 2019)

TV star Malin previously accused the 'narcissist' of being abusive in Instagram posts in 2019 and shared pictures of herself with a cut cheek and bloodied nose.

But Tom, from Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, denied the claims at the time, branding her a 'liar with mental health issues'.

The former couple had an on-off romance, splitting briefly during her pregnancy, amid claims Tom had been unfaithful to her, but reconciling shortly before the birth.

In March they split again, with Malin admitting it was better to end things between them as she and her partner struggled with their grief.

In October, Malin told how she believes the physical abuse Tom subjected her to while she was pregnant was a factor behind her daughter's death at just one month old.

Awful: Tom Kemp, 28, was jailed at Aylesbury Crown Court in September after admitting to actual bodily harm, which left the reality star 'black and blue' but was released three months later in January (Malin pictured with her injuries - taken at the time)

She revealed Kemp 'slapped and punched' her while she was six months pregnant, causing her to fall on her back and her stomach to hit the side of a bed.

Speaking to The Sun, Malin said she is convinced the incident contributed to Consy's death as after a few days, she noticed she wasn't moving around as much.

A month later, the movements reduced again and Malin insisted Kemp drive her to the hospital where doctors discovered Consy's irregular heartbeat, leading her to have an emergency cesarean that day at Great Ormond Street Hospital.

She said: 'When Tom threw me about, I'd tense my stomach so much, I could feel her pausing inside me. The doctors didn't understand what happened to her, but I know in my heart.'

Injuries: Tom left Malin with broken bones and bruises in a violent tirade

In June last year, Malin posted a lengthy Instagram post, captioned: 'The third and final lot, I am NOT a victim anymore.'

Calling their romance 'toxic and unhealthy', she said 'it has been an ongoing battle to emotionally let go as dealing with the grief from both my mum and daughter I've had him as my comforter.'

Accusing Kemp of emotional and physical abuse she said: 'Including being spat at, hit, pushed, kicked, scratched, spoken down to, controlled, manipulated, cheated and so much more I experienced the worst pain yet to come last night.'

Malin claimed she had received a phone call from a woman asking why the star had been texting her 'boyfriend.'

She wrote: 'After a calm and collected call with her we had finally came to the confirmation they have been speaking since January (when our daughter was in intensive care).'

Shocking: Tom, was jailed at last year after following an attack in which he broke her hand (pictured are the injuries to her face)

'While I've been focusing on my mental health I've been receiving multiple emails, calls, texts from one extreme to the other (I'm a bad mum, my mum hates me I'm going to hell to the extreme of I love you I can't be without you etc.

'This ladies is a fine example of a narcissistic man.

'I will NOT be another victim to domestic violence, I will not be beaten mentally or physically when I've fought through so much worse than this.

Adding that she was 'exhausted, heartbroken and confused' she urged her followers to 'listen to your gut and learn to love yourself.'

If you are a victim of domestic abuse, call Refuge's freephone, 24-hour National Domestic Abuse Helpline on 0808 2000 247

If you have been affected by the death of a baby please call Sands on 0808 164 3332 or email helpline@sands.org.uk
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gizzi Erskine has revealed that she is a godmother to Professor Green's son Slimane Ray Manderson.

Speaking on Monday's Lorraine, the TV chef and media personality, 41, said it was 'sweet' that the singer, 37, had given her the role in his family.

Professor Green - real name Stephen Manderson - welcomed his first child with girlfriend Karima McAdams, 36, in March sharing a sweet picture of mother and daughter.

Family: Gizzi Erskine has revealed that she is a godmother to Professor Green's son Slimane Ray Manderson (Gizzi and Professor Green are pictured in 2020)

Speaking to Christine Lampard Gizzi said: 'Stephen very sweetly made me godmother to his son Slim!'

The pair were discussing how she also has her cats to look after to which she said: 'Those are my kittens which were one of those really happy accidents, I got Mochi - I recused her at the beginning of lockdown.'

Gizzi and Professor Green have been close friends for years, often being pictured at events together. They also threw a post-lockdown garden party together back in May.

Cute: Professor Green - real name Stephen Manderson - welcomed his first child with girlfriend Karima McAdams, 36, in March sharing a sweet picture of mother and daughter

In March Professor Green welcomed his first child with girlfriend Karima.

In a lengthy caption alongside the shot of his newborn son's head, he detailed their difficult pregnancy, which he branded 'a rollercoaster' and confessed during 'scare after scare' they feared their baby 'would not make it'.

Pro Green was swiftly congratulated by his 865,000 Instagram followers, with many of his celebrity pals sending well-wishes.

Happy: Speaking to Christine Lampard on Monday's Lorraine Gizzi said: 'Stephen very sweetly made me godmother to his son Slim!'

Sharing a lengthy caption alongside the post, he penned: 'I didn't wake up Monday morning expecting to meet you. In my mind we still had a couple of weeks to get everything ready, but you had other ideas...

'I've always said 'the only way to be on time is to be early'; it's nice to see you taking after me already, though you seem to have inherited your Mum's looks...

'Privately we've endured what so many parents-to-be have, your journey to us wasn't a straight line whatsoever, it was a rollercoaster right up to your arrival...

Busy: The pair were discussing how she also has her cats to look after to which she said: 'Those are my kittens which were one of those really happy accidents, I got Mochi - I recused her at the beginning of lockdown'

'I didn't allow myself to express my excitement as much as I'd have liked to, I wanted to freely shout about how excited I was about you joining us, but I was frightened...

'We had scare after scare during the worst of which, I said to your Mama 'if he does make it, he's grounded'...

'Having met you, I'm sorry. It wasn't your fault and you're totally forgiven. You're far too perfect to be mad at. As mum's go, you've lucked out; you have the best example of what a brave, strong, passionate, loving, kind and both considered and considerate woman is...'

The couple announced the pregnancy in January. The star posted a snap to Instagram on New Year's Day, of him in the bath and Karima sat on the floor in patterned pyjamas, looking at her bump.

Father: In March Professor Green welcomed his first child with girlfriend Karima sharing this sweet picture of the pair

Pro Green captioned the snap: 'And then, all of a sudden everything is different. It all makes sense.'

Admitting that Karima's pregnancy had got 'impossible to hide', he sweetly added: 'I've been overwhelmed with excitement, admiration and curiosity ever since we found out. I'm excited about meeting you. Holding you. Teaching you. Learning from you.

'Never have I admired anyone as much as I have your mamma. She's nothing short of remarkable, remarkable in fact is an understatement.

'To see the body change in such a way is fascinating, incredible, unbelievable, amazing, ASTOUNDING. Weird. Ridley Scott had to get his inspiration from somewhere...

'So my mate and I are procreating': The couple announced the pregnancy in January with Karima showing off her bump

'I feel a bit useless sometimes, pedestrianised; left to spectate from the sin bin as each phase plays out. It's humbling; never do our strengths as men compare to that of a woman. I'm awestruck. Subservient (albeit reluctantly at times.

'I’m curious about everything to come; about who and how you’ll be, what you’ll look and sound like... and who’ll be the stricter parent.

'A friend told me the best thing you can do for your own anxiety is to have a child. It sort of made sense at the time, it doesn’t anymore; THIS HAS BEEN WILD.

'My understanding of mortality and just how fragile life is have grown exponentially. Wishing you all (and hoping for) a very joyous and healthy 2021. Happy new year.' [sic]

Karima - who started dating the I Need You Tonight singer in summer 2019 - also shared the news, posting a similar photo of the pair in the bathroom, this one with Pro Green leaning out of the bath to kiss the mother-to-be.

Professor Green and actress Karima were first linked in July 2019, after he quietly split from PR executive Milly Gattegno.

They were reportedly introduced through mutual friends and made their public debut at Glastonbury Festival in late June, earlier that summer.

Couple: Professor Green and actress Karima were first linked in July 2019, after he quietly split from PR executive Milly Gattegno

Karima is best known for starring in the spy series Deep State alongside Game Of Thrones actor Joe Dempsie.

The actress, who is half Moroccan and half Irish, was born in Bethnal Green, east London. The star spent her childhood in Morocco before moving to London when she was seven.

She previously dated George Lamb for almost six years, before the couple parted ways in 2014.

Pro Green had also dated Fae Williams, and prior to that was married to reality star Millie Mackintosh.

The couple tied the knot at Babington House in Somerset in September 2013, but announced their split after two and a half years of marriage in February 2016.

The duo finalised their divorce in May 2016, the same week that Millie chose to go public with Hugo Taylor, her former Made In Chelsea co-star boyfriend with whom she had reunited.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She welcomed her third child at the end of April.

And Christina Milian, 39, didn't hesitate to take to Instagram and flaunt her curves in a strapless blue bikini on Sunday.

'Who that is? That's just my baby daddy,' wrote the Dip It Low hitmaker as she posed in front of her husband Matthieu Tota in PrettyLittleThing swimwear.

Dip it low: Christina Milian took to Instagram and flaunted her curves in a strapless blue bikini on Sunday

Christina looking sensational as she angled her pert posterior towards the camera with her hand running through her hair.

The singer showcased her thigh tattoos in the skimpy swimwear and accessorised with a dainty gold bracelet.

Her curly raven tresses cascaded over her shoulders and remained slicked back following her swim in the pool.



Christina looked flawless as she went full glam for the at home photo shoot and gave the camera a pensive gaze.

Wow: Christina looking sensational as she angled her pert posterior towards the camera with her hand running through her hair

The mother-of-three announced the arrival of her son in April as she shared a photo of her cradling the newborn and gushed about the new addition to her family.

'Kenna, Welcome to the world baby boy! Wow, What an adventure we've been on since the day he was conceived!', she wrote to Instagram.

'I thank God everyday for blessing me with his super active energy (wonder where he gets it from?) and now to meet our healthy baby boy?! Thankful. Blessed.'

Happy news: The mother-of-three announced the arrival of her son in April as she shared a photo of her cradling the newborn and gushed about the new addition to her family

The actress also has daughter Violet with her ex-husband The-Dream and son Isaiah with beau Matt.

The beauty and her beau, who've been an item for about two-and-a-half-years, welcomed their first child, son Isaiah, on January 20, 2020.

According to the French magazine Public, the couple got married shortly before they made their pregnancy announcement in December, although this is yet to be confirmed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kelly Brook was all smiles when she worked her best angles in a summery Heart FM photoshoot on Monday.

The model, 41, looked gorgeous wearing a thigh-skimming floral playsuit and posed for snaps alongside her co-host Jason King, who is filling in for Amanda Holden and Jamie Theakston alongside Kelly.

Kelly's glossy brunette hair cascaded in curls past her shoulders and the star looked delighted as she tucked into an ice-cream.

Photoshoot: Kelly Brook, 41, was all smiles when she worked her best angles in a summery Heart FM photoshoot on Monday

Summery: The model looked gorgeous wearing a thigh-skimming floral playsuit and was sporting an immaculate bright red manicure

Switching up her look, Kelly then slipped into a collared dress stamped with pink and orange flowers while Jason changed out of his patterned shirt into a plaid number.

The pair appeared to have a blast while posing in front of a neon Heart sign, with Kelly reclining on a beach chair.

The duo also incorporated a red pool float shaped like a heart into the upbeat shoot.

Later in the day, the brunette beauty beamed from ear to ear as she wrapped up her shift on the airwaves and made her way home.

Co-hosts: Kelly posed for snaps alongside her co-host Jason King, who is filling in for Amanda Holden and Jamie Theakston alongside the brunette beauty

Switch up: Switching up her look, Kelly then slipped into a collared dress stamped with pink and orange flowers

Working her best angles: Kelly worked her best angles while peering through a bright red heart-shaped pool float

Having a blast: The pair appeared to have a blast with Kelly reclining on a striped red and white beach chair

Kelly teamed her jumpsuit with white trainers, ensuring maximum comfort for the radio presenter.

Accessorising the outfit, she opted for a black quilted bag with chain detailing, which she slung over her left shoulder, and donned two necklaces.

Kelly's long dark caramel tresses tumbled over her shoulders as they were swept into a side parting with one side of her hair tucked behind her ear.

Wow: Kelly was all smiles as she stepped out after work at Heart radio in London on Monday wearing a thigh skimming floral playsuit

Stunning: The ensemble had a matching belt cinched in at her waist accentuating her curvaceous figure

The natural beauty kept it simple with her make up, with subtle eye shadow and a slick of nude lipstick.

It comes after Kelly revealed in June that it was 'so lonely' backstage on The Masked Dancer as the contestants had to keep their identities secret from each other and couldn't chat.

Speaking about not knowing who anyone was in the show, Kelly said: 'Yes it was so lonely backstage!

'We walk around with these jumpers on that say ''don't speak to us''.

Looking good: She made the cornflour blue and white ensemble a bit more casual by donning white trainers, ensuring maximum comfort for the radio presenter

'You're just backstage at Wembley thinking, is everyone else as terrified as I am?

'Because you don't have that camaraderie, so you can't share any of your experience, so you think you're the only one freaking out.

'But since the show has aired and we've figured out who everyone is, I've been talking to you Howard [Donald] and Bonnie [Langford], and everyone's like ''did you do this, did you feel like this'' and everyone was in the same boat really.'

The trio also discussed whether Kelly managed to correctly guess any of the other contestants, which included Zoe Ball as Llama and Christopher Dean as Beagle.

Kelly told Amanda and Jamie: 'Not really…I couldn't bear not knowing so I went on Twitter and once I saw all the fans guessing, then things started to make sense.

'I knew then that Squirrel must be Bonnie [Langford] because only Bonnie can move like that! To be honest I thought it was Ashley Roberts!'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dani Harmer is pregnant with her second child.

The Tracy Beaker star, 32, took to Instagram on Monday morning to announce the happy news that she's pregnant with baby number two.

Posting a sweet snap of herself, partner Simon Brough and their daughter Avarie-Belle, five, the pregnant actress confirmed she is due to give birth in February.

Congrats! Tracy Beaker star Dani Harmer, 32, has announced that she is pregnant with her second child. The actress took to Instagram on Monday morning to announce the happy news

In the snap, her daughter could be seen holding up a roll of ultrasound snaps while standing between her mum and dad.

Dani wrote: 'Han Solo had Chewie. Frodo had Sam. Shrek had Donkey.

'Now be prepared for the adventures of Avarie-Belle and as of yet unnamed bump, coming February 2022.'

Simon shared the same photo and caption, but added: '(hopefully not to a cinema near you).'

Then and now: Dani began playing the iconic role of Tracy Beaker in 2002 when she was just 12-years-old

Family: Dani and Simon Brough are already doting parents to daughter Avarie-Belle, five

Exciting! Simon added an extra line to the pregnancy announcement

Dani's celebrity pals were quick to congratulate the star in the comments section beneath the sweet photograph.

Dani recently reprised her role as the former tearaway teen Tracy Beaker in a reboot of the much-loved series based on Jacqueline Wilson's 2018 book.

In February, Dani appeared on The One Show, where she explained how playing Tracy Beaker once more is 'really nice' especially because her character has 'lost her selfishness' as a teen and is now a dedicated mother to daughter Jess, played by Emma Maggie Davies,.

She admitted: 'Being a mother myself, it completely changes you. So it's been really nice to play Tracy and see how she's lost that selfishness that she once has and she's all just about Jess.

Famous friends: Dani's celebrity pals were quick to congratulate the star in the comments section beneath the sweet photograph

Poor Tracy Beaker: Fans of the show will remember how Tracy, who lived in a care home, longed for her mother to come and take her home (pictured in throwback show still from 2002)

'But at the same time, she hasn't lost herself. She's still this fierce, strong female that she's always been.'

Dani began playing the iconic role of Tracy Beaker in 2002 when she was just 12-years-old.

And the former Strictly star reminisced about growing up famous, and noted how at one point, she didn't want to be known as Tracy Beaker after being constantly called by her alter-ego's name.

She said 'When I was younger, I used to get called Tracy a lot more than I got called Dani. At one point I was like "oh, can I just not be Tracy, just for a minute!".
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Daisy Lowe posted a slew of sun-soaked snaps on Instagram from her family holiday, including an image where she plants a sweet kiss on her boyfriend's cheek.

The 32-year-old model looked as happy as ever in the snap with her estate agent beau Jordan Saul, as they posed on the Greek island of Corfu.

The raven-haired beauty was pictured with other members of her family, including a snap with a younger male relative, Etienne Maclaine, as she posed for a windswept snap on a boat with the sun on her smiling face.

Cute: Daisy Lowe, 32, looked as happy as ever in the snap with her estate agent beau Jordan Saul, as they posed on the Greek island of Corfu

In another, she looked gorgeous as she donned a black and yellow granny square crochet dress with her arm around her younger half sister Betty Goffey.

Betty, 16, is from Daisy's mother, Pearl Lowe's, marriage to Supergrass drummer Danny Goffey.

The family were in good spirits as they posed for a photo while enjoying some time at a restaurant.

Glowing: The raven-haired beauty was pictured with other members of her family, including a snap with a younger male relative, Etienne Maclaine

Soaking up the hot Greek weather were Betty and Alfie Goffey with their father Danny, and their mother Pearl.

The last image in the 'photo dump' was a snap of the harbour where the family were staying.

The location looked idyllic with clear still water at sunset with boats on the jetty and mountains in the background.

The family seemed to have given a warm welcome to Daisy's beau Jordan, who works as a new home consultant for an estate agent.

Sisters: In another, she looked gorgeous as she donned a black and yellow granny square crochet dress with her arm around her younger half sister Betty Goffey

They were spotted for the first time together in June 2020 - despite being under government-ordered lockdown for 10 weeks.

Daisy took to Instagram in June to mark their first anniversary and reveal to her followers how she met her beau with a sweet post where she called Jordan her 'hero'.

She captioned the upload: 'A year ago today I went to meet @misstilda for a walk on the Heath…. But I was running a little late- Mercury was in retrograde [crying laughing emoji].

Stunning: The last image in the 'photo dump' was a snap of the harbour where the family were staying. The location looked idyllic with clear still water at sunset with boats on the jetty

'When I arrived, Monty ran straight towards a very handsome Belgium shepherd, attached to this handsome dog was a rather handsome man.

'I dawdled around having some dog chat… we ended up walking together for a couple of hours, what a dog walk!'

She continued: 'Here we are a year later, through countless lockdowns, adventures, disasters and triumphs. You @jordanjaysaul have been my hero.

'Through and through. Thanks for feeling like home & always making me giggle even when I really don’t want to! It’s my absolute favourite making you laugh so much your legs give way….

'I am very happy I was 5 mins late to meet Tilds that day & I am so very grateful you are mine. Happy anniversary my pain in the ass. I love you ♥️.' [sic]
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Victoria Beckham shared a hilarious picture of some 'urine' flavoured sour candy sweets she was tucking into on Sunday.

The fashion designer, 47, quipped that the tangy fluid was 'just what I'm looking for,' as she captured the snack to Instagram.

The 'urine' was served in a small container, imitating a traditional urine sample, and it featured the words, 'Urine for a treat, sour liquid candy "samples"' inked on the front. It also listed the ingredients in blue print.

Something for David? Victoria Beckham shared a hilarious picture of some 'urine' flavoured sour candy sweets she was tucking into on Sunday on Instagram

While Victoria's face wasn't featured in the photo, her stunning pink manicure and gold ring were both visible.

Last week, the former Spice Girl and husband David Beckham congratulated their son Cruz as he received his GCSE results on Thursday.

The former footballer took to his Instagram Stories and shared a recent heartwarming snap alongside Cruz, 16, where they wrapped their arms around each other.

The proud father, 46, wrote: 'Cruzie so proud well done big boy'.

Staying hydrated: The fashion designer, 47, quipped that the tangy fluid was 'just what I'm looking for,' as she captured the snack to Instagram

Victoria shared a photo of her son going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Record numbers of top grades were awarded to pupils doing their GCSE's this year, with 30 per cent of entries in England gaining grades 7 and above - equivalent to A and A*.

David and Victoria are also parents to sons Brooklyn, 22, Romeo, 18, and daughter Harper, 10.

It comes after the family recently enjoyed an evening out at Lucali restaurant in the New York City borough of Brooklyn.

Heartwarming: Victoria and her husband David Beckham congratulated their son Cruz, 16, as he received his GCSE results on Thursday

Proud: The mother-of-four shared a photo of her son going for a swim and wrote: 'Well done @cruzbeckham on your amazing school results! We are all so proud of you!!'

Fashion designer Victoria took to Instagram to share a sweet shot of her famous family during the evening with son Romeo notably missing.

'Special night tonight in NYC. I love you so much @davidbeckham @brooklynbeckham @cruzbeckham #HarperSeven We miss you @romeobeckham x Kisses from Brooklyn X VB,' she penned.

David rocked a casual black T-shirt, while Brooklyn and Cruz co-ordinated a white T-shirt and baseball cap look.

On Tuesday, David was hard at work at his football club Inter Miami and brought Harper along with him.

'Special night in NYC': David (centre bottom), 46, and Victoria ordered 'the best' pizza in the city with kids Harper, 10, Cruz (right) and Brooklyn (centre top), 22 last Saturday night

Tasty: 'Very happy with my pie,' David captioned a photo of his bleach-blonde self relishing his pizza

Taking to Instagram, he revealed that he was enjoying a kickabout on one of the club's pitches with his daughter and shared sweet footage of their game.

Filming Harper kick a ball to him, David could be heard commentating: 'Beckham, to Beckham, yeah!' before kicking the ball into the net.

He then passed the ball back to Harper, saying: 'Yes, pass it back. Nice. Get set - Beckham, to Beckham, woohoo!' as she also scored a goal.

David captioned the post: 'Daddy daughter day at work @intermiamicf BECKHAM to BECKHAM GOOOOAAAAALLL.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They star alongside each other in Truth Be Told.

And on Monday's Lorraine, Octavia Spencer, 51, and Kate Hudson, 42, enthused about their friendship and working together on the Apple+ crime series.

Octavia - who also produces the show - plays Poppy, an old friend of Kate's character Micah, and both women raved about each other's talents.

Happy ladies: On Monday's Lorraine, Octavia Spencer, 51, and Kate Hudson, 42, enthused about their friendship and working together on the Apple+ crime series Truth Be Told



Speaking to Ross King, Octavia gushed: 'Octavia the producer thinks of Kate, the actor, as one of the greatest actors out there and it's an honour that she said yes, because she made our season that much more fun - for Octavia the actor - but also for our viewing audience because she brings such a richness, such a depth to Micah.

'Octavia the actor is excited to be working on a show that's extremely fun and a genre that I actually do watch every night.'

Kate added: 'Octavia loves true crime, I can attest to this. Octavia not only knows every true crime series - or has seen it - but also she knows things that are happening in real life.

'She gets really into how crazy some of these stories are. So if there's anybody to be producing a true crime show, it's Octavia.'

Women supporting women: Both women raved about each other's talents

Speaking of Octavia as a producer, Kate joked: 'She demanded so much of me, we had some really tough times on set!

Kate continued: '[Ross] you've interviewed a lot of people and I'm sure they always say it comes from the top. When you have great energy on set and you have a really great leader, that's where it all trickles down from.

'Octavia is that leader, she is just absolutely loveable, warm, generous, smart, attentive, makes everybody work at their best.'

Speaking about the extra pressures of producing during a pandemic, Octavia explained: 'Our escape as a society, as a world for this pandemic, is your creative outlets - books and your viewing pleasure, so I think it's incumbent upon us to put out material that allows for a little escapism.

Talented: Octavia - who also produces the show - plays Poppy in Truth Be Told

'I'm excited that doing a true crime show like Truth Be Told, we have active viewership. You're sitting on the edge of your seat and for me, I'm a fan of the genre and so I would literally watch it in one day if I could.'

Commenting on the show's plot, Kate said: 'You have these moments that go beyond just the who dunnit, it's also how we're all related to each other so it's got a really juicy… I think it's going to keep a lot of people engaged.'

Of their own friendship, Octavia revealed: 'We had met in passing at some sort of awards event and we're fans of each other. And just to play opposite someone who is always ready to play and mix it up.

In character: In The Apple+ series, Kate plays Micah, an old friend of Poppy's

'There were times when Kate would always keep me guessing - something in rehearsal and she would bring something different to each take we filmed, which made it really exciting.'

Kate agreed: 'We could disarm each other and at the same time I think, Octavia and I could make each other cry in five seconds. We really did energetically feed off each other.'

Octavia added: 'Having a scene partner and a season partner in Kate was just really, really fun.'

And on revealing any secrets about Octavia, Kate said: 'I will never tell!' To which Octavia sang: 'That's what friends are for.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ulrika Jonsson has marked her 54th birthday with a playful series of selfies that appear to have been taken from the comfort of her bed.

Ringing in her special day on Instagram on Monday, the TV star looked radiant while pulling faces for her social media followers and declaring: 'This is 54.'

Posting a lengthy caption alongside the intimate snaps, Ulrika branded herself 'a complicated soul' and 'a lioness of boundless proportions'.

Birthday: Ulrika Jonsson has marked her 54th birthday with a playful series of selfies that appear to be taken from the comfort of her bed

Special day: Ringing in her special day on Instagram on Monday, the TV star looked fresh-faced while pulling faces for her social media followers and declaring: 'This is 54'

Ulrika wrote in full: 'This is 54. Happy Birthday, to me. What I know so far: I'm a lioness of boundless proportions. I am fierce; I am loyal. Passion courses through my veins; fire scorches my heart and imagination canters like a wild horse through my buoyant, tangled mind.

'I love with reckless abandon and ardour at times when caution and circumspection might be the order of the day. Lying down with lions has never perturbed me. But the futility of attempting to change the shape of my heart has never been lost on me. I am who I am.'

She added: 'I may be too much. But I am never not enough. I'm instinctive and intuitive. An empath; a lover, a carer and nurturer. I am learning to put myself first but it turns out to be a vigorous lesson to learn. I am a woman of substance. I am a complicated soul.'

Ulrika concluded: 'I can be apprehensive and impatient. And I don't like goat's cheese.'

'Complicated soul': Posting a lengthy caption alongside the intimate snaps, Ulrika branded herself 'a complicated soul' and 'a lioness of boundless proportions'

Ulrika's birthday post comes four days after she returned from Corfu, where she had been visiting her eldest daughter, Bo.

While there, the doting mother shared plenty of sunny snaps with her followers, including a sizzling series of bathroom selfies in which she donned a bright yellow bikini.

Ulrika added: 'I love with reckless abandon and ardour at times when caution and circumspection might be the order of the day'

Ulrika set off for her mother-daughter holiday shortly after revealing her youngest son Malcolm, 13, finally had settled status in the UK and can remain for an 'indefinite period'.

Malcolm recently returned from America where his advertising executive father Brian Monet is from.

Ulrika said the thought of him being 'adopted abroad' would have been 'messy' so she is grateful to have him back home.

The media personality took to Instagram earlier in August to share a snap of Malcolm posing with a lightsaber.

Alongside the post, she wrote: 'Tonight I had a 27min instruction on lightsabers from the youngest Ungrateful.

Ulrika concluded: 'I can be apprehensive and impatient. And I don't like goat's cheese'

'He has just returned from the States where he custom made one. Himself.

'This is important because today I was told by the @ukhomeoffice that this half-yank, half-Viking boy has been given leave to stay in this country for an indefinite period. He finally has Settled Status.

'Which is a huge relief because the thought of having him adopted abroad was gonna be messy.

Age-defying: Ulrika's birthday post comes four days after she returned from Corfu, where she had been visiting her eldest daughter, Bo, and the star shared snaps of her holiday

Relieved: Ulrika revealed her youngest son Malcolm (pictured), 13, has finally settled status in the UK and can remain for an 'indefinite period'

'So thank you, UK for letting me keep him by my side. And if anyone is interested in lightsabers, you know where to find the bugger.'

Ulrika was married to ex-husband Brian for eleven years before the couple parted ways in 2019.

She is also mother to son Cameron, 26, with John Turnbull, daughter Bo with ex Markus Kempen and daughter Martha, 17, with Lance Gerrard-Wright.

Ex: Malcolm recently returned from America where his advertising executive father Brian Monet is from. Ulrika pictured with Brian in 2013
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Madonna turned 63-years-old on Monday and seemed to already be celebrating her big day the night before.

The Queen Of Pop shared several images to her Instagram account that documented another year around the sun as she seemed to be in good spirits with her nearest and dearest.

The blonde beauty was dressed in a pale blue silk print dress as she wore her hair down in soft waves while posing with her kids, including eldest children Lourdes, 24, and Rocco, 21, as well as her boyfriend Ahlamalik Williams, 27.

Here we go: Madonna turned 63-years-old on Monday and seemed to already be celebrating her big day the night before

Also seen was GoodFellas actress, Debi Mazar, 57, who has been pals with Madonna since the 1980s.

'Let the Birthday Games Begin,' said the Truth Or Dare star as she added a blue and purple heart emoji.

The beauty, who has been married twice - Guy Ritchie (2000–2008), Sean Penn (1985–1989) - also has kids David Banda, 15, Mercy James, 15, and twins Estere and Stella Ciccone, eight.

The Borderline singer was also seen licking an ice cream cone as she stared at the camera seductively while her beau put his tongue out while closing his eyes. His hand rested on Madonna's thigh.

A little lick: The musician shared an ice cream waffle cone with her boyfriend Ahlamalik Williams, 27. The Borderline singer stared at the camera seductively while her beau put his tongue out while closing his eyes. His hand rested on Madonna's thigh

A little selfie from Madame X: She also licked the cone herself as she wore rings that spelled MDNA, which is the name of one of her albums

The Like A Prayer crooner also had a deep blue purse over her shoulder as she held hands with her beau while waking down a path.

And she had on layers of necklaces as she was seen holding a glass of rose wine while posing by a stone building.

Lourdes opted for a black bikini top with short skirt and a sequined purse on her lap. Her dark hair was worn down in braids. Her modeling career is growing: she is on the September cover of Vogue with Kaia Gerber.

Madonna also had her arm around Rocco as he modeled a blue-and-white striped shirt with plaid slacks.

A look at this May/December couple: Madonna and her beau have almost 40 years between them but it does not get in their way as they savor their sweet moments together like this one as they holds hands

Her celeb pals wished Madge well. Kelly Ripa said, 'Happy Birthday, iconic,' adding a heart emoji. Donatella Versace said, 'Happy birthday to the one and only!!! You look AMAZING!!!!'

This post comes after news of her new partnership with Warner Music Group will see her entire catalogue reissued over the next few years.

The pop icon is set to celebrate her 40th year in the recording industry in 2022 and she is now poised to personally curate deluxe editions for many of her landmark albums as part of the agreement with Warner.

The family: The Queen Of Pop shared several images to her Instagram account that documented another year around the sun as she seemed to be in good spirits with her nearest and dearest; here she is with Rocco and Lourdes with Debi Mazar behind her

Budding model: Lourdes opted for a black bikini top with short skirt and a sequined purse on her lap. Her dark hair was worn down in braids. She is on the cover of Vogue this month

Sharing sugar with her friends: Seen here with Nicolas Huchard and Daniele Sibilli

Madonna - who released her debut single with Warner in 1982 - said: 'Since the very beginning, Warner Music Group has helped bring my music and vision to all my fans around the world with the utmost care and consideration.

'They have been amazing partners, and I am delighted to be embarking on this next chapter with them to celebrate my catalogue from the last 40 years.'

The new partnership will include Madonna's entire Sire/Maverick/Warner catalogue, which includes some of her best-known work such as 'Like a Virgin' and 'Like a Prayer', as well as some of her more recent albums, such as 'MDNA' and 'Rebel Heart'.

The little ones: The beauty, who has been married twice - Guy Ritchie (2000–2008), Sean Penn (1985–1989) - also has kids David Banda, 15, Mercy James, 15, and twins Estere and Stella Ciccone, eight. The twins seen here with pals

He loves to have fun: David seen with a daisy in his mouth and a pearl necklace on his neck

So much red power: A bouquet of red peppers were seen in a clay vase

Guy Oseary, Madonna's long-time manager, helped to seal the landmark deal and has promised to bring 'new life' to her records.

He explained: 'Over the past 30 years, I've been fortunate enough to meet and spend time with many of Madonna's incredible fans, and this new partnership will bring to fruition what so many of them have been patiently waiting for: a celebration of her ground-breaking catalogue.

'My partner Sara Zambreno and I are working closely with Warner Music Group to bring new life to these iconic works.'

So chic: The Like A Prayer crooner also had a deep blue purse over her shoulder as she held on to a glass of rose wine

Such a beautiful place to celebrate: She wrote 'Mambo's Birthday!' on this image

Max Lousada, the CEO of Recorded Music at Warner Music Group, hailed Madonna as an 'incomparable superstar'.

He added: 'Madonna has changed the course of pop and dance music, while taking live performance to new heights of drama and invention. At the same time, she uses her fame to amplify some of the most important social issues and movements of our time.

'Constantly and fearlessly challenging convention, her four decades of music are not only an extraordinary body of work, but a playbook for creative and cultural evolution.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pawn Stars vet Rick Harrison filed for divorce from his wife Deanna Burditt one year ago.

And only now did TMZ stumble across the paperwork, saying the combined drama of COVID-19 and the George Floyd protests buried the filing.

The reality TV star, 56, said in the divorce documents that he wanted to split with his wife of seven years because their 'mental dispositions' had become so different.

The store owner also said that he and his wife, 45, had 'mutually' decided to end the marriage.

They snuck in the split: Pawn Stars vet Rick Harrison filed for divorce from wife Deanna one year ago. And only now did TMZ stumble across the paperwork, saying COVID-19 and the George Floyd protests allowed the paperwork to be looked over. Seen in 2015

Rick had written into the documents that their 'tastes, mental dispositions, views, likes, and dislikes have become so divergent that they have become incompatible in marriage.'

And it was added that there is no chance to reconcile.

Rick and Deana reached a settlement agreement in September 2020. That means they have already taken care of how much alimony and support she will get and who will take which property.

No on the same wavelength: The reality TV star, 56, said in the divorce documents that he wants to split with his wife of seven years because their 'mental dispositions' have become so different. Seen in 2015

Though they never had children together, he helped raise her three daughters from a previous relationship. She was married twice before tying the knot with Rick.

They became engaged in 2012 then wed in Laguna Beach, California in 2013.

According to People, they wed in front of 180 guests with his co-star Chumlee as the ring bearer and Counting Cars star Danny Koker as the minister. A band called Steel Panther played music.

Early days of love: Seen in 2013, the year they wed, at Andrea's Restaurant grand opening at the Wynn Las Vegas & Encore Resort Featuring

Harrison was also wed to Kim Harrison from 1982 until 1985, then Tracy Harrison from 1986 until 2011. Rick has three kids: Corey, 38, Adam, 37, and Jake.

Rick - whose full name is Richard Kevin Harrison - is the owner of the Gold & Silver Pawn Shop in Las Vegas.

The shop is the backdrop for his successful Pawn Stars show which featured his father, Richard Benjamin Harrison - who went by Old Man - as the wise old know-it-all sage.

The team: Pawn Stars with Corey Harrison, Rick Harrison and Richard Harrison in their Las Vegas shop that opened in 1989

He passed away in 2018.

The two other stars of the show are Corey 'Big Hoss' Harrison and Austin 'Chumlee' Russell.

The shop was started in 1989 and in 2009 the reality TV show began to film there.

The show sees people bring in their items to sell. The pieces range from jewelry to guns to Civil War memorabilia.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She certainly is having the time of her life while in Europe this summer.

In July model-turned-DJ Chantel Jeffries had fun with her friends while along the Amalfi Coast in Italy then she moved on to Mykonos in Greece.

And this week the ex-girlfriend of Justin Bieber was seen getting a tan in a teeny bikini while on the pristine beaches in Ibiza, Spain.

Sun worshipper: She certainly is having the time of her life while in Europe this summer. In July model-turned-DJ Chantel Jeffries had fun in Italy then Greece. And this week she was seen getting a tan in a teeny bikini while on the pristine beaches in Ibiza, Spain

The star was sitting on a lounge chair on the beach as she showed off a colorful string bikini with little flowers here and there.

Her hair was worn down in soft curls and she had minimal makeup on with clear sunglasses and gold jewelry on. Her purse went with her bikini and the book that she was reading, Thinking In Systems, as she flashed blue nails.

Last month she was on the Greek island of Mykonos. The cover girl captioned the post, 'Tyche ❤️‍🔥🌬' and tagged Revolve.

Chantel, who lives in Miami, stretched out by the pool on an orange towel in a two-piece black bathing suit by Camila Coelho Collection.

So matchy: Her purse went with her bikini and the book that she was reading, Thinking In Systems as she flashed blue nails

Color queen: The star was sitting on a lounge chair on the beach as she showed off a colorful string bikini with little flowers here and there. Her hair was worn down in soft curls and she had minimal makeup on with clear sunglasses and gold jewelry on

She wore a large trucker hat on top of her wavy, sandy blonde hair that read 'God's favorite' in white lettering.

In a second photo the beauty posed on a beach with lounge chairs behind her while her eyes gazed out of the camera's frame.

She wore a necklace with a pendant and earrings in multiple ear piercings.

Always connected: The budding star had in her pods in white so she could listen to music

The beach babe also posted a video clip of herself jumping into the ocean for a quick swim. She added a final photo of her wet hair slicked back with the turquoise sea as her backdrop.

Ceejay the DJ, as she refers to herself on Instagram, is a former military kid and used to travel often as her parents moved her and her siblings from Coronado to North Carolina to Virginia and other places along the way.

These days she keeps busy posting lifestyle content and music to her YouTube channel where she enthralls over 1 million subscribers.

A looker: The beauty, who used to date Justin Bieber, posed on a beach with lounge chairs behind her while her eyes gazed out of the camera's frame in Greece

Tan and tatted: The DJ showed off her ink in this photo with her wet hair slicked back and the turquoise sea as her backdrop

Jeffries has been on a European vacation for the past couple weeks, along with a slew of stunning Instagram models including Cindy Wolfy and Armie Hammer's ex Paige Lorenze as part of Revolve Summer.

Chantel has posted snaps from Ravello and Positano and has been eating her way through the idyllic towns.

Prior to flying overseas she had begun to perform in-person shows again, most recently doing several shows in Miami Beach.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ashlee Simpson hit a fashion high note as she enjoyed a day with her family on Sunday.

The Pieces Of Me songstress, 36, exuded style in a black lace tank top tucked into a pair of high-waist blue jeans.

Ashlee was spotted strolling through Los Angeles in the company of her husband Evan Ross, 32, and their daughter Jagger, six.

Jean-ius! Ashlee Simpson hit a fashion high note as she enjoyed a day with her family in Los Angeles on Sunday

The hitmaker looked stunning with her blonde locks slicked back into a ponytail, putting her done-up complexion on full show.

She glammed up the look with gold hoop earrings, necklaces, and a quilted green bag.

The Autobiography hit-maker finished off the look with a pair of peep toe gold-accented flats.

Her doting husband carried their eldest child together as they strolled down the pavement together.

Family first: Her doting husband carried their eldest child together as they strolled down the pavement together

Evan and Ashlee tied the knot in August 2014 in a ceremony officiated by the groom's superstar mother who also sang at the reception.

Along with little Jagger they also share an infant son called Ziggy whom they welcomed into the world last October.

Ashlee also has a 12-year-old son called Bronx Mowgli Wentz with her ex-husband Pete Wentz who shot to fame as part of Fall Out Boy.

Golden girl: She dressed up the look with dazzling hoop earrings, necklaces, and gold-accented flats

A few years ago Ashlee and Evan dished to Us Weekly about the process of co-parenting Bronx with Pete and his girlfriend Meagan Camper.

'I think the fact that there is a lot of respect amongst all of us. That makes it easier. And we're all really close friends. It's easy, we got really lucky with that,' said Evan.

Ashlee meanwhile gushed that her ex and his girlfriend were 'wonderful' and that she 'lucked out' in her circumstances.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eight-time Grammy nominee Avril Lavigne rocked a red cut-out bikini top to enjoy Malibu beach with her boyfriend Mod Sun on Sunday.

The Canadian 36-year-old passionately kissed the 34-year-old Minnesota native after 'jumping in the ocean' together.

'We did it. Summertime!' Mod Sun (born Derek Ryan Smith) gushed.

Still going strong! Eight-time Grammy nominee Avril Lavigne rocked a red cut-out bikini top to enjoy Malibu beach with her boyfriend Mod Sun on Sunday

'You look so pretty.'

Avril made sure to share all the PDA and fun from her afternoon with her captive, combined 93.5M social media followers.

'Summer in Malibu,' Lavigne captioned a video of her frolicking in the surf with a white crop-top and black shorts.

'Summertime with my love!' The Canadian 36-year-old (R) passionately kissed the 34-year-old Minnesota native (L) after 'jumping in the ocean' together

Mod Sun (born Derek Ryan Smith) gushed: 'We did it. Summertime! You look so pretty.'

Beaming: Avril made sure to share all the PDA and fun from her afternoon with her captive, combined 93.5M social media followers

Lavigne captioned a video of her frolicking in the surf with a white crop-top and black shorts: 'Summer in Malibu'

'His and hers': Later, the pop-punk couple bought 'new sk8boards' in camouflage print

'Sk8er' girl: Avril then coasted towards the camera, flashing the middle finger salute, as she skateboarded on the patio of her $7.8M Malibu mansion

Later, the pop-punk couple bought 'new sk8boards' in 'his and hers' camouflage print.

Avril then coasted towards the camera, flashing the middle finger salute, as she skateboarded on the patio of her $7.8M Malibu mansion.

Lavigne and Mod Sun began dating around the time they recorded their duet Flames back in December with producer and Goldfinger frontman John Feldmann.

Started in the studio: Lavigne and Mod Sun began dating around the time they recorded their duet Flames back in December with producer and Goldfinger frontman John Feldmann (R, pictured December 11)

Twice divorced: The Sk8er Boi rocker divorced Nickelback frontman Chad Kroeger (L) in 2015 after two years of marriage, and she divorced Sum 41 frontman Deryck Whibley (R) in 2010 after three years of marriage

'I will always love you!' Meanwhile, the No Escape rocker was previously in an open 19-month relationship with Bella Thorne, which ended in 2019 (pictured in 2019)

The Sk8er Boi rocker divorced Nickelback frontman Chad Kroeger in 2015 after two years of marriage, and she divorced Sum 41 frontman Deryck Whibley in 2010 after three years of marriage.

Meanwhile, the No Escape rocker was previously in an open 19-month relationship with Bella Thorne, which ended in 2019.

Mod Sun will kick off his 17-date Internet Killed the Rockstar Tour on September 5 at the Bottle Rock Festival in Napa alongside openers Girlfriends and Tyler Posey.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Deon Cole dropped to his knees after his team lost the Fast Money round on Sunday's episode of Celebrity Family Feud by just one point.

The 49-year-old actor and his sister Brooklynn Martin partnered for the Fast Money round after their team beat Tisha Campbell, 52, and her squad during the first main game.

The Black-ish star and Brooklynn needed 200 points to win $25,000 for Stand Up For Cancer and were given the same five survey questions to answer.

Deon Cole dropped to his knees after his team lost the Fast Money round on Sunday's episode of Celebrity Family Feud by just one point

Deon after the first 20-second round scored 104 points.

He gained a whopping 41 points on the fourth survey question 'Name something that rings' when he answered 'Phone', which was the number one answer.

Show host Steve Harvey, 64, for the fifth survey question asked Deon to 'name something the congregation does during a church service'.

'Pass the collection plate,' Deon answered.

Family affair: The 49-year-old actor and his sister Brooklynn Martin partnered for the Fast Money round

Steve, who who looked typically dapper in a red velvet suit with matching shirt and tie, later revealed that only two people answered the survey the same and the two points was Deon's lowest score.

Brooklynn who competed with 25 seconds on the clock also answered 'Telephone' for the fourth survey question and after being buzzed for the repeat answer replied, 'Doorbell'.

That answer brought the team's total to 199 points with only one point needed to win the grand prize for charity.

Tense moment: Show host Steve Martin and Brooklynn reacted as he announced the results

Deon's team that also consisted of Kelly Kali, Ocean Glapton and Kimberly Turner spun around in shock as Steve giggled.

'We are one point away,' Steve said.

'Lord, Jesus,' Deon exclaimed as he fell to his knees and Brooklyn encouraged him to pray.

Prayer time: 'Lord, Jesus,' Deon exclaimed as he fell to his knees and Brooklyn encouraged him to pray

'All y'all, pray,' Brooklynn said as her team dropped to their knees seeking divine intervention.

'You wouldn't have to pray to him, Deon, if you hadn't said ''collection plate'',' Steve quipped and laughed at his own joke.

Brooklynn then covered her eyes and turned away as Steve turned to the big board.

Good one: 'You wouldn't have to pray to him, Deon, if you hadn't said ''collection plate'',' Steve quipped and laughed at his own joke

Divine intervention: Deon and Kelly sought divine intervention

'Name something the congregation does during a church service. You said, they ''Clap''. Survey said ...,' Steve announced before a buzzer rang and a score of zero was revealed.

Deon fell to his hands and knees as the entire studio gasped.

'What church they don't clap at?,' Brooklynn said aloud.

'No clapping. Number one answer was ''sing''. I know you're supposed to clap. It's a Black church. That's okay. We still got $10,000 for Stand Up To Cancer,' Steve said.

One point: Deon's team needed only one point to win $25,000 for Stand Up To Cancer

Good question: 'What church they don't clap at?,' Brooklynn said aloud

Good effort: Deon's team that also consisted of Kelly Kali, Ocean Glapton and Kimberly Turner

So close: Brooklynn and Deon were so close in the Fast Money round to winning $25,000 for charity

First game: Tisha Campbell was head of a team that included Jennifer Freeman, Dani Wright, Terra Shockley and Stanley Campbell

The second game featured Kevin Smith, 51, leading his Smod Squad team that included his longtime collaborator Jason Mewes, 47, his wife Jennifer Schwalbach Smith, 50, as well as Marc Bernardin and Ralph Garman.

They went up against Justin Long, 43, who was captain of a team that included his brother Christian, 39, actress Diana Gettinger, 45, Justin's cousin Rich Long and James Duffy.

Justin's team scored 176 points after the first question and the Mod Squad stole 100 points on the second question.

Second game: The second game featured Kevin Smith, 51, leading his Smod Squad team that included his longtime collaborator Jason Mewes, 47, his wife Jennifer Schwalbach Smith, 50, as well as Marc Bernardin and Ralph Garman

Long brothers: Justin Long, 43, was captain of a team that included his brother Christian, 39, actress Diana Gettinger, 45, Justin's cousin Rich Long and James Duffy

Fan favorite: Kevin was excited to be on the ABC show

Longtime collaborator: Jason Mewes joined Kevin on his team

Point values were tripled for the third question, 'Name something you keep in the kitchen in case a party breaks out?' and Justin's team after three strikes still won after Kevin tried to steal with an answer of 'ice'.

Justin and Christian then teamed up for the Fast Money round and got off to an inauspicious start as Christian produced just 84 points.

They rallied, however, as Justin made up the difference and they won $25,000 for the Hole In The Wall Gang Camp founded by the late Paul Newman.

Close game: Justin's team scored 176 points after the first question and the Mod Squad stole 100 points on the second question

Winning team: Justin and Christian then teamed up for the Fast Money round and got off to an inauspicious start as Christian produced just 84 points, but Justin rallied for the win

Good answers: Diana provided some solid answers for her team

Squaring off: Steve stood between Diana and Jennifer as they squared off
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mike Shouhed admitted that he had an addiction to attention amid a break from girlfriend Paulina Ben-Cohen during Sunday's season finale of Shahs Of Sunset.

The 42-year-old reality star made the revelations during a group trip organized by Golnesa 'GG' Gharachedaghi, 39, on the season nine episode titled High And Dry.

Mike fled a cannabis-fueled animal spirit exercise in which his bat persona and its description of being 'faithful' was mocked by 'hyena' Reza Farahan, 48, who starting laughing at the idea.

Attention addiction: Mike Shouhed admitted that he had an addiction to attention amid a break from girlfriend Paulina Ben-Cohen during Sunday's season finale of Shahs Of Sunset

'This is so f***ing crazy. This is the same song and dance. Like, damn, you're hurting me. You're my brother. If you're a hyena, you act like a hyena does. Reza, you bite through the bone,' Mike told his frenemy.

Mike claimed that felt bullied and Reza accused him of playing the victim.

Destiney Rose, 38, interjected and stated that Paulina was 'not here for a reason' and urged Mike to stop pretending that his life was perfect.

He admitted that raunchy text messages that Paulina found created 'a lot of problems', but denied giving Paulina any other reason to distrust him.

Opening up: The 42-year-old reality star made the revelations during a group trip

'That's a lie,' Destiney told him.

'Okay, I'm completely done, 'cause I'm not gonna play this game,' Mike said as he left the group.

Mike privately spoke with Mercedes Javid, 49, who told Mike that his actions weren't matching his intentions.

Called out: 'That's a lie,' Destiney Rose said after Mike said he never gave Paulina reason to distrust him besides those raunchy texts

'Your intentions are, I will never hurt Paulina. In reality, you harmed and shattered and broke her heart,' MJ told him.

'Yes, I broke her heart,' Mike admitted.

MJ asked Mike to walk her through it and he shared that Paulina does not like him communicating with other women

Candid conversation: Mike privately spoke with Mercedes Javid, 49, who told Mike that his actions weren't matching his intentions

'I thrive off that attention. I do. I seek it, which is a problem,' Mike said.

Mike said he had to deal with it or risk losing 'the battle of having Paulina in my life.

'You're not gonna lose that battle,' MJ said.

Tough love: 'Your intentions are, I will never hurt Paulina. In reality, you harmed and shattered and broke her heart,' MJ told him

'There's deep love that we have for each other, but above that there's some f***ing damage that was done. We're taking a few days of break and just giving each other some space, and that's that,' Mike said.

'So, you guys broke up?,' MJ asked.

'No, hell no. There's no breaking up in me and Paulina's relationship because we both don't think that way,' Mike said.

A break: 'No, hell no. There's no breaking up in me and Paulina's relationship because we both don't think that way,' Mike said

Mike then clarified that he didn't mean they took a relationship break, but just a break from each other.

They rejoined the group where GG had another exercise in which they wrote down what they wanted to release and then tossed the paper into a fire.

'The whole point of this trip, the whole thing I've been waiting for, is this moment right here, for everyone to say out loud to all of us what it is that you want, your intentions,' GG said.

Intentions known: 'The whole point of this trip, the whole thing I've been waiting for, is this moment right here, for everyone to say out loud to all of us what it is that you want, your intentions,' GG said

Mike participated and said, 'I want to let go of the idea that everything is perfect, and I need to become better at being open and honest about it.'

The next morning MJ and Reza talked about Mike and his 'break' with Paulina who Mike admitted does not forgive easily.

Mike during breakfast apologized for skipping out the night before and thanked his friends for allowing him to have a breakthrough.

Letting go: Mike participated and said, 'I want to let go of the idea that everything is perfect, and I need to become better at being open and honest about it'

He admitted that he went into his shell to keep from getting hurt, but realized they will never trust him if he doesn't stop fooling himself.

Mike said his biggest fear was losing Paulina and Reza blurted out that MJ told him they were on a break.

'No, we're not on a break. We're taking a break from each other while we're here. There are some issues in our relationship,' Mike said.

Blurted out: Mike said his biggest fear was losing Paulina and Reza blurted out that MJ told him they were on a break

Some issues: 'No, we're not on a break. We're taking a break from each other while we're here. There are some issues in our relationship,' Mike said

Mike told his friends that social media had become a 'big problem' and he thrived on the attention.

'Because my whole thing is or what I'm trying to fight, is that chase that I f***ing like, and me getting off on the fact that I still can pull some f***ing a**, and it's a f***ing problem. I f***ing need to f***ing work on that s***, that I f***ing allow my horniness,' Mike said.

GG chimed in that he should let go of Paulina and stop hurting her and her children while he's trying to get himself together.

Good question: GG's sister Leila asked Mike if he could be monogamous

Reza asked Mike if he pushed it past the point of no return with Paulia.

'I don't know. I'm hopeful that I didn't,' he replied.

Mike admitted that Paulina caught him having an online conversation before he left on the trip.

Caught again: Mike admitted that Paulina caught him having an online conversation before he left on the trip

'I'm addicted to attention,' Mike said.

'Of course, I like attention. It's human nature. If someone tells you, you look attractive today, you feel good about yourself, right? But I take it too far,' he added in a confessional.

Mike said he was capable of being monogamous and declared they were going to see a 'new Mike'.

Human nature: Mike admitted that Paulina caught him having an online conversation before he left on the trip

The organizer: GG was impressed by Mike opening up and being honest

'A part of me doesn't believe it because I've heard this thing that he does all the time. 'I'm trying to get to a better place,' blah, blah, blah. But I also do hope that he's really taking the steps to make himself better. I really do. I'm that dumb b**** that believes there's always a rainbow on the other side of a rainy day,' Destiney said in a confessional.

The episode also showed Reza writing an apology letter to MJ's husband Tommy who has forbidden his son Shams from meeting Reza after a nasty falling out.

MJ delivered the letter, but Tommy ripped it up without reading it.

The Shahs Of Sunset will return next week with first reunion episode.

Heard before: 'A part of me doesn't believe it because I've heard this thing that he does all the time. 'I'm trying to get to a better place,' blah, blah, blah. But I also do hope that he's really taking the steps to make himself better. I really do. I'm that dumb bitch that believes there's always a rainbow on the other side of a rainy day,' Destiney said in a confessional

Off limits: Reza looked hurt as he watched MJ talk to her baby sons Shams who he still has not met

Apology note: The episode also showed Reza writing an apology letter to MJ's husband Tommy who has forbidden his son Shams from meeting Reza after a nasty falling out

Tore up: Tommy tore up Reza's not without even reading it
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Patrick Mahomes and Brittany Matthews' baby daughter Sterling is already a music connoisseur.

Brittany, 25, posted an adorable video of her five-month-old daughter strapped into her baby carrier on Saturday as she showed off her sense of rhythm.

The tot managed to bounce along perfectly in time to Soulja Boy Tell 'Em's song Rick N' Morty.

Letting loose: Patrick Mahomes' fiancée Brittany Matthews, 25, shared an adorable video on Saturday of her five-month-old daughter sterling bouncing along to a rap song.

Little Sterling looked super cute in a white onesie with prink frilly shoulders and a colorful sprinkles design.

She also wore a large floppy bowed handbag while nestled in her Jolly Jumper. T

Sterling jumped up and down on a pink mat with her name printed on it while doing an admirable job of staying on the beat.

'@patrickmahomes made me do it,' Brittany joked in her caption while adding a tears of laughter emoji.

She's got the beat: Little Sterling looked super cute in a white onesie with prink frilly shoulders and a colorful sprinkles design as she bobbed on tempo to Soulja Boy Tell 'Em's song Rick N' Morty in her Jolly Jumper

Visiting: On Thursday, the Kansas City Chiefs quarterback posted a sweet family photo with Brittany by his side and Sterling cradled in his arm. They were visiting him at his training camp

She also posted a copy of the video to her Instagram Stories and captioned it: 'She. Is. The. Cutest.'

Brittany and Patrick announced that she was pregnant with their first child, a girl, back in September of last year, and baby Sterling was born on February 20 of this year.

On Thursday, the Kansas City Chiefs quarterback posted a sweet family photo with Brittany by his side and Sterling cradled in his arm.

Brittany wore a black-and-white T-shirt with red short and white trainers, while Sterling had on a black-and-white dress with red Converse sneakers and a matching bow and Patrick was suited up in his Chiefs uniform.

His fiancée and daughter were making a visit to his training camp with the Chiefs.

'Sterling's First Camp!' he wrote, while Brittany captioned a similar post with, 'It's Game Day, and we could not be more excited for Season Starting!! Sterling is ready.'

The latest: The NFL star, 25, and Brittany are set to get married in 2022. They've dated since high school and got engaged on September 1, 2020, the day he received his first Super Bowl championship ring; seen in 2019 in Atlanta

Patrick and Brittany got engaged on September 1, 2020, the same day that he received his Super Bowl championship ring.

The sweethearts, who have been together since they were in high school, have already picked out a venue and a date for the upcoming nuptials.

Although they're keeping those details secret for now, Brittany shared in March on Instagram that they're planning on tying the knot in 2022.

Last month, Brittany's friend Sydni Paige revealed on Instagram that members of the wedding party had received lavish gifts ahead of the ceremony.

Among the gifts was a silk robe embroidered with her name and a gold Cartier Love bangle valued at $6,900.

Jackson Mahomes, Patrick's younger brother, revealed that he had been sent flask and a bottle of Fireball whisky, as well as an expensive silver Rolex Submariner wristwatch.

Pricy: Last month, Brittany's friend Sydni Paige revealed on Instagram that members of the wedding party had received lavish gifts ahead of the ceremony

Luxurious: Among Sydni's gifts were a silky robe with her name embroidered on it and a gold Cartier Love bangle valued at $6,900
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nicole Scherzinger was seen leaving a taping of The Masked Singer in Los Angeles on Sunday evening.

The 43-year-old performer appeared to be enjoying the spotlight as she wore a glammed-up outfit while taking a solo stroll after finishing up the night's work.

The Pussycat Dolls member has worked on the reality singing competition series ever since its premiere in 2019 and has previously spoken about her enjoyment of being a panelist.

Working hard: Nicole Scherzinger was seen taking a stroll after finishing a taping of The Masked Singer in Los Angeles on Sunday evening

Scherzinger wore a dual-tone green dress that notably featured a sparkling right side and a flat left during the taping.

She paired her outfit with a pair of slightly lighter high-heeled shoes as she took a post-event stroll.

The actress accessorized with several articles of jewelry, including a sparkling ring worn on her left hand.

Her gorgeous brunette hair cascaded onto her shoulders and backside as she made her way around the taping area.

Eye-catching ensemble: The performer sported a green dress and slightly lighter heels for the show's taping

Scherzinger has been involved with The Masked Singer ever since its inception in 2019.

The show is based on the Korean show King of Mask Singer, which initially premiered in 2015.

The performer regularly appears alongside fellow panelists Ken Jeong, Robin Thicke and Jenny McCarthy in all of the episodes, with Nick Cannon serving as a host.

Joel McHale has appeared in every season of the hit Fox show since its inception.

Sticking with it: Scherzinger has served as a panelist on The Masked Singer ever since its inception in 2019

During an interview with Entertainment Weekly, Scherzinger expressed that she was heavily invested in The Masked Singer's success for a very personal reason.

She remarked, 'with doing a lot of these talent-searching shows, I do get very emotional because music is the best way of communication and connection to me.'

The actress also gave the media outlet her take on why the program has become so well-known with audiences and lauded the series' unorthodox take on competition shows.

'I think that's what's so bizarre and so special about our show is that you're looking at these crazy costumes and these faces that don't move. And yet you're moved by these contestants, you're moved by their performances,' she said.

Something special: The performer sat down for an interview with Entertainment Weekly where she expressed that the show's viewers were able to be 'moved' by the performances of its contestants

The hitmaker also expressed that she saw The Masked Singer as a way for the performers to let out their deepest feelings without fear of ridicule.

'I feel like with that mask on, it gives them the courage to let go more, but they're really revealing all from the inside out,' she noted.

Scherzinger concluded by expressing that she was happy to be one of the program's main figures and stated that she enjoyed a close relationship with her collaborators.

'It doesn't even feel like a job. It's the best job in the world. I get to go to work with the panelists, who are my close friends that I adore and love,' she said.

Feeling good: Scherzinger also described working on the hit show as 'the best job in the world'; she is seen with Fox Entertainment CEO Charlie Collier in 2019

Earlier in the day, the singer was seen arriving at Jennifer Klein's star-studded Day of Indulgence party in Brentwood.

The performer was first seen exiting a car in which she had ridden to the event before she flashed a wide smile and entered the function's area.

Scherzinger sported a lovely red multi-patterned and sleeved dress that covered much of her toned frame as she arrived at the event.

Showing up: Earlier in the day, Scherzinger was seen arriving at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood. The singer wore an eye-catching and multi-patterned dress while spending time at the event

The singer also sported a stylish pair of heeled shoes that featured bright white straps.

She accessorized with numerous pieces of jewelry that gave her clothing ensemble a bit of shine as she spent time in the California sun.

The performer notably sported a stylish pair of tinted sunglasses and a wide-brimmed hat.

Scherzinger added a little bit of darkness to her outfit with a black leather purse that was slung around her left shoulder.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Katharine McPhee only just became a first-time mother with the birth of her son Rennie in late February.

But as the weekend was coming to a close on Sunday, the singer and actress left her baby at home in order to head out for a grocery run at a Bristol Farms in Beverly Hills.

She showed off her toned post-pregnancy body in a black crop top and blue sweatpants.

Mom's busy day: Katharine McPhee, 37, went on a grocery run to a Bristol Farms in Beverly Hills on Sunday

McPhee, 37, also donned a pair of colorful Crocs as she appeared to be carrying her matching blue hoodie in her left hand.

She used her right hand to hold on the a bag full of grocery items.

Her long brown tresses were pulled back into a tight bun with a part in the middle.

Looking good: The Waitress star showed off her toned post-pregnancy body in a black crop top and blue sweatpants

McPhee and husband David Foster, who first met on the set of American Idol in 2006, got married in June 2019, and eventually welcomed their baby boy on February 22 of this year.

'We picked Rennie because I had actually been in labor for a while, we didn’t have a name picked out,' she explained of their son's name during an appearance on Today With Hoda And Jenna in March.

'We had a couple [of] names, but my husband was on a text chain with his sisters and one of his sisters suggested an old family name.'

The Country Comfort star said that the name had belonged to music mogul's great-grandfather and great uncle, so 'it has a long history in his family.'

'My husband said, "Hi, Ren Foster," so we said, "That’s a good name. That's a strong name."'

First-time mom: The Waitress star became a mother when she and husband David Foster welcomed their son Rennie to the world on February 22

Going strong: McPhee and husband David Foster, 71, first met on the set of American Idol in 2006, and eventually got married in June 2019

The Broadway star and American Idol alum has called her newfound motherhood, 'amazing.'

While Rennie is the first child for McPhee, this is child number six for Foster, but first son for the music composer and executive.

The 71-year-old is already the proud father to five adult daughters: Sara, 40, Erin, 38, and Jordan, 34, whom he shared with second wife Rebecca Dyer.

He also has daughters Allison, 51, and Amy, 48, from previous relationships.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Only recently back from her extended stay in her native country of Brazil, Alessandra Ambrosio enjoyed a little rest and relaxation on Sunday.

The longtime supermodel was spotted heading into the Little Beach House Malibu social club that's situated along the world famous Pacific Coast Highway in Malibu.

And along the way, the 40-year-old turned more than a few heads dressed, casually but stylish, in striped legging pants and a red hot blouse that she left unbuttoned just enough to showcase her ample cleavage.

R&R: Alessandra Ambrosio, 40, stepped out to a beachfront social club in Malibu on Sunday

In keeping with the theme of her ensemble, the model turned entrepreneur also wore a pair of flip flops and her long brown tresses were pulled back into a ponytail with a center part.

She also had a small blue box purse that hung over her right shoulder as she carried her phone that was attached to a crossbody lanyard.

The Little Beach House Malibu is a small private members' club for the creative community in Malibu and the surrounding coastal areas.

Turning heads: The longtime supermodel gave more than a hint of her cleavage dressed in a red hot blouse that was paired with striped legging pants

It's located in a stand-alone building that features outdoor terraces, a bar and a restaurant, all with ocean views.

The idea of the club is to make it as comfortable and relaxing as possible to help stimulate the creative juices of its members.

Earlier, the mother of two took to her Instagram Stories and offered a 'good morning' to her 10.4 million fans and followers with a photo of the waves crashing waves of the Pacific Ocean. The selfie also captured the side of her head.

She followed up with a sweet snap of herself giving her nine-year-old son Noah a kiss on the forehead.

There's also a black-and-white silhouette image of the Gal Floripa co-founder from behind as she soaked in the view of the ocean from the very same balcony.

In both pictures Ambrosio is dressed in a black, skin-tight bodysuit, with her hair styled long, straight, and flowing well past the middle of her back.

Ambrosio also has a 12-year-old daughter, Anja, with whom she also shares with ex-fiance Jamie Mazur.

Lovely: Ambrosio shared a sweet snap of herself giving her son Noah, nine, a kiss
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pete Davidson reportedly called it quits with his girlfriend of five months Phoebe Dynevor recently.

So naturally his co-star Kaley Cuoco felt the need to give him a hug of support during their latest day on set.

The 35-year-old actress and 27-year-old actor had big smiles on their faces as they shared an embrace while filming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York City on Sunday night.

Sweet: Kaley Cuoco and Pete Davidson had big smiles on their faces as they shared an embrace while filming romantic comedy Meet Cute in New York City on Sunday night

Claims: This comes amid news that Phoebe Dynevor and the 27-year-old actor have reportedly called it quits on their romance after five months of dating (pictured at Wimbledon in the UK in July)

The castmates posed for cute snaps together while filming Alex Lehmann's latest flick as they have been working on the project together in recent weeks.

Kaley looked cute in a yellow gingham patterned midi dress along with white sneakers.

Her signature blonde locks were worn down as her bangs hung just above her eye and she showed off her natural looks with complementary make-up.

Just the two of us: The castmates posed for cute snaps together while filming Alex Lehmann's latest flick as they have been working on the project together in recent weeks

Pete kept it casual in a grey long-sleeved striped shirt with black jeans and matching sneakers.

According to Deadline, Meet Cute 'is a wildly inventive deconstruction of the romantic comedy built around the question: What would you do if you could travel to your loved ones’ past, heal their traumas, fix their problems, and change them into the perfect partner?'

In June the producer shared a post to Instagram announcing news of the new romantic comedy with the SNL star. 'This one's gonna be real cute...' she gushed.

Back-to-back: Kaley looked cute in a yellow gingham patterned midi dress along with white sneakers

Since then the bombshell has teased photos of the pair working together.

Cuoco teased a black and white photo from the set of their film with the caption, 'You're gonna love them.' Underneath the image she wrote their characters' names, 'Sheila and Gary.'

Over the weekend it was reported that the SNL star had split with Phoebe Dynevor after five months of dating.

Pals: Pete kept it casual in a grey long-sleeved striped shirt with black jeans and matching sneakers

The Bridgerton actress, 26, and comedian were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon.

However a source has now claimed that the duo have split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship.

A source told The Sun: 'Pete and Phoebe's romance was a real whirlwind and from the start they were both totally committed.

Co-stars: Kaley recently teased a black and white photo from the set of their film with the caption, 'You're gonna love them'

'It was pretty telling when Phoebe headed to Croatia with her mates this week rather than going to see Pete in America.

'It was wild while it lasted... But the distance has put a strain on them. They will remain close but unless something drastic changes their relationship won't recover.'

The source continued that both of the stars have very busy schedules at the moment, with Phoebe filming Bridgerton series two in the UK and Pete working on Saturday Night Live in the US as well as filming a movie called Meet Cute.

All over? The Bridgerton actress, 26, and comedian, 27, were last seen together in the UK in July, with them putting on a loved-up display at Wimbledon (pictured at the tennis)

It is also thought that travel restrictions have added a further pressure to their romance as it isn't easy to just 'jump on a plane' and see each other.

MailOnline has contacted Phoebe and Pete's representatives for further comment.

Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April.

In exclusive pictures obtained by MailOnline the duo were seen enjoying a stroll in Stoke-on-Trent during his visit to the UK.

Busy: A source has claimed that the duo split after trying to make things work long distance 'put a strain' on their relationship and added that they both having busy schedules making it hard to see each other (Phoebe is pictured on Bridgerton)

It has been previously reported that Pete fell for her after watching her raunchy love scenes on Bridgerton.

The Saturday Night Live star is said to have told pals he thought the actress was 'hot as hell' over her character Daphne's intimate scenes with Simon, The Duke of Hastings (Regé-Jean Page).

A Los Angeles based friend of Pete's told The Mirror: 'Pete just loved Bridgerton and just got totally tripped out by Phoebe.

'She was totally his type - fresh faced, youthful, innocent looking beauty.

'We all joked with him about the naughty scenes, and of course he confessed he found them hot. He binge watched the show and felt it was his destiny to meet her.'

Cosy: Phoebe and Pete are thought to have started dating in February, with her taking a trip to NYC the same month, and they confirmed their romance in April

Sun: It comes after Phoebe enjoyed a girls' trip to Croatia with her Bridgerton co-star Sabrina Bartlett this week

MailOnline contacted a representative for Pete Davidson for comment at the time.

The reports of their break-up come as Phoebe enjoys a sun-soaked break in Croatia with her co-star Sabrina Bartlett.

In snaps shared on Instagram, the actress wowed in an orange bikini as she took a bike ride before having cocktails with pal, 29, who plays Siena Rosso in Bridgerton.

The pair also enjoyed an Aperol Spritz in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together before heading out on a fun boat trip.

Fun: The pair enjoyed an Aperol Spritz during their day trip in the sunshine as they posed for a glowing selfie together

The stars - who are both based in the UK - will not have to quarantine when they come home as Croatia is currently on the green travel list.

Filming on the second series of Bridgerton was recently delayed yet again after a Covid outbreak on set.

The stalling is said to be causing Netflix 'an expensive headache'.

Due to a previous case, shooting had only just resumed again - but a day after cast and crew returned to the period drama things are once again on ice.

The likes of Phoebe and co-star Jonathan Bailey, who plays Viscount Anthony Bridgerton, have had to cease work while various members of the production isolate.

Farewell: Phoebe is currently working on series two of Bridgerton (pictured with Regé-Jean Page who bade farewell to in April– to the dismay of his many fans)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Olivia Rodrigo added a splash of color when she arrived at the annual Day of Indulgence party on Sunday in Los Angeles' Brentwood neighborhood.

The 18-year-old actress and singer rocked a vibrant patterned top and a black mini skirt as she arrived at the self-care celebration with a friend.

Olivia's sheer long-sleeve shirt featured shifting green and pink circles, and she contrasted it with a black mini skirt.

Self-care Sunday: Olivia Rodrigo, 18, rocked a colorful patterned top and a black mini skirt as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles on Sunday

The 5ft5in hitmaker matched her skirt with a cool pair of tall black platform boots.

She wore her brunette tresses parted down the middle and tied back in a low-slung bun.

She kept red-tinted slim sunglasses on hand to block out the sun, and she wore a surgical-style mask to help slow the spread of the novel coronavirus.

Olivia also accessorized with a fuzzy leopard-print handbag, and she was seen leaving the party with several bags of swag.

Her friend walked arm-in-arm with her as they arrived and then again as they departed the party.

She wore a pink blouse with black trim, plus a tan mini skirt, golden boots and a fuzzy bucket hat.

The party, which is thrown annually by Klein, a film and television producer, is a regular retreat for A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

In addition to the suitcases, the guests received a LeSportSac weekenders bag with items specially tailored for each individual guest.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Among the high-profile crowd were Jennifer Lopez and her daughter Emme, Alexandra Daddario, Tyra Banks, Tessa Thompson, Leslie Mann and many others.

Free stuff for the wealthy: Olivia joined A-listers like Jennifer Lopez, Alexandra Daddario, Tyra Banks and Tessa Thompson to get an incredible amount of free swag; seen in May in London

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

Stepping on toes: Recently, Olivia has been involved in a spat with rocker Courtney Love after the grunge singer alleged that Olivia had ripped off the cover of her classic 1994 album Live Through This, recorded by her band Hole

Recently, Olivia has been involved in a spat with rocker Courtney Love after the grunge singer alleged that Olivia had ripped off the cover of her classic 1994 album Live Through This, recorded by her band Hole.

The Bizaardvark star released a cover image for her virtual concert Sour Prom which featured her dressed in a prom dress with a tiara on her head, a bouquet of flowers in her arms and mascara running down her face from crying.

Fans noticed the similarity between the image and the cover of Courtney's album, which also featured a teary prom queen, though the angles and framing were different.

Similar: Fans noticed the similarity between the image and the cover of Courtney's album, which also featured a teary prom queen, though the angles and framing were different

After the publicity image was released, Courtney posted Olivia's photo to her own Instagram, captioning it: 'spot the difference! #twinning!'

Olivia took the post as a compliment and replied: 'love u and live through this sooooo much.'

Courtney replied: 'Olivia — you're welcome. My favorite florist is in Notting Hill, London! Dm me for deets! I look forward to reading your note!'

Though seemingly polite, she seemed to imply that Olivia owed her some flowers for the photo.

She made it clear she was at least partly miff when a fan asked if she was 'mad or nah,' and she remarked that Olivia 'didn't ask.'

'So bit of both. I dig manners.'

Not happy: Courtney made it clear she was at least partly miff when a fan asked if she was 'mad or nah,' and she remarked that Olivia 'didn't ask.' 'So bit of both. I dig manners'; seen in 2020 in London

But in her cover interview for Variety, released last week, Olivia said she was honored just to be on Courtney's radar.

''I mean, to be honest I’m flattered that Courtney Love knows who I am,' she said.

She continued: 'She’s from a totally different generation, so I thought that was cool, but I think we’re both obviously really inspired by the film Carrie. I don’t know — I didn’t really give it too much thought.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Her most famous role was as office manager-turned-director of agency operations Joan Holloway in Mad Men.

So it comes as no surprise that Christina Hendricks was all business on her latest outing.

The 46-year-old actress was seen rocking a floral blazer as she arrived for the star-studded Day of Indulgence party thrown by Jennifer Klein in Brentwood, California on Sunday afternoon.

All business: Christina Hendricks was seen rocking a floral blazer as she arrived for the star-studded Day of Indulgence party thrown by Jennifer Klein in Brentwood, California on Sunday afternoon

She commanded attention in the business casual look featuring a white T-shirt, skinny black jeans an intricately weaved sandals.

Christina completed the look with black accessories including wayfarer shades, designer bag, and polka dot protective face mask.

Her signature fiery red locks were worn down in waves which blew in the wind.

The star-studded affair was held at the Brentwood home of film producer Jennifer Klein.

Rocking it: The 46-year-old actress commanded attention in the business casual look featuring a white T-shirt, skinny black jeans an intricately weaved sandals

On the move: Christina completed the look with black accessories including wayfarer shades, designer bag, and polka dot protective face mask

The women's-only party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is arguably one of the most famous dancing pros to ever come out of Dancing With The Stars.

And Julianne Hough proved just why as she put on a pin parade on her latest outing.

The 33-year-old television personality showed off her legs as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday.

Gorgeous: Julianne Hough showed off her legs as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday

The Footloose star donned a black floral maxi dress featuring a thigh-high split as she left with tons of goodies from the celebrity packed event in several bags and even a large travel luggage.

She teamed the long-sleeved number with a pair of strappy black heels.

Julianne accessorized with gold-rimmed sunglasses and a small Chanel bag featuring a gold-chained strap.

Out and about: The Footloose star donned a black floral maxi dress featuring a thigh-high split as she left with tons of goodies from the celebrity packed event in several bags and even a large travel luggage

In the details: She teamed the long-sleeved number with a pair of strappy black heels

Her blonde locks were worn down in a middle-part as she wore a white protective face mask.

The women's-only party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

Rocking it: Julianne accessorized with gold-rimmed sunglasses and a small Chanel bag featuring a gold-chained strap

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jason Momoa says he's kept his work on the TV series Baywatch under wrap from his kids.

The Aquaman leading man, 42, who shares daughter Lola Iolani, 14, and son Nakoa-Wolf Manakauapo Namakaeha, 12, with wife Lisa Bonet, 53, was asked on the Australian program Fitzy & Wippa what they think of his early career work on Baywatch.

The 6ft4 screen star, who played the role of Jason Ioane on 44 episodes of the show from 1999 until 2001, replied, 'We don't say the B word here. We hide all of that mate! Never happened mate!'

The latest: Jason Momoa told the Australian program Fitzy & Wippa that he's kept his work on the TV series Baywatch under wrap from his kids, daughter Lola Iolani, 14, and son Nakoa-Wolf Manakauapo Namakaeha, 12

'We don't talk about those words, the B word didn't happen,' he said.

The Honolulu, Hawaii native also said his kids haven't seen his work on the HBO show Game of Thrones, as he played the role of Khal Drogo from 2011-2012.

'They're not going to watch Game of Thrones either even though it's fantastic,' he said of the series, which contained graphic scenes depicting sex and violence.

He added: 'So right now superheroes and we're good.'

Hilarious: Momoa joked of the show, 'We don't talk about those words, the B word didn't happen'

Flashback: (L-R) Momoa, Jason Brooks and Michael Bergin were seen on the show Baywatch Hawaii in 2000

Things in the Zoom interview took an awkward turn when Wippa's wife Lisa gatecrashed the interview and revealed she had a little crush on the Hollywood hunk.

After the couple enjoyed a few cocktails before the chat, Lisa worked up the confidence to tell Momoa that he's welcome to stay at their $6.5million Rose Bay mansion the next time he's in Sydney.

'Hang on, my wife has just walked in, she was responsible for the eyebrow,' Wippa explained, after he shaved his eyebrow to match Jason's trademark eyebrow scar.

'Do you want to ask Jason a question honey?' Wippa asked.

Lisa excitedly chimed in, saying: 'Hi how are you Jason? Congratulations on the movie. This might sound really creepy, but when Covid-19 is over you're more than welcome to stay with us, we have a spare bedroom!'

Momoa hilariously quipped back: 'I'm there!'

Wippa then dryly remarked: 'You can hop out now honey. You were warned Jason, I apologize about that!'

Leading man: Jason spent time in Australia in 2017 as he filed Aquaman on the Gold Coast

Can't blame a girl for trying! Nova star Michael 'Wippa' Wipfli's wife Lisa left the radio host red-faced as she crashed his interview with Jason Momoa over the weekend

The American actor even hilariously tried out an Aussie accent every now and then throughout the chat, saying 'mate' with a twang upon occasion.

At one point, he spoke about his signature long hair with an Aussie accent and quipped: 'I've got the blonde ends mate!'

Momoa also sent a sweet message to his Australian fans, telling them to keep strong while in lockdown amid the Covid-19 pandemic.

'Tell everyone in Australia I love them,' Momoa said. 'I truly enjoy your country, sorry about the lockdown, I hope you all stay safe.'

The A-list action star appeared to promote his new project Sweet Girl, which is slated to be released August 20.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It was star-studded event filled with A-listers.

And Laverne Cox certainly found a way to stand out.

The 49-year-old actress channeled a futuristic femme fatale as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday.

On the prowl: Laverne Cox channeled a futuristic femme fatale as she arrived at Jennifer Klein's annual Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood, California on Sunday

The Orange Is The New Black star made safety as couture as possible as she donned a shiny multicolored face shield.

She teamed the avant-garde headwear with a clinging black catsuit featuring a cutout down the middle featuring forearm sleeves which showed off her bountiful cleavage.

The outfit featured a leather corset as she completed the look with a pair of black Balenciaga Speed Light sock sneakers.

Interesting: The 49-year-old actress made safety as couture as possible as she donned a shiny multicolored face shield

Flaunting it: She teamed the avant-garde headwear with a clinging black catsuit featuring a cutout down the middle featuring forearm sleeves which showed off her bountiful cleavage

She had plenty of designer digs including a small black leather quilted pouch and a large black and white Fendi bag.

Laverne's highlighted blonde locks were worn down in a middle-part as they flowed over her shoulder.

The party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

Fashion forward: She had plenty of designer digs including a small black leather quilted pouch and a large black and white Fendi bag

In the details: The outfit featured a leather corset as she completed the look with a pair of black Balenciaga Speed Light sock sneakers

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lupita Nyong'o was seen hosting a special screening of the soon-to-be-released horror film Candyman at a theater in Peachtree Corners, Georgia on Sunday.

The 38-year-old actress appeared to be enjoying her time at the venue while speaking to an audience during the event, and she was later pictured spending time with her relatives Achieng' and Fiona.

The forthcoming feature serves as a direct sequel to the 1992 film of the same name and is currently set to be released to the public later this month.

Leading the event: Lupita Nyong'o was seen hosting a special screening of the upcoming horror film Candyman in Peachtree Corners, Georgia on Sunday

Nyong'o sported a stylish leopard-printed dress and a pair of black high-heeled shoes while presenting the upcoming film.

Her beautiful dark brown locks had been arranged intricately prior to the presentation of the horror feature.

The Academy Award-winning actress accessorized with a single bracelet, a set of rings and a pair of matching hoop earrings.

At one point, the Black Panther star was seen wearing a stylish pair of eyeglasses while she addressed the audience.

Looking great! The Academy Award-winning actress sported an eye-catching leopard-print dress during the event

Family matters: The performer was joined at the event by her relatives Achieng' and Fiona, with whom she posed for a picture

Nyong'o's appearance at the event comes prior to the premiere of two major film projects with which she was involved.

The performer is currently set to feature in the forthcoming spy film The 355, where she will play an MI6 agent named Khadijah.

Also set to appear in the Simon Kinberg-directed film are actresses such as Jessica Chastain, Penelope Cruz and Diane Kruger, among others.

The concept for the film was worked out by its director and the Zero Dark Thirty star during the filming of X-Men: Dark Phoenix.

Staying busy: Nyong'o is currently set to appear in one of the main roles in the upcoming spy film, The 355

The cast was brought together in 2019, and filming started in July of that year.

Production moved through several different locations before additional shots were finished the following year.

Although the upcoming film was supposed to have its major debut this past January, it was delayed due to the ongoing state of the global pandemic.

The 355 is currently set to have its premiere on January 7th, 2022.

Delay: Although The 355 was set to have its premiere this past January, it was pushed back as a response to the ongoing state of the global pandemic

Nyong'o will also appear in the forthcoming Marvel feature, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, which serves as a sequel to the original 2018 film.

The feature began being actively developed shortly after the release of the first movie, and director Ryan Coogler signed on to helm the follow-up that October.

However, the project entered an uncertain state after Chadwick Boseman, who starred as the titular character, suddenly passed away in August of 2020.

After a period of restructuring, the film was confirmed to still be in development, and Nyong'o was confirmed to be reprising her role as Nakia in the sequel.

Doing it again: Nyong'o will also reprise her role as Nakia in the upcoming Marvel feature Black Panther: Wakanda Forever; she is seen alongside Chadwick Boseman in the original 2018 film

Other returning cast members include Danai Gurira, Letitia Wright and Martin Freeman, among others.

Tenoch Huerta was in talks to join the list of performers as one of the film's antagonists.

Filming initially began this past June, with principal photography primarily taking place in Atlanta, Georgia.

Black Panther: Wakanda Forever is currently set to be made available to the public on July 8th, 2022.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Well she certainly knows how to get free advertising.

Tyra Banks represented her recently-opened ice cream shop Smize Cream as she wore a T-Shirt representing the new venture while arriving at the star-studded Day of Indulgence party.

The 47-year-old model had all eyes on her while joined by boyfriend Louis Bélanger-Martin at the annual event hosted by film producer Jennifer Klein in Brentwood, California on Sunday.

Her own best advert: Tyra Banks represented her recently-opened ice cream shop Smize Cream as she wore a T-Shirt representing the new venture while arriving at the star-studded Day of Indulgence party

Out and about: The 47-year-old model had all eyes on her while joined by boyfriend Louis Bélanger-Martin at the annual event hosted by film producer Jennifer Klein in Brentwood, California on Sunday

Her top featured a pink graphic with Tyra made to look like an ice cream coned as she teamed it with black cropped pants and matching sneakers.

She accessorized with plenty of gold including chain necklace featuring a large pendant, hoop earrings and a diamond ring.

Her signature highlighted blonde locks were put in a messy bun as she showed off her natural looks by wearing minimal make-up.

In the details: Her top featured a pink graphic with Tyra made to look like an ice cream coned as she teamed it with black cropped pants and matching sneakers

Vibes: Her signature highlighted blonde locks were put in a messy bun as she showed off her natural looks by wearing minimal make-up

Tyra opened up Smize Cream in Santa Monica, California last month.

The party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Rocking it: She accessorized with plenty of gold including chain necklace featuring a large pendant, hoop earrings and a diamond ring

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She was declared to officially be a billionaire and the world's wealthiest female musician earlier this month by Forbes.

But Rihanna tried to prove she still enjoys the simple pleasures like a relaxed late-night stop at the grocery store when she dropped by a Whole Foods location in Manhattan's Tribeca neighborhood on Sunday.

The 33-year-old hitmaker certainly looked like a member of the ultra-wealthy with strands of thick pearls and gold jewelry draped from her throat for the otherwise-casual outing.

The personal touch: She may be a newly minted billionaire, but that didn't stop Rihanna, 33, from buying her own groceries late at night at a Whole Foods in Manhattan on Sunday

A small golden cross was appended to the pearls, and other gold necklaces hung down to her midriff.

Rihanna put on a busty display in a simple black top, which she wore under her black jacket, which featured thick gold buttons.

She dressed down the rest of her ensemble with a set of high-waisted acid-wash jeans with blown-out knees and other shredded patches.

The 5ft8in Work singer wore a rare black-and-gold striped Chanel no. 5 belt with a thick dangling gold pendant.

Luxurious: The hitmaker wore a stunning thick string of pearls around her throat with dangling gold necklaces and a rare black-and-gold Chanel no. 5 belt

Showing off: Rihanna put on a busty display in a simple black top, which she wore under her black jacket, which featured thick gold buttons

Low key: She kept the rest of her ensemble casual with torn acid-wash jeans, white Adidas trainers and a green New York Yankees baseball cap

Rihanna kept up her low-key theme with white Adidas trainers and a green New York Yankees baseball cap.

She appeared to be rocking short hair and covered up despite the late hour with chunky black sunglasses.

Earlier this week, the singer–songwriter was spotted with her rapper boyfriend A$AP Rocky as they left a nightclub at 5 a.m.

On Tuesday, she posted a joking photo of herself in bed with a massive tin of caviar on ice to celebrate that astounding financial landmark.

'how I woke up after #FENTYPARFUM sold out this morning!!!' she joked, referencing her line of scents.

Produce section: The Umbrella singer shopped in the produce section

Mask on: Rihanna masked up while pushing a grocery cart

Stylish star: The singer looked runway ready while running errands

Celebration: Earlier this week, the singer–songwriter was spotted with her rapper boyfriend A$AP Rocky as they left a nightclub at 5 a.m.

Lap of luxury! On Tuesday, she posted a joking photo of herself in bed with a massive tin of caviar on ice to celebrate that astounding financial landmark

Rihanna is now worth well over $1 billion, with Forbes estimating she's worth closer to $1.7 billion.

However, that vast majority of that worth is unrelated to the music that made her a household name.

Most of her wealth is related to her cosmetics company Fenty Beauty, which the publication confirmed she owns 50 percent of.

Her lingerie company Savage x Fenty reportedly makes up another $270 million of her wealth, and the rest of her fortune comes from her music career, as well as occasional forays into acting.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dune's director, Denis Villeneuve, recently spoke about his plans for a potential sequel to the forthcoming feature.

The filmmaker, 53, recently spoke to Il Venerdi Di Republicca and gave the media outlet a bit of information regarding his future plans for a follow-up film, should one be produced.

The upcoming flick is based on Frank Herbert's 1965 novel of the same name and will premiere at the 78th Venice International Film Festival, which will occur next month.

Looking to the future: Dune's director, Denis Villeneuve expressed that he has plans for a follow-up to the soon-to-be-released feature; he is seen in 2013

During the sit-down, Villeneuve remarked that he was excited to begin work on a sequel to Dune and commented on the chemistry between its lead actors.

'I can't wait to shoot the second part of Dune to get [Timothee Chalamet and Zendaya] back together,' he said.

The Call Me By Your Name star will portray Paul Atreides in the film, and the Euphoria lead is set to play his romantic interest, Chani.

The Blade Runner 2049 director also pointed out that he planned to place a new character at the forefront of the film in the planned feature.

Excited: During an interview, the filmmaker expressed that he 'can't wait to shoot the second part of Dune to get [Timothee Chalamet and Zendaya] back together'

Taking the lead: The filmmaker also revealed that Zendaya's character, Chani, will serve as the main character in a potential follow-up flick

Specifically, he noted that 'in the next chapter Zendaya will be the protagonist of the story.'

Development on the soon-to-be-released version of Dune initially began in 2016 when Legendary Entertainment acquired the rights to the book.

Alejandro Jodorowsky was previously set to direct an adaptation of the novel that would have starred figures such as Orson Welles and Salvador Dali, although plans fell through in the mid-1970s.

David Lynch went on to helm a feature based on the book that starred Kyle MacLachlan that was released in 1984 and was met with a negative critical reception.

In the past: Development on the current version of Dune was initially started in 2016 when Legendary Pictures acquired the rights to the book

Not the first: David Lynch previously helmed an adaptation of the book, which was released to negative reviews in 1984

A miniseries was later produced and broadcast on the Sci-Fi Channel, now known as Syfy, in 2000, which was received well by both critics and fans of the novel.

Villeneuve officially signed on to direct Dune in 2017, and he also serves as one of its producers.

The forthcoming film will feature an ensemble cast including performers such as Oscar Isaac, Rebecca Ferguson and Jason Momoa, among numerous others.

Principal photography initially began in March of 2019 and continued throughout the year until it officially concluded that July.

Serious talent: Dune features an ensemble cast that includes performers such as Rebecca Ferguson, Oscar Isaac and Jason Momoa

Further filming for the forthcoming feature was conducted the following year in Budapest.

Dune was originally supposed to have its premiere in November of 2020, but it was eventually delayed on numerous occasions owing to the ongoing state of the global pandemic.

It was ultimately given a wide debut date of October 22nd, where it currently stands.

Taking their time: Dune was originally supposed to be released in November of 2020, although it was later delayed several times

Villeneuve has expressed concern about Warner Bros' decision to dual-release the feature in theaters and on the HBO Max streaming service, as the film's producers fear that Dune will not be profitable enough to warrant a follow-up.

A preview of the flick's first ten minutes revealed that the movie was being released as Dune: Part One, lending further speculation that a second motion picture is being planned.

A spinoff series entitled Dune: The Sisterhood is currently being developed and will serve as a prequel to the film.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jennifer Hudson says that of all of the characters in a potential Hercules project, the one she would most want to play would be Calliope.

The actress/singer, 39, appeared in a segment for the outlet WIRED in which she answered questions most commonly asked online about her.

Hudson - in response to the question, 'Who is Jennifer Hudson playing in Hercules?' - said that all of her costars in her 2006 film Dreamgirls have been seen in Disney productions.

The latest: Jennifer Hudson, 39, says that of all of the characters in a potential Hercules project, the one she would most want to play would be Calliope

'Y'all listen close - all my Dreamgirls cast members, this is a fun fact, have been in Disney films,' she said, citing Beyonce, Jamie Foxx, Eddie Murphy and Anika Noni Rose.

The Academy Award-winning actress, said, 'Where's my Disney role?' noting her past experience with the character.

'I was Calliope, the head muse, on a Disney cruise ship, so that means I'm ready for my part,' Hudson said. 'We are the muses, goddesses of the arts and proclaimers of heroes. That was me, Calliope.'

She continued: 'So I'm ready, just roll the camera. You ain't even got to send a script, I don't need the music. I'm ready to shoot. So I'll just wait for your call, thank you.'

Details: The actress/singer appeared in a segment for the outlet WIRED in which she answered questions most commonly asked online about her

Coincidence: Hudson said that all of her costars in her 2006 film Dreamgirls have been seen in Disney productions

Hudson in 2015 told W Magazine about how her experience as an entertainer on the cruise ship prior to her showbiz breakout in finishing in the top 10 on American Idol season three in 2004.

'I was on a Disney cruise line the year I decided to audition for American Idol,' she said. 'I was Calliope the muse in Hercules: The Muse-ical and I was also the Circle of Life soloist in Disney's cruise.

'And in that show, I narrated the show, I did a lot of singing and we had a lot of choreography, as well. It's part of how I got Dreamgirls because they took that as an acting credit.'

Hudson can currently be seen playing Aretha Franklin in the biopic Respect, which comes about three years following the iconic singer's death in 2018 at age 76.

Backstory: Hudson had previously performed on a Disney cruise ship before her breakout on American Idol

The Academy Award-winning actress, said, 'Where's my Disney role?' noting her past experience with the Calliope character
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vanessa Hudgens and gal pal GG Magree have never been shy when it comes to showing off whatever fun-filled activity they're into at the moment on social media.

And on Sunday the two ladies shared some photos that appear to have been taken ahead of Magree's DJ gig in Scottsdale, Arizona.

Hudgens, 32, took to Instagram and shared a snap where she's laying on a hardwood floor with her hands seductively placed on each side of her head, and Magree looking on, that she captioned: 'Act natural.'

'Act Natural': Vanessa Hudgens, 32, dropped a seductive pose while laying on a floor with bestie GG Magree looking in a photo the actress shared on Instagram on Sunday

The Princess Switch star put her midriff on display dressed in skimpy brown top that was nothing more than a glorified bra with extra fabric.

She paired it with brown and white-patterned pants and matching platform boots.

The ensemble was rounded out with stylish sunglasses and her dark tresses styled long with a center part.

But it was her beaming grin that helped hone in the entire look.

Rave time: Magree, 32, shared a photo of herself and Hudgens dressed in the same outfits while sitting with Yaris Sanchez

Magree (born Georgia Magree), 32, rocked an animal print bodysuit, that hugged her womanly curves, with black extra-high platform boots and red-tinted glasses.

Her blonde locks were styled straight and long with a part in the middle.

Three hours earlier, Magree shared a photo of the two gal pals sitting on the top of a black couch dressed in the very same outfits alongside actress Yaris Sanchez.

'Sugar N Spice,' she wrote gushed in the caption.

Sanchez, 30, originally from the Dominican Republic, sat between Hudgens and Magree decked out in a black minidress and matching platform shoes.

Sanchez, 30, sat between Hudgens and Magree in a series of photos seemingly taken before Magree's DJ gig in Scottsdale, Arizona

Rockin' the house: Magree performed poolside at The Sunday Drip situated in the Maya Day & Nightclub in Scottsdale, Arizona on Sunday

Sanchez shared several photos that were similar to the one posted by Magree, which showed the three ladies getting rambunctious sitting on top of that long black booth chair

'The girls wanna rave,' she said of their attitudes for the day in the caption.

Out on the tour circuit lately, Magree performed poolside at The Sunday Drip situated in the Maya Day & Nightclub in Scottsdale, Arizona on Sunday.

The Australian native is popular DJ and electronic dance music producer whose been living in Los Angeles in recent years.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is known for showing off her well-put-together clothing ensembles on her social media outlets.

And on Sunday, Nicole Scherzinger put on an eye-catching display in a flowing paisley-printed dress while arriving at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood.

The Pussycat Dolls member, 43, was seen flashing a wide smile as exited a private vehicle and made her way towards the star-studded function.

Dressed to impress: Nicole Scherzinger put on an eye-catching display while wearing a vibrantly colored outlet while arriving at the Jennifer Klein Day of Indulgence event in Brentwood on Sunday

Scherzinger sported a vibrantly colored and sleeved dress that featured lovely paisley and floral patterns to the event.

Her beautiful dark brunette locks added an element of darkness to her otherwise vibrant ensemble.

The entertainer also sported a light pair of platform shoes and a near-matching wide-brimmed hat to the function.

She accessorized with numerous articles of jewelry, including a stylish pair of tinted sunglasses.

Accessorizing well: The Pussycat Dolls member sported numerous articles of jewelry that added a bit of shine to her clothing ensemble

Dressed for the weather: The performer also wore a stylish pair of tinted sunglasses and a wide-brimmed hat

Scherzinger kept a small crossbody leather purse slung over her left shoulder for the duration of her time in public.

The party, which is thrown annually by producer Jennifer Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Jennifer Lopez, Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, were just a few of the major celebrities seen at the event.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Packed: Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

JLo, 52, certainly had all eyes on her as she arrived with her 13-year-old daughter Emme.

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back

Striking: Good girls star Christina Hendricks looked fancy in a black floral print blazer with a white blouse underneath

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

The performer is currently awaiting the start of production on the upcoming television special, Annie Live!

Development on the project was initially announced this past May when it was made known that Alex Rudzinski and Lear deBessonet would be co-directing the musical.

The production is based on the Broadway show of the same name, which in turn is based on Harold Gray's comic strip, Little Orphan Annie.

Future project: Scherzinger is currently set to appear in the forthcoming musical special, Annie Live!; she is seen in February

Tony Award-winning choreographer Sergio Trujillo will plan out the event's dance scenes.

Taraji P. Henson is currently set to play the villainous Miss Hannigan, and her casting was announced in June.

That same month, Harry Connick, Jr. signed on to portray Daddy Warbucks in the forthcoming special.

Scherzinger's casting was announced earlier this month, and she gave a statement to Deadline to express her excitement for being involved with the project.

Impressive cast: Taraji P. Henson and Harry Connick Jr were also added to the forthcoming feature's list of performers; the former is seen in 2020

'Musical theater has always made my heart soar, so I'm over the moon to join this amazing cast for such a great classic,' she said.

Titus Burgess was recently added to the cast, and he will play Rooster Hannigan.

The actress who will fill the role of the show's titular character has not been announced as of yet.

Annie Live! is currently set to have its official premiere on NBC on December 2nd.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Advertisement

She has to stick to a demanding routine to keep up her astoundingly fit figure.

But Jennifer Lopez was ready to relax and enjoy some pampering as she arrived at the home of film producer Jennifer Klein for her annual Day of Indulgence party on Sunday.

The 52-year-old Hustlers star brought her 13-year-old daughter Emme along to the retreat, as they joined a host of other stars, including Olivia Rodrigo, Christina Hendricks and Alexandra Daddario, at the luxurious home in Los Angeles' tony Brentwood neighborhood.

Cream of the crop: Jennifer Lopez, 52, joined her 13-year-old daughter Emme for some pampering on Sunday at Jennifer Klein's Day of Indulgence party in Los Angeles with a bevy of A-listers

Jennifer and Emme were spotted as they walked up to Klein's house from the street, which was crowded with cars dropping off attendees.

The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed.

The suit featured a matching top that she wore unbuttoned that hung loosely on her slender frame.

It featured pale pastel green trim with hypnotizing abstract designs.

Seasonally appropriate: The Out Of Sight star rocked a playful summery ensemble featuring a skimpy pale lavender tube top that put the spotlight on her washboard abs, which she proudly displayed

Standing tall: Jennifer elevated her 5ft5in stature with a pair of gray open-toe stilettos

Jennifer elevated her 5ft5in stature with a pair of gray open-toe stilettos, and she added some sparkle to the muted ensemble with dangling gold necklaces, including a long pendant that hung over her midriff.

She wore her caramel-colored locks tied back tightly in a ponytail, and she blocked out the sun with a stylish set of large square sunglasses.

Emme looked cozy in a cream-colored cable knit cardigan with a white crop top and a burgundy floral pattern skirt.

Contrast: Emme looked cozy in a cream-colored cable knit cardigan with a white crop top and a burgundy floral pattern skirt

Top ticket: The party, which is thrown annually by Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering

She rocked the voluminous green hair that she's showcased in recent weeks and carried a brown handbag under her arm.

Emme, whose twin brother Max had to stay home from the female-only event, wore chic large-frame eyeglasses and dressed down with a casual pair of white sneakers.

Jennifer was also seen walking around outside the house and cooling down with a fruity cocktail.

While inside the gathering, she was spotted grinning ear-to-ear as she chatted with friends.

Free stuff: Several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies

Catching up: While inside the gathering, she was spotted grinning ear-to-ear as she chatted with friends

The party, which is thrown annually by Klein, is a regular retreat for the A-listers and a chance for them to take in some pleasurable pampering.

The ultra-wealthy actresses and entertainers each are given a variety of expensive swag for free, and several stars were spotted pushing out massive Samsonite suitcases, which InStyle reported could be filled with as much as 80lbs of goodies.

The event seems to be quite the afternoon of fun as guests are treated to food and beverages as different parts of the property make for different experiences including a free outdoor swag bazaar in the backyard and pop-up boutiques in rooms that include a mix of shopping and gifting.

The celebrities can then end the day relaxing by the pool where there are spa treatments available.

Bold new look: Emme has been sporting a bold new green hairdo for the last few weeks after dying her naturally brunette locks an eye-catching shade

This is the 23rd year for the unmissable event, which continued last year despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.

At that event, attendance was limited compared to previous years, and guests were required to be masked and to social distance at all times.

It's unclear if the guests list was curtailed again for 2021, though several guests were still seen wearing masks at various times.

It's considerably safer this year even with many people going unmasked, as many of the attendees are fully vaccinated against Covid-19.

Newcomer: Pop superstar Olivia Rodrigo was among the high-profile attendees. She looked casually yet stylish in a sheer shirt with a pink-and-green dotted pattern, along with a black mini skirt to highlight her trim legs

Towering: The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back

Striking: Good girls star Christina Hendricks looked fancy in a black floral print blazer with a white blouse underneath

On point: She wore matching black pants and eye-catching rose gold braided open-toe heels

Pop superstar Olivia Rodrigo was among the high-profile attendees.

She looked casually yet stylish in a sheer shirt with a pink-and-green dotted pattern, along with a black mini skirt to highlight her trim legs.

The Driver's License hitmaker stood tall in black platform boots and wore slim sunglasses while tying her hair back.

Good girls star Christina Hendricks looked fancy in a black floral print blazer with a white blouse underneath.

She wore matching black pants and eye-catching rose gold braided open-toe heels.

Low key: Alexandra Daddario, who's currently receiving rave reviews for her popular HBO series The White Lotus, opted for a casual and comfortable ensemble

No fuss: She had a simple cream-colored blouse with rolled up sleeves that was tucked loosely into her black leggings.

Accessorized: The brunette beauty wore a silver wristwatch and styled her shoulder-length hair straight down to frame her piercing blue eyes

Alexandra Daddario, who's currently receiving rave reviews for her popular HBO series The White Lotus, opted for a casual and comfortable ensemble.

She had a simple cream-colored blouse with rolled up sleeves that was tucked loosely into her black leggings.

The brunette beauty wore a silver wristwatch and styled her shoulder-length hair straight down to frame her piercing blue eyes.

Pretty in pink: English actress Annabelle Wallis had the perfect summer look with a billowing tiered dress in shades of pink and lavender. The patchwork look featured several flower print patterns

Golden beauty: She also wore gold open-toe heels and carried a quilted beige-and-white handbag under her arm. Annabelle, who has been dating Chris Pine since 2018, parted her voluminous blond locks down the center and wore chic round-frame sunglasses

English actress Annabelle Wallis had the perfect summer look with a billowing tiered dress in shades of pink and lavender.

The patchwork look featured several flower print patterns.

She also wore gold open-toe heels and carried a quilted beige-and-white handbag under her arm.

Annabelle, who has been dating Chris Pine since 2018, parted her voluminous blond locks down the center and wore chic round-frame sunglasses.

Legs for days: Julianne Hough highlighted her toned dancer's legs in a black dress with a sky-high slit. The long-sleeve ensemble featured enlivening floral designs that complemented her long blond hair

Swag: She was seen leaving the party as she pushed her black Samsonite suitcase and carried a variety of bags with her.

Goodies: Julianne had her black-and-pink floral print bag resting on her suitcase as she attempted to get all of the extravagant gifts home

Julianne Hough highlighted her toned dancer's legs in a black dress with a sky-high slit.

The long-sleeve ensemble featured enlivening floral designs that complemented her long blond hair.

She was seen leaving the party as she pushed her black Samsonite suitcase and carried a variety of bags with her.

In addition to the suitcases, each invited guest received a LeSportSac weekenders bag with items specially tailored for each individual guest.

Julianne had her black-and-pink floral print bag resting on her suitcase as she attempted to get all of the extravagant gifts home.

No fuss: How I Met Your Mother star Cobie Smulders went with a considerably more casual and rugged look than many of the guests. She looked cool in a beige-and-white shirt covered in palm leaf patterns, which she wore with weather acid-wash jeans and beige heels

Iconic: Jordana Brewster channeled Julia Roberts' iconic brown polka dot dress from Pretty Woman as she arrived in a nearly identical number

Taking it easy: Actress Alexandra Shipp sported thick braids with a ribbed beige tank top and black jeans

How I Met Your Mother star Cobie Smulders went with a considerably more casual and rugged look than many of the guests.

She looked cool in a beige-and-white shirt covered in palm leaf patterns, which she wore with weather acid-wash jeans and beige heels.

Jordana Brewster channeled Julia Roberts' iconic brown polka dot dress from Pretty Woman as she arrived in a nearly identical number.

Actress Alexandra Shipp sported thick braids with a ribbed beige tank top and black jeans.

Woman in red: Nicole Scherzinger pulled out all the stops for her colorful ensemble as she made a grand entrance. She arrived in a busty sheer scarlet dress that whipped about in the breeze as she stepped out of her SUV

Colorful: The colorful look featured a bevy of blue-and-yellow floral designs and voluminous sleeves

Covered up: The reality judge also wore a floppy straw had and large sunglasses

On point: She wore white open-toe wedges and had a black chevron quilted Yves Saint Laurent handbag

Nicole Scherzinger pulled out all the stops for her colorful ensemble as she made a grand entrance.

She arrived in a busty sheer scarlet dress that whipped about in the breeze as she stepped out of her SUV.

The colorful look featured a bevy of blue-and-yellow floral designs and voluminous sleeves.

She wore white open-toe wedges and had a black chevron quilted Yves Saint Laurent handbag.

The reality judge also wore a floppy straw had and large sunglasses.

Runway entrance: Tyra Banks put aside her supermodel glamour for a low-key entrance

Supermodel: She had on a black T-shirt with a 'Smize Cream' design over the chest, and she paired it with matching black slacks with an unusual flap over the front

Simple: The America's Next Top Model host wore her hair tied up in a swirling top knot

On theme: She rounded out he look with black sneakers and a black mask

Tyra Banks put aside her supermodel glamour for a low-key entrance.

She had on a black T-shirt with a 'Smize Cream' design over the chest, and she paired it with matching black slacks with an unusual flap over the front.

The America's Next Top Model host wore her hair tied up in a swirling top knot.

She rounded out he look with black sneakers and a black mask.

Space invader: Laverne Cox arrived at the party in a futuristic all-black ensemble. She wore a figure-hugging bodysuit with a halter top

Skimpy: The outfit had a low-cut slit highlighting her cleavage, along with a thick black band around her midriff

Unmissable: She wore elbow-length gloves with the outfit and carried a thick black-and-white tote bag. But the most striking part of her outfit was an oil slick–colored mask that completely blocked out her eyes and mouth and made her look like an extraterrestrial visitor

Laverne Cox arrived at the party in a futuristic all-black ensemble.

She wore a figure-hugging bodysuit with a halter top and a low-cut slit highlighting her cleavage, along with a thick black band around her midriff.

She wore elbow-length gloves with the outfit and carried a thick black-and-white tote bag.

But the most striking part of her outfit was an oil slick–colored mask that completely blocked out her eyes and mouth and made her look like an extraterrestrial visitor.

Classic style: Thor: Ragnarok star Tessa Thompson looked lovely in a white blouse over a black dress as she carried a pink knit Prada tote

Simple: Miranda Cosgrove looked vibrant in a short black dress covered in white flowers

Casual: She wore a pink masked and dressed down with a set of black Prada platform sneakers

Lacy: Supergirl star Melissa Benoist also rocked a low-key look with a lacy white blouse and flared jeans

Thor: Ragnarok star Tessa Thompson looked lovely in a white blouse over a black dress as she carried a pink knit Prada tote.

Miranda Cosgrove looked vibrant in a short black dress covered in white flowers.

She wore a pink masked and dressed down with a set of black Prada platform sneakers.

Supergirl star Melissa Benoist also rocked a low-key look with a lacy white blouse and flared jeans.

Stylish: Guardians Of The Galaxy star Karen Gillan looked chic in a short pale yellow double-breasted trench coat

Red-haired beauty: She wore it with white sneakers and a black quilted handbag, and she let her voluminous red tresses cascade down her shoulders

Lustrous: Laura Harrier glowed in a white satin dress as she walked up to the party

Blue mood: Jane Levy, whose canceled series Zoey's Extraordinary Playlist was just revived for an additional movie, wore a hypnotizing blue-and-white knit sweater

Standard: She also had on black slacks with sandals and carried a black-and-white gingham handbag as she pushed her suitcase of swag out

Guardians Of The Galaxy star Karen Gillan looked chic in a short pale yellow double-breasted trench coat.

She wore it with white sneakers and a black quilted handbag, and she let her voluminous red tresses cascade down her shoulders.

Laura Harrier glowed in a white satin dress as she walked up to the party.

Jane Levy, whose canceled series Zoey's Extraordinary Playlist was just revived for an additional movie, wore a hypnotizing blue-and-white knit sweater.

She also had on black slacks with sandals and carried a black-and-white gingham handbag as she pushed her suitcase of swag out.

Sundress: It's Always Sunny In Philadelphia fixture Kaitlin Olson rocked a white dress with thick green stripes and gladiator-style brown sandals

Mix and match: Orange Is The New Black star Samira Wiley paired a lovely yellow tank top with olive-colored shorts and a matching blazer

Stylish: She draped the jacket over one shoulder and and also had on a matching fedora to block out the sun

It's Always Sunny In Philadelphia fixture Kaitlin Olson rocked a white dress with thick green stripes and gladiator-style brown sandals.

Orange Is The New Black star Samira Wiley paired a lovely yellow tank top with olive-colored shorts and a matching blazer.

She draped the jacket over one shoulder and and also had on a matching fedora to block out the sun.

Looking good: This Is 40 star Leslie Mann was all business in a white ribbed sweater

Perfection: She had on a set of high-waisted pale yellow jeans and platform heels and covered up with chunky black sunglasses

Songstress: Songwriter Diane Warren wore playful black pants decorated with Mickey Mouse designs, plus a black T-shirt and baby blue trainers

This Is 40 star Leslie Mann was all business in a white ribbed sweater and a set of high-waisted pale yellow jeans.

She wore platform heels with the colorful look and covered up with chunky black sunglasses.

Songwriter Diane Warren wore playful black pants decorated with Mickey Mouse designs, plus a black T-shirt and baby blue trainers.

Gorgeous: Actress Julianne Nicholson lit up the day with her white-and-blue striped tiered dress. She wore a white fedora with a pale blue band as well, plus white sneakers

Actress Julianne Nicholson lit up the day with her white-and-blue striped tiered dress.

She wore a white fedora with a pale blue band as well, plus white sneakers.

Dania Ramirez beamed as she arrived at the party in a multicolored striped dress.

She added more color to the pastel ensemble with a red Goyard bag and reflective aviator sunglasses, as well as a pale pink mask.

Grinning: Dania Ramirez beamed as she arrived at the party in a multicolored striped dress. She added more color to the pastel ensemble with a red Goyard bag
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mickey Rourke knows firsthand the therapeutic value of dogs.

But it takes just moments to realize the Oscar-nominated actor cherishes the unconditional love and friendship they bring to his life the most.

And over the weekend the Upstate New York native put his bond with one of his four-legged family members on display during a lunch date with a friend and his beloved pooch, King Carlos, in Beverly Hills.

Lunch date: Mickey Rourke, 68, appeared to be on the lookout for a friend before sitting down for lunch in Beverly Hills over the weekend

The Wrestler star went with his casual-cool look dressed in fitted blue jeans and a charcoal black hoodie without a shirt.

He stepped out in brown cowboys boots that were adorned with metal tips and a yellow design along the sides and heels.

The acclaimed actor ended up sitting in the outside patio of Mulberry Street Pizzeria with his beloved small white dog that's among his pack of pooches at home.

At one point, he was spotted giving Carlos a hug and a kiss.

Unconditional love: The acclaimed actor gave his beloved dog King Carlos a kiss during lunch

Unique: The Wrestler star opted for his casual-cool look dressed in fitted blue jeans with a charcoal black hoodie, without a shirt, and cowboy boots

During the afternoon outing, Rourke had his pal snap a photo of himself feeding King Carlos.

'King ""lCARLOS HAVING CHICKEN MEAT BALLS,' the Barfly leading man wrote in the caption, along with a series of heart emojis and a couple of hand emojis signifying his love for his beloved pooch.

Rourke has devoted much of his Instagram page to his endless devotion and welfare of dogs, which includes helping find forever homes for animals in need.

Snack time: The Oscar-nominated actor fed King Carlos chicken meatballs during his lunch date at Mulberry Street Pizzeria

Adorable: King Carlos snuggled up with a new friend in a post last week

Rourke famously thanked his dogs when he accepted the Golden Globe for Best Actor for The Wrestler back in 2009.

'I'd like to thank all my dogs, the ones who are here and the ones who aren't here any more, because sometimes when a man's alone, all you got is your dog,' he said before adding, 'And they've meant the world to me.'

Earlier that year, during an interview, he credited his dogs for helping save his life when he contemplated suicide during one of the lowest points of life.

Along with his Oscar-nominated performance in The Wrestler (2008), Rourke's acting resume includes such acclaimed films as Diner (1982), Rumble Fish (1983), The Pope Of Greenwich Village (1984), 9 1/2 Weeks (1986), Angel Heart (1987), Barfly (1987), A Prayer For The Dying (1987), Sin City (2005), Domino (2005) and Sin City: A Dame To Kill For (2014).

His pack: Rourke snuggled up next to his dog Ivan aka (Baby Gorilla) two weeks ago
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lizzo spoke out about body positivity prior to taking to social media to decry 'racist' and 'fat-shaming' messages she received on social media amid the release of her single Rumors with Cardi B.

The 33-year-old singer, chatting Friday with Zane Lowe of Apple Music, discussed the scrutiny about her appearance amid her success.

'I feel like fat is the worst thing people can say about me at this point,' Lizzo said. 'This is the biggest insecurity. It's like, "How dare a pop star be fat?" I had to own that.'

The latest: Lizzo, 39, spoke out about body positivity Friday, prior to taking to social media Sunday to decry 'racist' and 'fat-shaming' messages she received on social media amid the release of her single Rumors with Cardi B

She explained how she feels her journey up the top of the charts has differed from other artists.

'I feel like other people who were put on that pedestal, or who become pop stars, probably have other insecurities or have other flaws,' she said, 'but they can hide it behind a veneer of being sexy and being marketable.'

'There's still so many people who suffer from being marginalized systemically. Meanwhile, there's a plus-size Black girl at the Grammys.'

Lizzo said things 'got a long way to go' in society amid the disparities based on race and appearance, as 'the infrastructure has not changed as much.

Exchange: The singer chat Friday with Zane Lowe of Apple Music, as they discussed the scrutiny about her appearance amid her success.

Lizzo explained how she feels her journey up the top of the charts has differed from other artists in the chat

Lizzo said things 'got a long way to go' in society amid the disparities based on race and appearance, as 'the infrastructure has not changed as much'

'Plus-size Black women are still not getting the treatment they deserve in hospitals and from doctors and at work,' she said.

On Sunday, Lizzo took to Instagram Stories to express her anguish amid the nasty feedback she received amid the release of Rumors, which marks her first single in more than two years, since Cuz I Love You in April of 2019.

'People say s*** about me that doesn’t even make sense,' Lizzo said in the candid social media clip, in which she used a tissue to wipe away her tears. 'It’s fatphobic, it’s racist and it’s hurtful - if you don’t like my music cool, if you don’t like Rumors the song, cool but a lot of people don’t like me because of the way I look.'

The Grammy Award-winning performer said she feels the loving energy she tries to put out isn't reciprocated.

Lizzo on Sunday took to Instagram Live to express her anguish over 'fat-shaming and racist' reactions in response to Rumors, her collaboration with Cardi B

Emotional: The Truth Hurts artist said that 'for the most part,' the negativity doesn’t hurt her feelings, but her patience and tolerance is lessened amid a grueling work schedule

'I’m putting so much loving energy into the world ... and sometimes I feel like the world don't love me back,' said the recording artist, whose real name is Melissa Viviane Jefferson. 'It doesn’t matter how much positive energy you put into the world, you’re still going to have people that have something mean to say about you.'

The Truth Hurts artist said that 'for the most part,' the negativity doesn’t hurt her feelings, but her patience and tolerance is lessened amid a grueling schedule of writing, performing and promoting, but the reaction to Rumors has been an exception.

'I’m more sensitive and it gets to me ... I feel so down, I'm hurt so hard,' the Detroit native said, adding that she's been working overtime on a daily basis making and promoting her music, even following a root canal procedure.'

In the ancient Greek-themed video, which premiered Friday, Lizzo and Cardi B reunited since their last work on the 2019 hit film Hustlers.

Busy: The Detroit native said he's been working overtime on a daily basis making and promoting her music, even following a root canal procedure

Moving forward: The lauded artist was seen on the social media site with awards in the background

Cardi B took to her defense in a tweet, imparting her own wisdom on the topic of how to mentally deal with the haters.

'When you stand up for yourself they claim [you're] problematic & sensitive,' she said. 'When you don’t they tear you apart until you crying like this. Whether you skinny, big, plastic, they going to always try to put their insecurities on you. Remember these are nerds looking at the popular table.'

Cardi B also shared screen grabs documenting the early success of Rumors while adding that 'body shaming and callin her mammy is mean & racist as f***.

Double trouble: In the ancient Greek-themed video, which premiered Friday, Lizzo and Cardi B reunited since their last work on the 2019 hit film Hustlers

Cardi B took to Twitter to defend her musical peer against the torrent of hateful tweets

'Rumors is doing great,' she said. 'Stop trying to say the song is flopping to dismiss a woman emotions on bullying or acting like they need sympathy. The song is top 10 on all platforms.'

Jameela Jamil also chimed in, expressing her disgust over the nasty social media communications Lizzo has had to contend with in the wake of the song's release.

'Lizzo makes a song about people spending energy trying to bring women down,' Jamil said. 'Twitter erupts in abuse about her talent and mostly her appearance, and then she cries on IG live while addressing how damaging this culture is, and she gets made fun of for crying. This is so f****d up.

Jameela Jamil also chimed in, expressing her disgust over the nasty social media communications Lizzo has had to contend with in the wake of the song's release

Chloe credited Lizzo for inspiring her with her candor

She continued: 'This app has spawned, encouraged and celebrated the most depraved, dehumanized and depressing side of human beings. It’s not FUNNY that you’re hurting some innocent cheerful musician’s mental health. It’s not going to take back the pain of whatever your school bullies did to you.

'When you pile onto and Enjoy the pain of a Black woman who literally only tries to uplift other people, while NOT spending your time piling onto and going after actual abusers and predators… it doesn’t make you cool. It highlights what a useless, irrelevant, vicious pig you are.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Shawn Levy recently stated that the highly-awaited fourth season of the hit Netflix show Stranger Things would be 'super worth the wait.'

The program's executive producer, 53, spoke to The Hollywood Reporter and gave his opinion about several projects with which he was heavily involved.

The Night At The Museum director then fielded a question about the sci-fi program and told the media outlet about various aspects of the forthcoming run of episodes, which will premiere next year.

Hyping it up: Stranger Things' executive producer Shawn Levy recently stated that the highly-awaited fourth season of the show would be 'super worth the wait'; he is seen in 2019

Levy began the interview by expressing that he and the show's creators were aware of the hype that has been generated regarding the program and desired to make them available to the public as soon as possible.

He noted, 'We are long-delayed, and the Duffers and I want to share season four with the world as badly as the world wants it.'

The filmmaker noted that the reason that the run of episodes has taken so long to produce is based on the scale that the series' producers had in mind.

'Part of what's taking time is long before Covid and the pandemic existed, season four was built to be by far the most ambitious, cinematic, sprawling and epic season that we've ever done...by a lot,' he said.

Ready to go: The filmmaker noted that the show's producers 'want to share season four with the world as badly as the world wants it'

Great expectations: Levy also expressed that the forthcoming run of episodes would be 'by far the most ambitious, cinematic, sprawling and epic season that we've ever done'

Levy concluded by expressing that the next set of episodes would please fans of the show despite the time that it has taken to make them as fine-tuned as possible.

He expressed: 'the complexity of season four, even before we had the obstacles, hurdles and challenges of a pandemic, is taking a lot of time because it is super worth the wait.'

Stranger Things' fourth run of episodes was originally planned long before it was officially announced that the show had been renewed for another time.

The announcement was made public with a teaser that was released in September of 2019.

Going back: Planning for the fourth season of Stranger Things occurred long before it was officially announced that a new set of episodes was in development

Several new performers were added to the show that year, with numerous others joining during the new season's development process.

Series regulars Millie Bobby Brown, Winona Ryder and David Harbour, as well as many of the returning cast members, are set to reprise their roles from the previous seasons.

New actors on the program include Jamie Campbell Bower and Eduardo Franco, who were added as series regulars.

Performers such as Robert Englund, Myles Truitt and Amybeth McNulty were also cast in recurring roles.

Back at it: Several series regulars, including Millie Bobby Brown and Winona Ryder will return to their roles in the new season

Physical production on Stranger Things' fourth season initially began in February of last year, with filming taking place in Lithuania.

The show's team then moved to Atlanta before shooting was shut down in March due to the onset of the global pandemic.

Filming eventually resumed in later September after numerous delays.

Rolling with the punches: The show's production team resumed production in September of 2020 after filming was shut down due to the onset of the global pandemic

Harbour previously revealed that filming on the new season of the show was set to conclude in August.

A teaser trailer for the forthcoming run of episodes that was released earlier this month revealed that they were set to be made available in 2022.

However, a definitive release date for the fourth season of Stranger Things has not been set as of yet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She made her film debut with a small role in the Kevin Smith black comedy horror film Tusk, when she was just 15-years-old.

Fast forward seven years and Lily Rose Depp has added nine more movie roles to her resume, with two new films set to drop next month at the 2021 Toronto International Film Festival.

And on Sunday, as the weekend was winding down, the daughter of actor Johnny Depp and singer and model Vanessa Paradis looked to be in casual mode during a food run in New York City.

On the go: Lily Rose Depp, 22, stepped out for a food and water run in New York City on Sunday

Depp, 22, flaunted her petite 5ft3in curves in cutoff jean shorts that were worn over a purple bodysuit.

Being that she was on the go at the height of summer, the A Faithful Man star kept the accessories to a minimum, while wearing a pair of white running sneakers and stylish sunglasses.

The French-American actress and model looked to be in a hurry, considering she grabbed her lunch items to go and hurried out of the store and back onto the busy streets of Manhattan.

Depp kept part of her focus on her phone, which at times appeared to be used as a source for music.

Casual mode: The actress and model showed off her petite 5ft3in curves in cutoff jean shorts that were worn over a purple bodysuit

Despite being delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic, Depp was able to finally finish up shooting two films that are now in post-production.

First, there's the British comedy Silent Night, which centers around a Christmas dinner amongst an extended family. It also stars Keira Knightley, Roman Griffin Davis, Matthew Goode, Annabelle Wallis and Kirby Howell-Baptiste.

Silent Night is slated to make its world premiere at the 2021 Toronto International Film Festival in September.

New roles: The daughter of actor Johnny Depp and singer and model Vanessa Paradis has two new films slated to premiere at the 2021 Toronto International Film Festival in September

Depp scored one of the leading roles in the Irish-Polish drama film Wolf, which will also make its debut at next month's Toronto International Film Festival.

The story focuses on a boy who suffers from species dysphoria, a real illness where people believe they're an animal trapped in a human body.

The film is set in clinic and follows Jacob, a young man, played by George MacKay, who thinks he's a wolf, according to the director and writer Nathalie Biancheri. It also stars Paddy Considine, Eileen Walsh, Fionn O'Shea, Lola Petticrew and Senan Jennings.

Along with her burgeoning career as an actor, Depp has also been busy as a brand ambassador for Chanel since 2015.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Karrueche Tran and Draya Michele both rocked chic yet casual ensembles as they lit up the Lionne Fall/Winter 2021 fashion show on Sunday.

Karrueche, 33, looked stylish in a charcoal denim minidress that highlighted her toned legs as she walked the red carpet for the Los Angeles–set show.

Meanwhile, Draya, 36, offered up a more relaxed look featuring a busty black pinstripe vest.

Stunners: Karrueche Tran, 33, looked chic in a gray denim dress, while Draya Michele, 36, cut a casual figure in a busty black pinstripe vest at the Lionne Fall/Winter 2021 show in Los Angeles on Sunday

Karrueche's featured thick buttons running up her side, with the bottom one undone to create a revealing slit.

The sleeveless dress had a thick pocket cover over her bust, the unusual collar was tilted toward her shoulder.

The 5ft1in Games People Play star elevated her stature with a set of pointy gold open-toe stilettos, and she wore striking oval-shaped white-rimmed sunglasses.

Her raven tresses were swept to one side, with a single long strand resting over her shoulder, and she accessorized with jeweled bracelets.

Extra storage: Tran carried a small reflective purse with her during the event. The model's gorgeous locks were mainly combed over to the left side of her face

Gray mood: Karrueche's sleeveless dress featured an ultra-high slit, a pocket flap over her bust and an odd tilted collar. She wore oval-shaped white-rimmed sunglasses

Looking straight: She wore oval-shaped white-rimmed sunglasses. The model also sported numerous rings and bracelets

Draya kept things more low key with her revealing suit-like outfit.

She showcased her cleavage in a low-cut black pinstripe vest that also put her toned tummy on display.

The 5ft7in model paired her top with a matching set of pinstripe slacks that hung loosely on her frame.

She covered up her messily black curls with a 'Potent' trucker hat from fashion designer Anthony Cordero.

Draya completed her look with a burst of color thanks to her baby blue Hermès Birkin bag.

On point: Draya kept things more low key with her revealing suit-like outfit. She showcased her cleavage in a low-cut black pinstripe vest and wore matching baggy slacks

Mix and match: She covered up her messily black curls with a 'Potent' trucker hat from fashion designer Anthony Cordero and carried a baby blue Birkin bag

Duckie Thot was also seen spending time and posing for a few shots at the fashion show.

The 25-year-old model sported a form-fitting green dress that clung tightly to her curvy hips.

She contrasted the light shade of her top with a pair of heeled cowboy boots that rose to just below her kneecaps.

The former Australia's Next Top Model contestant's gorgeous black locks draped onto her chest as she spent time in front of the cameras.

Thot added a bit of shine to her outfit with a gold watch and bright white painted fingernails.

Good looks: Duckie Thot sported a tight-fitting green dress while spending time at the event

Luscious locks: The model's beautiful black hair cascaded onto her chest and shoulders

Contrast: The former Australia's Got Talent contestant sported a pair of heeled cowboy boots to the function. Thot also sported a gold watch and her fingernails were painted white

The model was later seen walking the runway while dressed in a sleek white dress that covered much of her sculpted physique.

She also donned a pair of white heeled shoes prior to walking in the fashion show.

Her beautiful locks contrasted beautifully with the light shade of her outfit.

Working it: Thot was later seen wearing a flowing white dress while walking in the fashion show

Teaira Walker sported an oversized graphic-printed white t-shirt that was offset by the deep color of her gorgeous locks.

The social media personality also rocked a pair of gold heeled shoes as well a pair of tinted sunglasses and numerous pieces of jewelry while posing for a shot.

Alexis Marie wore a single-sleeve yellow-green top that exposed her toned tummy to the fashion show.

The model contrasted her shirt with a pair of wide-legged black pants and kept a matching bag slung over her right shoulder.

Eye-catching apparel: Teaira Walker wore an oversized t-shirt to the fashion show. Alexis Marie contrasted a green single-sleeve top with a pair of slightly wide-legged black pants

Nafessa Williams was dressed in a double-breasted pink top that featured sizable sleeves and showed off a slight portion of her stomach.

She was seen flashing a wide smile while wearing a pair of form-hugging printed leggings that were slightly darker than her top.

Sevyn Streeter wore a black sleeved top that exposed a lace bra while appearing at the fashion show.

The singer, 35, also rocked a pair of see-through leggings and carried a purse that matched her tops, all of which were offset by her bright green hair.

Va va voom: Nafessa Williams donned an all-pink outfit that included a set of form-hugging leggings. Sevyn Streeter rocked a lace bra and matching leggings, both of which were offset by her bright green hair

Delicia Corden wore a pair of black cargo pants and a matching set of tops as she posed for a few shots.

The designer also kept a Chanel purse slung over her right shoulder and sported several articles of silver jewelry.

Cailin Russo opted for a leather biker jacket that draped over much of her frame and a crop top.

The singer also wore a pair of oversized pants and a matching set of boots, which paired well with her beautiful blonde locks.

Keeping it consistent: Delicia Corden wore an all-black outfit that was offset by numerous articles of silver jewelry. Cailin Russo wore a leather biker jacket that draped over much of her frame at the fashion show

LaToia Fitzgerald sported a cropped light gray camouflage top that was contrasted by a dark inverted skirt at the function.

The designer also wore a pair of heeled boots that rose to above her kneecaps and nearly matched her upper article of clothing.

James Harden opted for an eye-catching yellow zip-up sweater and matching pants at the fashion show.

The professional basketball player, 31, also rocked a pair of white shoes and numerous matching accessories while attending the event.

Interesting outfit: LaToia Fitzgerald appeared to be wearing an inverted skirt as she posed for a quick snap. James Harden wore a bright yellow zip-up jacket and matching pants at the function

Slick Woods was also seen walking in the show while dressed in an open-faced dark gray button-up jacket.

The model wore a matching miniskirt that showed off her chiseled thighs and sported a bra with a metal ring in the center.

The fashion industry personality's bright red hair added an element of color to her outfit, as did her sparkling white sneakers.

She accessorized with numerous pieces of silver jewelry that added a bit of metallic shine to her ensemble.

One-tone wonder: Slick Woods sported a dark gray outfit that was offset by a pair of sparkling white sneakers during the fashion show

LaLa Anthony wore a long blue skirt that conformed tightly to her hips and thighs while arriving at the event.

The reality television personality also rocked a sleeveless white shirt and fuzzy heeled shoes.

She carried a light beige bag with a sizable gold chain for the duration of the star-studded function.

Her bright red hair added a little bit of extra color to her already vibrant clothing ensemble.

Keeping it close: LaLa Anthony sported a long blue skirt that clung tightly to her hips and thighs during the event
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kit Harington recently discussed how he was previously unfamiliar with his character in the upcoming Marvel film Eternals.

The 34-year-old actor appeared on Thursday's episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon and revealed that he had to perform a web search on Dane Whitman when he received the part.

The Game Of Thrones star is currently set to appear in the forthcoming Marvel Cinematic Universe entry, which will be made available to the public in the near future.

Doing his research: Kit Harington revealed that he had to Google Dane Whitman after being cast in Eternals on Thursday's episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon

Harington told the show's host that, when he was initially cast in Eternals, he was simply informed about the character that he would be portraying.

He recalled: 'I didn't get sent a script. I just got sent, "This is who you're playing." So I was like, "Okay."'

The performer then revealed that he had to look the superhero up on the Internet, as he had never heard of the swordsman.

'I just had to Google the character. This is you know, a hell of a way to kind of work out who you're playing,' he noted.

Being blunt: Harington revealed that he did not receive a script, stating: 'I just got sent, "This is who you're playing."'

One way or another: The Game Of Thrones star expressed that 'a hell of a way to kind of work out who you're playing'

Harington then humorously drew a parallel between the superhero and the person he portrayed on Game Of Thrones, Jon Snow.

'I Googled him. He's a character called Dane Whitman, and I realized he has a sword and rides a horse. And I was like, I know this guy. I've been this guy,' he said.

Although he pointed out that the two sounded similar conceptually, the actor noted that Whitman was 'quite different, so it's exciting.'

Fallon then pressed Harington to reveal if Harry Styles would be appearing in the forthcoming flick, about which the performer remained tight-lipped.

One more time: Harington drew a parallel between Jon Snow and Dane Whitman, stating that he 'realized he has a sword and rides a horse. And I was like, I know this guy'

Tight lips: When Fallon pressed the actor to reveal if Harry Styles would appear in the forthcoming feature, the performer did not give a definitive answer

Development on Eternals began in 2018, and its director, Chloe Zhao, was confirmed to be helming the project that September.

The upcoming superhero film will serve as one of the first entries in the MCU's recently-started Phase Four.

Several actors were added to the feature's cast the following year, including Angelina Jolie, Salma Hayek and Kumail Nanjiani, among numerous others.

Shooting had begun by the summer of 2019, with new cast members being added over the course of production.

Keeping it going: Production on Eternals had begun by the summer of 2019 and new cast members were added during the filming process

The film's crew later moved to England in 2020 to capture further scenes, and principal photography ended that February.

Eternals' first teaser was released this past May and was met with a positive reception from both critics and fans.

The film was initially set to be released in November of last year, although it was delayed several times due to the onset of the global pandemic.

Eternals is currently set to be made available to the public on November 5th.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cindy Crawford looked incredible as she sunbathed poolside in a one-piece swimsuit on Sunday.

The 55-year-old supermodel shared a photo on her Instagram page in which she was seen laying on the deck of a pool with the ocean in the background.

'Poolside ✨ Soaking it in…,' Cindy wrote in the caption of the sexy snap.

Wow! Cindy Crawford looked incredible as she sunbathed poolside in a one-piece swimsuit on Sunday

Crawford propped herself up by the pool's edge as she laid back on the cement. The Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue cover star lifted up her sculpted arm as she ran her fingers through her golden-streaked brunette locks.

The runway star showcased her taut midriff in a black one-shouldered one-piece swimsuit. She accessorized simply with a gold chain bracelet.

The catwalk queen showed off her toned and tanned legs as she lounged on the sunny afternoon. Crawford closed her eyes as she raised her head to take in the rays.

Making a profit: Crawford recently sold her Beverly Hills home for $13.5 million. Pictured in 2019

The photo was taken at the beauty's oceanfront estate in Malibu. Crawford recently sold her Beverly Hills home for $13.5 million.

Cindy made a profit of $1.88 million on the lavish property after she sold it to WhatsApp co-founder Jan Koum last week.

According to reports, the sale of the home brings Cindy’s total real estate profits up to an estimated $8 million in the last six years, after she also sold two homes – one in Beverly Hills, and one in Malibu – in 2015 for a total of $80 million.

Lavish: Cindy and her husband, Rande Gerber, purchased the five-bedroom Beverly Hills home for $11.6 million in 2017 from OneRepublic rocker Ryan Tedder. Seen in 2019

Cindy and her husband, Rande Gerber, 59, purchased the five-bedroom Beverly Hills home for $11.6 million in 2017 from OneRepublic rocker Ryan Tedder. The mid-century modern home spans 5,400-square-feet and was built in 1959, although it has been completely re-designed.

Cindy and Rande - who have Kaia, 19, and Presley, 22, together - initially put the house up for sale for $16 million in August 2020 before the price was slashed to $13.5 million.

The home has high ceilings, walls of glass and an open floor plan, according to Realtor.com, who also listed the property as having a double living room with a bar and eye-catching fireplace, as well as a gourmet kitchen with a centre island made of Calacatta marble.

The gated, one-acre lot has a motor court, a large pool and private walking paths, according to the listing.

Kurt Rappaport of Westside Estate Agency represented the seller and the buyer.

News of the house sale comes after Cindy and Rande purchased a new waterfront home in Miami Beach back in January.

The couple reported spent $9.6 million on the property, which has five bedrooms, four and a half bathrooms, and almost 4,000 square feet of living space.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@January Jones has grabbed the attention of admirers and critics with her consistent flow of bikini snaps on Instagram over the past couple of years.

And on Sunday the Mad Men alum sent her 1.1 million fans and followers into a frenzy once again by stepping up the sex appeal level with a series of photos where she flashes underboob in a peachy bikini.

'If only boring people are bored, I fear I may be boring,' the 43-year-old joked in the caption.

Next level: January Jones, 43, stepped up the sex appeal level and showed off some underboob in her latest series of bikini snaps she shared on Instagram on Sunday

The South Dakota native struck a pose in the peach-colored two-piece with her right leg on a chair in the first photo, which was seemingly taken in the yard of her Los Angeles home.

While the bottoms of the stylish number were moderate, the bikini top could barely hold in her burgeoning breasts.

She opted to go with a serious and stern look on her face in the first image, but changed her tune in the follow-up of the series by flashing a big beaming smile.

Jones covered up, ever so slightly, in a perfectly matched shirt that she left wide open to hold the attention firmly on her womanly curves.

Skimpy: The Mad Men alum stunned in a peach-colored bikini that could barely hold in her burgeoning breasts, along with a matching shirt she left wide open

She accessorized the ensemble with a few gold necklaces, matching earrings, and a pair of stylish sunglasses.

A third snap shared on her Insta-Story showed off more of her legs as she she again posed with her right leg on the chair and serious look on her face.

There was no shortage of fans and followers who were willing to react to her comment: 'If only boring people are bored, I fear I may be boring.'

'Boring never looked so good tho' was a common sentiment in the comments section.

Tasty: A third snap shared on her Insta-Story showed off more of her legs as she she still posed with her right leg on the chair and serious look on her face

Of course there were plenty of people who couldn't resist sharing their thoughts about her underboob with comments like, 'Underteat looking good, Jan!' and 'Not sure that fits but oh well f**k it dude.'

One concerned citizen shared her worry by writing: 'Hope that knot is tight otherwise the candy is out of the piñata.'

An obvious admirer kept it simple and sweet by writing, 'I'm not worried about you.'

Jones last starred in the Netflix drama series, Spinning Out, which premiered in January 2020 but was canceled just one month later.

She is currently shooting the action-thriller film God Is A Bullet, which is being directed by Nick Cassevetes and co-stars Jamie Foxx and Nikolaj Coster-Waldau.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He famously showed off his manhood while paddleboarding with his fiancée Katy Perry.

And Orlando Bloom showed how much he loved that sense of freedom as he took another dip in the nude in an Instagram post shared with his 5.2 million followers on Sunday.

The 44-year-old actor flaunted his ripped physique while taking a swim in a gorgeous rural spot before showing off his peach-covered backside.

Letting loose: Orlando Bloom, 44, stripped down to the nude for an invigorating swim in nature on Sunday, before showing off his pert backside for his Instagram followers

Orlando was nude at least from the waist up in a photo and an accompanying video he posted of himself taking a swim in what was either a lake or a gentle river.

In the short clip, he sent water flying as he finished up a backstroke, before standing up in the shallow water and swiping his hair back.

'Ah!' he exhaled with delight. 'So amazing!'

It wasn't clear if the Lord Of The Rings star was wearing swim trunks or in the buff, but he stripped down for a follow-up photo.

Stripped down: Orlando had his bare bottom covered with a playful peach emoji as he grinned and flashed a thumbs up

Freedom! Orlando famously showed off his manhood while paddleboarding with his fiancée Katy during a holiday in Sardinia in 2016 (pictured)

Orlando had his bare bottom covered with a playful peach emoji as he grinned and flashed a thumbs up.

It appeared to be a campground, and there were people off in the distance on the other bank, but he had some clothing draped over his nether regions so as not to flash them.

He let the photos and video do all the talking and simply captioned the post with water droplets emojis.

The post was a hit with fans, who left plenty of cheeky comments of their own.

His fellow actor Josh Brolin commented with multiple rock on emojis, while makeup artist Michael Anthony joked, 'Who knew he had the BACK STROKE toooooo!!!'

Helena Christensen joked, 'That family on the other side,' and added a staring emoji, while Roma Downey just wrote that it was 'peachy.'

Free and clear: Orlando was nude at least from the waist up in a photo and an accompanying video he posted of himself taking a swim in what was either a lake or a gentle river

Taking a dip: In the short clip, he sent water flying as he finished up a backstroke, before standing up in the shallow water and swiping his hair back

Refreshing: 'Ah!' he exhaled with delight. 'So amazing!'

Having a laugh: His fellow actor Josh Brolin commented with multiple rock on emojis, while makeup artist Michael Anthony joked, 'Who knew he had the BACK STROKE toooooo!!!'

Orlando was likely referencing his infamous and oft-mocked nude paddleboarding photos, taken in 2016 while he was on an Italian vacation with his then-girlfriend Katy Perry.

He was seen totally unclothed as he kneeled and paddled, while Katy was fully clothed and sat a the front of the board, looking somewhat embarrassed.

In July of last year, she opened up to Howard Stern about the risqué photos and admitted that her beau tried to get her to strip down with him.

After Howard asked if she refused to go nude because there were photographers around, she replied, 'I mean, I would have never, like, set him up if I had a real thought,' she said, via Vanity Fair.

'But in the back of my mind...I am Jim Carrey in The Truman Show a little bit, so I thought maybe there would be a chance. I would say I'm a little bit more of the pragmatic in the partnership.'

Old times: Orlando was likely referencing his infamous and oft-mocked nude paddleboarding photos, taken in 2016 while he was on an Italian vacation with his then-girlfriend Katy Perry; seen together on July 31 in Capri, Italy

Although her instincts turned out to be correct, she didn't think it was particularly nude that her love wanted to let it all free.

'Well it was Europe. Honestly, we had had a pretty chill time for a week and everywhere we looked it was like everybody was naked. It was Europe, it was Italy, and I think he wanted to fit in with the locals and it was the end of the trip,' she continued.

She also joke that she'd been unimpressed the day before when Orlando had been bragging about how popular his franchises Lord Of The Rings and Pirates Of The Caribbean franchises were on Twitter.

'I was like, eye roll, eye roll, eye roll,' she said, 'and then all of the sudden, he is number one trending on Twitter and I was like, 'How?! How?''

Seeing the sights: Orlando didn't specify where he was when he took his most recent nude photos, but he last updated his fans a week ago as he and Katy were on a gorgeous tour of Italy

Orlando didn't specify where he was when he took his most recent nude photos, but he last updated his fans a week ago as he and Katy were on a gorgeous tour of Italy.

He and his wife-to-be began dating in early 2016, though they split just over a year later in February 2017.

But their love brought them back together, and they reunited one year later in February 2019.

In March of last year, Katy revealed in her Never Worn White music video that she was pregnant with their first child, and they welcomed their daughter Daisy, 11 months, on August 26, 2020.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eight months after suffering a miscarriage, Grammy winner Michelle Branch announced Sunday that she's pregnant with her third child 'due in early 2022.'

The expecting 38-year-old unveiled her baby No. 3 news by posting about baking scones from a recipe in Nigella Lawson's 2001 cookbook How to Be a Domestic Goddess.

Michelle's Instagram post received supportive comments from three-time Grammy winner Jennifer Nettles, Oscar nominee Juliette Lewis, and fitness trainer Gunnar Peterson.

Bun in oven: Eight months after suffering a miscarriage, Grammy winner Michelle Branch (pictured Friday) announced Sunday that she's pregnant with her third child 'due in early 2022'

'You know you're pregnant when...': The expecting 38-year-old unveiled her baby No. 3 news by posting about baking scones from a recipe in Nigella Lawson's 2001 cookbook How to Be a Domestic Goddess

Branch also admitted she was 'nervous' considering she and second husband - The Black Keys drummer Patrick Carney - suffered their 'first miscarriage' on December 26.

The Ohio-born 41-year-old was still technically married to his second wife Emily Ward when he first met Branch at a 2015 Grammy Awards party.

The South Carolina-based married couple of two years will next celebrate the third birthday of their son Rhys James on August 28.

Michelle is also mother to 16-year-old daughter Owen Isabelle from her decade-long marriage to bass player Teddy Landau (19 years her senior), which ended in 2015.

'So happy for you!' Michelle's Instagram post received supportive comments from three-time Grammy winner Jennifer Nettles, Oscar nominee Juliette Lewis, and fitness trainer Gunnar Peterson

Fingers crossed: Branch also admitted she was 'nervous' considering she and second husband - The Black Keys drummer Patrick Carney - suffered their 'first miscarriage' on December 26

Still going strong! The Ohio-born 41-year-old (L, pictured April 17) was still technically married to his second wife Emily Ward when he first met Branch (R) at a 2015 Grammy Awards party

Branch will next perform September 10 during the 20th anniversary livestream of her platinum debut The Spirit Room at www.momenthouse.com.

The homeschooled Arizona native re-recorded The Spirit Room and pressed it on vinyl, but hasn't released a new record since her third studio album Hopeless Romantic in 2017.

The Black Keys will kick off their 'intimate' three-date World Tour of America on September 20 in Athens, GA alongside opener Robert Finley.

The four-time Grammy winners just dropped the music video for their track Poor Boy A Long Way From Home last Thursday.

More to celebrate! The South Carolina-based married couple of two years will next celebrate the third birthday of their son Rhys James (pictured Sunday) on August 28
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lizzo on Sunday took to Instagram Live to express her anguish over 'fat-shaming and racist' reactions in response to Rumors, her collaboration with Cardi B.

'People say s*** about me that doesn’t even make sense,' the 33-year-old singer said in the candid social media clip, in which she used a tissue to wipe away her tears. 'It’s fatphobic, it’s racist and it’s hurtful - if you don’t like my music cool, if you don’t like Rumors the song, cool but a lot of people don’t like me because of the way I look.'

The Grammy Award-winning performer said she feels the loving energy she tries to put out isn't reciprocated.

The latest: Lizzo, 33, on Sunday took to Instagram Live to express her anguish over 'fat-shaming and racist' reactions in response to Rumors, her collaboration with Cardi B

'I’m putting so much loving energy into the world ... and sometimes I feel like the world don't love me back,' said the recording artist, whose real name is Melissa Viviane Jefferson. 'It doesn’t matter how much positive energy you put into the world, you’re still going to have people that have something mean to say about you.'

The Truth Hurts artist said that 'for the most part,' the negativity doesn’t hurt her feelings, but her patience and tolerance is lessened amid a grueling schedule of writing, performing and promoting, but the reaction to Rumors has been an exception.

'I’m more sensitive and it gets to me ... I feel so down, I'm hurt so hard,' the Detroit native said, adding that she's been working overtime on a daily basis making and promoting her music, even following a root canal procedure.'

In the ancient Greek-themed video, which premiered Friday, Lizzo and Cardi B reunited since their last work on the 2019 hit film Hustlers.

Emotional: The Truth Hurts artist said that 'for the most part,' the negativity doesn’t hurt her feelings, but her patience and tolerance is lessened amid a grueling work schedule

Busy: The Detroit native said he's been working overtime on a daily basis making and promoting her music, even following a root canal procedure

Moving forward: The lauded artist was seen on the social media site with awards in the background

Cardi B took to her defense in a tweet, imparting her own wisdom on the topic of how to mentally deal with the haters.

'When you stand up for yourself they claim [you're] problematic & sensitive,' she said. 'When you don’t they tear you apart until you crying like this. Whether you skinny, big, plastic, they going to always try to put their insecurities on you. Remember these are nerds looking at the popular table.'

Cardi B also shared screen grabs documenting the early success of Rumors while adding that 'body shaming and callin her mammy is mean & racist as f***.

Double trouble: In the ancient Greek-themed video, which premiered Friday, Lizzo and Cardi B reunited since their last work on the 2019 hit film Hustlers

Cardi B took to Twitter to defend her musical peer against the torrent of hateful tweets

'Rumors is doing great,' she said. 'Stop trying to say the song is flopping to dismiss a woman emotions on bullying or acting like they need sympathy. The song is top 10 on all platforms.'

Jameela Jamil also chimed in, expressing her disgust over the nasty social media communications Lizzo has had to contend with in the wake of the song's release.

'Lizzo makes a song about people spending energy trying to bring women down,' Jamil said. 'Twitter erupts in abuse about her talent and mostly her appearance, and then she cries on IG live while addressing how damaging this culture is, and she gets made fun of for crying. This is so f****d up.

Jameela Jamil also chimed in, expressing her disgust over the nasty social media communications Lizzo has had to contend with in the wake of the song's release

Chloe credited Lizzo for inspiring her with her candor

She continued: 'This app has spawned, encouraged and celebrated the most depraved, dehumanized and depressing side of human beings. It’s not FUNNY that you’re hurting some innocent cheerful musician’s mental health. It’s not going to take back the pain of whatever your school bullies did to you.

'When you pile onto and Enjoy the pain of a Black woman who literally only tries to uplift other people, while NOT spending your time piling onto and going after actual abusers and predators… it doesn’t make you cool. It highlights what a useless, irrelevant, vicious pig you are.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bella Hadid showed off her incredible bikini body in a new photo from her summer vacation in Ibiza.

On Sunday, the 24-year-old supermodel shared an image in which she was seen from the chest down while lounging outside in a sexy two-piece.

The runway star was sporting a mysterious bruise on her right thigh as she draped her toned leg over a blue patterned cushion.

Mystery: Bella Hadid was sporting a mysterious bruise on her right thigh in a sexy bikini snap from her vacation in Ibiza

Bella, who was laying next to a backgammon board, captioned her post: 'Undefeated.'

The Vogue cover star is a backgammon enthusiast and was spotted picking a new board during a trip to Paris last month.

Hadid flaunted her cleavage in a pink and maroon triangle top. She pulled the straps of her skimpy bikini bottoms high over her hips, showcasing her taut midriff.

The brunette beauty's long waves spilled over her shoulder as she reclined next to a glass of white wine and a pepperoni pizza.

Sizzling: Later on Saturday, the stunning model shared a mirror selfie to her Instagram Story in which she displayed her flawless figure in her bikini

Trendy: She also posted a series of photos on her Instagram in which she was seen striking a variety of poses in a light blue long-sleeved cutout bodysuit

Relaxing: In another photo, Bella donned a black string bikini as she floated on her back in a pool

The catwalk queen accessorized with several pink and orange beaded bracelets and a gold watch along with a pinkie ring.

In another photo, Bella donned a black string bikini as she floated on her back in a pool.

Hadid also shared two images of the food she was enjoying during her trip. In one photo, a bowl of delicious-looking croissants was seen on a wood table as well as a cutting board covered with bread crumbs.

Yum! Hadid also shared two images of the food she was enjoying during her trip. In one photo, a bowl of delicious-looking croissants was seen on a wood table as well as a cutting board covered with bread crumbs

Delicious: Platters of fresh pineapple slices and kiwi as well as a bowl of blueberries and strawberries were displayed in another shot

Fun: Bella concluded her post with a photo of a movie playing on a giant outdoor poolside screen at night

Platters of fresh pineapple slices and kiwi as well as a bowl of blueberries and strawberries were displayed in another shot.

Bella concluded her post with a photo of a movie playing on a giant outdoor poolside screen at night.

Later on Saturday, the stunning model shared a mirror selfie to her Instagram Story in which she displayed her flawless figure in her bikini. The two piece was by Gone Girl star's Emily Ratajkowski's swimsuit line Inamorata Woman.

Hadid wore the bikini top high on her chest, flashing a bit of underboob. She held her iPhone over her face as she took the sizzling snap.

On the photo she tagged Ratajkowski and Inamorata Woman. She wrote, 'Thank you @emrata @inamoratawoman Jadoreeeee.'

She also posted a series of photos on her Instagram page in which she was seen striking a variety of poses in a light blue long-sleeved cutout bodysuit.

Statement piece: The daring bodysuit was adorned with strands of brightly-colored beads that hung in between the cutouts across her chest and midriff

Stylish: She paired the bodysuit with baggy textured low-rise jeans and pale blue sandals

The daring bodysuit was adorned with strands of brightly-colored beads that hung in between the cutouts across her chest and midriff.

She paired the bodysuit with baggy textured low-rise jeans and pale blue sandals. Hadid accessorized with neon colored beaded bracelets and gold decorative rings on almost every finger.

Bella added a green butterfly clip at the bottom of one strand of hair to completed her 90s-inspired ensemble.

She was seen sitting outdoors on a white and sandstone staircase against a desert background. A couple of photos featured the model as she pulled her hair on top of her head and gave the camera a sultry stare.

Throwback: Bella added a green butterfly clip at the bottom of one strand of hair to completed her 90s-inspired ensemble

Scenic: She was seen sitting outdoors on a white and sandstone staircase against a desert background

Her latest shots may have been taken by her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, who she has been nearly inseparable from since going public with their relationship last month.

Kalman was recently featured on Hadid's Instagram page, which boasts 44.8million followers.

Kalman was included in last week's photo dump from his and Bella's 'Day off in paradise' together, which was shot back in February.

The snap showed Bella planting a kiss on Marc's cheek, while other showed the model prancing around a tropical destination in various bikinis.

New love: Her latest shots may have been taken by her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, who she has been nearly inseparable from since going public with their relationship last month

Her newest photos confirm that her romance with Marc has been going on for months.

The two were only romantically connected in July, when she shared a photo of them embracing in a since-deleted post, but a source shared with Page Six that the lovebirds had been together since the summer of 2020, though they 'hid it well.'

Their scheme to hide the relationship reportedly involved having Marc drive her car, but when they arrived at their destination he would let her out but would stay in the car and park it elsewhere, so as to be less conspicuous.

At the time that she went Instagram official with her Marc, who's an art director, her older sister Gigi Hadid left a smiley face emoji in the comments section.

Love: The model's sultry snaps may have been taken by her new boyfriend Marc Kalman, who she has been nearly inseparable from since going public with their relationship last month; the pair pictured in February
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sophie Turner celebrated her husband Joe Jonas' 32nd birthday with a cute post on Instagram.

On Sunday, the 25-year-old Game of Thrones star shared two photos of the Cake By The Ocean singer as he posed in their living room, which decorated with streamers and a colorful 'Happy Birthday' banner.

'Birthday boy,' Sophie wrote in the caption, adding a partying smiley face emoji.

Happy Birthday! Sophie Turner celebrated her husband Joe Jonas' 32nd birthday with a cute post on Instagram of the singer posing amid party decorations

Joe donned a striped cream-colored polo shirt with navy blue trim and gold buttons as he stood with his arms behind his back.

In the next shot, Jonas rested his hand on a column and put his other hand in the pocket of his high-waisted grey pants as he glanced to the side with a slight smile.

A metallic tinsel foil fringe curtain was hung in the doorway behind the Camp Rock actor. Joe commented on Sophie's post with a red heart emoji.

Sweet: 'Birthday boy,' Sophie wrote in the caption, adding a partying smiley face emoji

New parent: The DNCE frontman became a father for the first time last year when Sophie gave birth to their daughter Willa at the end of July. Seen in 2019

The night before, Jonas was spotted in the same ensemble as he headed to dinner at Craig's with Sophie, who wore a slinky red slip dress.

The loved-up pair were joined by Joe's brothers Nick, 28, and Kevin, 33, as they dined at West Hollywood hotspot Craig's.

Joe's brothers and bandmates also posted birthday tributes on their Instagram pages. Nick added a black and white photo in which he and Joe were seen smoking cigars.

Brotherly love: Nick added a black and white photo in which he and Joe were seen smoking cigars with a touching caption

Kevin shared a boomerang of his brother, clad in a black puffer jacket and blue jeans, as he shook his hips on a sidewalk.

In the caption, he wrote: 'Happy birthday @joejonas love you dude!!! Dance your face off today!'

Nick's wife Priyanka Chopra celebrated her brother-in-law's birthday on her Instagram Story with a photo in which she was seen posing with her husband and Joe.

'Happy birthday @joejonas love you man. You deserve all the happiness in the world,' he wrote in the caption. Joe responded with a emojis of a red heart and smiley face with tears.

Funny: Kevin shared a boomerang of his brother, clad in a black puffer jacket and blue jeans, as he shook his hips on a sidewalk

Celebrating: Nick's wife Priyanka Chopra celebrated her brother-in-law's birthday on her Instagram Story with a photo in which she was seen posing with her husband and Joe

She superimposed a gold crown over Joe's head and wrote 'Happy Birthday Joe. Wish you all the love and good things in the world.'

Joe shared her post to his Instagram Story along with other birthday tributes from his friends.

The DNCE frontman became a father for the first time last year when Sophie gave birth to their daughter Willa at the end of July.

Turner and Jonas tied the knot in May 2019 with a surprise Las Vegas ceremony. They later married again in a lavish wedding that took place in France.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two-time Grammy winners Korn announced they were forced to postpone their concert at Pennsylvania's Pavilion at Montage Mountain in Scranton on Saturday due to the coronavirus.

'Unfortunately, there has been a confirmed COVID-19 case within the Korn camp,' the nu metal band - who boasts 15.6M social media followers - tweeted on Saturday.

'The safety of our artists, crew, venue staff, and fans are our top priority, so we must postpone the show tonight. We're deeply sorry for this unfortunate last minute news.

'We'll be back soon': Two-time Grammy winners Korn announced they were forced to postpone their concert at Pennsylvania's Pavilion at Montage Mountain in Scranton on Saturday due to the coronavirus (pictured in 2017)

'But please hold on to your tickets while we work to get your rescheduled date sorted ASAP with Live Nation and the Pavilion at Montage Mountain.'

Adding: 'Thank you for your understanding, and stay safe out there. We'll be back soon.'

However, the Can You Hear Me rockers have not postponed their show scheduled for this Tuesday at New York's Northwell Health at Jones Beach Theater in Wantagh.

The nu metal band tweeted on Saturday: 'Unfortunately, there has been a confirmed COVID-19 case within the Korn camp. The safety of our artists, crew, venue staff, and fans are our top priority, so we must postpone the show tonight'

Still on: However, the Can You Hear Me rockers (pictured last Tuesday) have not postponed their show scheduled for this Tuesday at New York's Northwell Health at Jones Beach Theater in Wantagh

Crew member? Therefore, chances are that the mystery infected person is definitely not frontman Jonathan Davis (pictured last Tuesday)

Therefore, chances are that the mystery infected person is definitely not frontman Jonathan Davis.

Other members of Korn supporting Staind's 28-date summer tour include guitarists James 'Munky' Shaffer and Brian 'Head' Welch as well as drummer Ray Luzier and bassist Ra Díaz (who replaced Reginald 'Fieldy' Arvizu on June 21).

YouTube creator Jim Powers uploaded three videos of the Finally Free stars' concert at Virgina's Jiffy Lube Live in Bristow last Wednesday.

Korn (styled KoЯn) formed in Bakersfield, CA in 1993 and they've sold more than 40M records worldwide.

'Coming undone!' Other members of Korn supporting Staind's 28-date summer tour include guitarists James 'Munky' Shaffer and Brian 'Head' Welch as well as drummer Ray Luzier and bassist Ra Díaz (who replaced Reginald 'Fieldy' Arvizu on June 21)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Debra Winger has revealed that she quit the 1992 hit movie A League of Their Own after learning the director had hired Madonna to star alongside her.

The Oscar-nominated actress also claimed that she was still paid for it, having trained for months in the baseball-themed project, after being replaced by A-List star Geena Davis in the lead role.

Winger, 66, who trained with the Chicago Cubs for three months in preparation, told The Telegraph in a new interview that she felt director Penny Marshall was making 'an Elvis film' after casting Madge, 62.

Not winging it: Debra Winger has revealed that quit the 1992 hit movie A League of Their Own after learning the director had hired Madonna, despite training for three months (Pic, 2019)

'The studio agreed with me because it was the only time I ever collected a pay-or-play on my contract. In other words, I collected my pay even though I did not play, and that’s very hard to get in a court,' Winger explained.

The well-reviewed film that also starred Tom Hanks, went on to make $132.4million at the box office against a $40million budget, making it a resounding success.

Still, Winger has no regrets.

'As entertaining as [the finished film] was, you don't walk away going "Wow, those women did that." You kind of go "Is that true?"' she explained, stating her case.

Big success: The movie - also starring Rosie O'Donnell - went on to make $132.4million at the box office against a $40million budget. Still, Winger says she has no regrets.

Replacement: Winger's role was recast with A-List star Geena Davis instead

Winger also said that although the other stars didn't train as hard as she did, her replacement Davis, 65, 'did OK.'

'I certainly don't begrudge any of them,' Winger added. But when asked about Madonna's performance, Winger is said to have replied: 'I think [her] acting career has spoken for itself.'

Madonna has certainly had a very mixed career in the movie business, having won plaudits for her role in the 1996 Alan Parker film Evita, and been torn to shreds by critics in turkeys such as Guy Ritchie's Swept Away in 2002.

Mixed bag: Madonna - pictured with co-star O'Donnell at the premiere in '92 - is not known for being the best actress out there in Hollywood

Meanwhile, Winger notched up Academy Award nominations for her roles in critically-acclaimed films, An Officer and a Gentleman (1982), Terms of Endearment (1983), and Shadowlands (1993).

But the actress became the subject of a documentary in 2002 about her career taking a nosedive in later years, in Rosanna Arquette's Searching for Debra Winger.

In 1995 Winger claimed that she decided to take a hiatus from acting.

In the documentary she explained: 'I wanted out for years. I got sick of hearing myself say I wanted to quit.'

Elsewhere in her interview with The Telegraph, Winger said she felt the #MeToo movement has 'gone ridiculously too far in some ways'.

Winger told how she was encouraged to take water retention tablets to lose weight on the set of An Officer and a Gentleman because she looked 'puffy'. Pictured, with co-star Richard Gere

The American actress explained did not feel the situation had 'settled' yet following the upheaval in the film industry.

Now appearing in Apple TV+ series Mr Corman alongside Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Winger said she views the #MeToo movement at least partly through the eyes of her three grown-up sons.

'I don't feel like it’s settled yet. [The industry] is still in upheaval,' she said.

'The plates are shifting. In some ways, it's pulled ridiculously too far. Part of it is that I’m the mother of three young white males, so I'm looking at things that they're experiencing, and things that my girlfriends of all different backgrounds are experiencing [and] it hasn't quite found its steady point yet where there's room for everybody.'

She added: 'I'm a bad one to ask. I always found my way. Is that privilege? It didn't feel like it at the time, because I felt like I was in very abusive situations, but it was my responsibility to buck up, get strong.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Wrath of Man action star Scott Eastwood affectionately wrapped his arms around a mystery woman while vacationing on the Amalfi Coast in Southern Italy on Saturday.

The 35-year-old third-generation Californian beamed as he canoodled with his brunette companion while swimming in the Tyrrhenian Sea located in the Gulf of Salerno.

Eastwood (born Reeves) and his lady friend then sunbathed together side by side on lounge chairs as she sipped wine.

New flame? Wrath of Man action star Scott Eastwood affectionately wrapped his arms around a mystery woman while vacationing on the Amalfi Coast in Southern Italy on Saturday

Scott was previously romantically linked to Ashton Kutcher mistress Sara Leal, One Tree Hill alum Jana Kramer, and Playboy 2015 cover model Brittany Brousseau.

And back in 2016, The Outpost actor told GQ Australia that it was 'harder to date' after his girlfriend Jewel Brangman was killed in 2014 from a defective airbag in her car.

On Saturday, Eastwood posted a video of himself enjoying a female acrobat's limber performance at the nightclub Lío Ibiza in the 'amazing country' of Spain.

Intimate: The 35-year-old third-generation Californian beamed as he canoodled with his brunette companion while swimming in the Tyrrhenian Sea located in the Gulf of Salerno

Bronzing their bodies: Eastwood (born Reeves) and his lady friend then sunbathed together side by side on lounge chairs as she sipped wine

Bachelor: Scott was previously romantically linked to Ashton Kutcher mistress Sara Leal, One Tree Hill alum Jana Kramer, and Playboy 2015 cover model Brittany Brousseau

Scott - who boasts 5.2M social media followers - gushed: 'Amazing few days in the islands!'

The 5ft11in heartthrob doesn't fall far from the tree as his famous father - four-time Oscar winner Clint Eastwood - is a notorious womanizer.

The legendary 91-year-old fathered Eastwood and his sister Kathryn from his secret romance with flight attendant Jacelyn Reeves.

Tragedy: And back in 2016, The Outpost actor told GQ Australia that it was 'harder to date' after his girlfriend Jewel Brangman was killed in 2014 from a defective airbag in her car

Perched: On Saturday, Eastwood posted a video of himself enjoying a female acrobat's limber performance at the nightclub Lío Ibiza in the 'amazing country' of Spain

Scott - who boasts 5.2M social media followers - gushed: 'Amazing few days in the islands!'

Clint fathered six more children from his relationships with girlfriends Roxanne Tunis and Frances Fisher, as well as wives Maggie Johnson and Dina Ruiz.

Eastwood - who directs and stars in western Cry Macho premiering September 17 on HBO Max - just endorsed Larry Elder for California governor in the recall election.

'Clint Eastwood just contacted me with a message of his support,' the 69-year-old Republican candidate tweeted last Tuesday.

Mini-me: The 5ft11in heartthrob doesn't fall far from the tree as his famous father - four-time Oscar winner Clint Eastwood (R, pictured in 2019) - is a notorious womanizer

Childhood snaps: The legendary 91-year-old (L) fathered Eastwood and his sister Kathryn from his secret romance with flight attendant Jacelyn Reeves (R)

Fertile: Clint fathered six more children from his relationships with girlfriends Roxanne Tunis and Frances Fisher, as well as wives Maggie Johnson and Dina Ruiz (pictured in 2018)

'A shout out to Mr. Eastwood. You made my day. #WeveGotAStateToSave #RecallGavinNewsom.'

Scott has acted in four of his dad's films - Flags of Our Fathers (2006), Grand Torino (2008), Invictus (2009), and Trouble with the Curve (2012).

The LMU grad has three upcoming films - David Hackl's thriller Dangerous, Jason Orley's comedy I Want You Back, and Ariel Vromen's LA riot drama April 29, 1992.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jada Pinkett Smith has unveiled a new tattoo and also promised her Instagram followers that there are many more to come.

On Sunday, the 49-year-old Girls Trip star shared an image in which she was seen crouching on the floor in a light green sweatsuit and extending her arm to show off her new ink.

'I always said I would get a sleeve at 60 but tomorrow is not promised. Soooo … I’m starting to build my sleeve now!' Jada exclaimed in the caption.

New ink: Jada Pinkett Smith got a new tattoo and promised her Instagram followers that there are many more to come

She continued, 'Repp’n the Divine Feminine journey within and without. ✨Jai Ma✨ #MataSita #Allat #Oshun #QuanYin.

Jada's tattoo is an intricate rendering of Mata Sita, a Hindu goddess and the heroine of the Sanskrit epic Ramayana. She is the goddess of sacrifice, purity, love and simplicity.

The other goddesses that Pinkett-Smith hashtagged in her caption include Arabian goddess Allat, African goddess Oshun and Quan Yin, the Buddhist bodhisattva of compassion.

More to come: Jada exclaimed in the caption: 'I always said I would get a sleeve at 60 but tomorrow is not promised. Soooo … I’m starting to build my sleeve now!' Seen in 2020

Pinkett-Smith's new tattoo was inked just above the tattoo that she got in May along with her daughter Willow, and mother Adrienne 'Gammy' Banfield-Norris. The trio all got matching tattoos of three blossoming lotuses.

Jada showcased the ink on her Instagram account, where she shared photos of the tattoo process followed by the finished product.

The ink was done by tattoo artist-to-the-stars Dr. Woo, and the process was all documented on their hit Facebook Watch series, Red Table Talk.

'Now I want a sleeve!' Jada Pinkett Smith, her daughter Willow, and mother Adrienne 'Gammy' Banfield-Norris all got matching lotus tattoos representing their three generations

All three women received tattoos of three blossoming lotuses, from bud to fully grown.

The three different tattoos varied slightly in design, with Jada and Adrienne opting for a small flowers sprouting in a downward direction while Willow opted for a larger design that bloomed in an upward trajectory.

'Look what we did!!! Thank you @_dr_woo_ for your patience and generosity of your craft and spirit. Now I want a sleeve!!!!' Jada captioned the slideshow.

Willow pitched the lotus design several days prior to their tattoo appointment on their show.

Flower power: All three women received tattoos of three blossoming lotuses, from bud to fully grown

Significant: Willow said the tattoo had spiritual and familial significance

'I thought that was brilliant': Adrienne was a fan of Willow's interpretation of the tattoo design

'You know what we could get? A lotus,' Willow said, as her mother and grandmother expressed their approval.

'I'm down for that!' Jada said.

The tattoos were a long time coming, with Willow and Adrienne previously expressing their interest in getting one done before Jada finally committed and got an appointment with Dr. Woo.

Inked! The ink was done by tattoo artist-to-the-stars Dr. Woo, and the process was all documented on their hit Facebook Watch series, Red Table Talk

Girl power! Jada shared an embrace with her mother as they savored the special moment

Deep meaning: Willow revealed the tattoo 'expresses the spiritual journey but also the three of us'

As Willow got her tattoo done, she explained the significance of the flower.

'The lotus represents spiritual enlightenment,' Willow said. 'And we hear this saying, "through the mud grows the lotus."'

'That's definitely my story,' Adrienne chimed in.

'Yes, 100%, and I think all of us from different perspectives in life have had that journey,' Willow continued. 'The bud to the little blossom to the bloom, also I feel like expresses the spiritual journey but also the three of us. I'm the youngest, you know my mom is the middle and Gam is the fully-bloomed lotus.'

Tatt's enough! Adrienne sat for Dr. Woo as he tattooed her arm

'And it means something different for each of us,' Adrienne added. 'Our stories, our journeys, are different. But it still represents us so well. I thought that was brilliant.

'"Out of the mud comes the lotus." You have to go through the mud, the dirt and still something beautiful is created,' Adrienne said. 'And that kind of describes my journey. I kind of been through some really tough times.

'But I'm still worthy, you know, and there's still room for me to grow and change even now, at 67. I'm still growing and changing and trying to be better. So getting the lotus was just everything.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Singer John Mellencamp has split with girlfriend Natasha Barret after a brief romance, it has been revealed.

The 69-year-old rocker - previously known as Johnny Cougar - was introduced to Natasha, 46, by his daughter, ex-RHOBH star Teddi Mellencamp.

They were first spotted in May together, with reports circling that they had been dating for just a few months before that.

It's over! John Mellencamp, 69, splits with Natasha Barrett, 46, following brief courtship (the pair pictured together in May this year just a few months after they started dating)

CloserWeekly reported their split on Saturday.

Barrett works as a realtor who specializes in helping celebrities, having worked with Chris Pratt and Anna Faris on selling their LA home when they were still married.

According to the bio on her firm's website The Agency, it says the beauty enjoys 'traveling the world in search of her soulmate.'

Single again: According to the bio on her firm's website The Agency, it says celeb realtor Natasha, 46, enjoys 'traveling the world in search of her soulmate'

Setting up her dad: The 69-year-old rocker - previously known as Johnny Cougar - was introduced to Natasha, 46, by his daughter, ex-RHOBH star Teddi Mellencamp (Pictured, 2018)

Last year, John was linked to celebrity skin care specialist Jamie Sue Sherrill, 50, known as Nurse Jamie, professionally.

They were first reported to be a couple in April but split in January 2021.

John previously dated Meg Ryan, 59, but ended their engagement because he reportedly 'didn't want to get married again'.

They split in 2019 and it was claimed their romance came to an end after John realized he didn't want to tie the knot again, as he's already been married three times.

Longtime love: John previously dated Meg Ryan, 59, but ended their engagement in 2019 because he reportedly 'didn’t want to get married again'

A source told People magazine at the time: 'He didn't want to get married again. He loves her, but marriage never seemed to be a part of it. It's unclear how important a marriage was to Meg.

'But they spent a lot of time together and it's too bad they split. They really got along so well together.'

John and Meg had been together on and off for eight years, with a brief split in 2014 when the musician dated Christie Brinkley.

Lover: The rocker is also known for having dated supermodel Christie Brinkley (Pictured in 2015)

They reconciled and got engaged back in November 2018 before calling it quits in November 2019.

The Jack and Diane singer has previously been married to Priscilla Esterline from 1970 to 1981, Victoria Granucci from 1981 to 1989, and Elaine Irwin from 1992 to 2011.

John is father to five children from his previous relationships; Michelle, 50, Teddi, 39, Justice, 36, Hud, 27, Speck, 26.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Linda Evangelista battled with French billionaire Francois-Henri Pinault over child support with regards to their son Augustin back in 2012.

But these days, it seems Evangelista, 54, only has love for her ex and his wife Salma Hayek, it would appear.

On Saturday, Hayek, 54, posted a family snap of herself out with Pinault's 14-year-old son to her Instagram page, and Evangelista reacted with joy - posting two black heart emojis in the comment section.

Burying the hatchet: Linda Evangelista battled with French billionaire Francois-Henri Pinault over child support with regards to their son Augustin back in 2012. But these days, it seems Evangelista only has love for her ex and his wife Salma Hayek, it would appear

Sweet: On Saturday, Hayek, 54, posted a family snap of herself out with Pinault's 14-year-old son to her Instagram page, and Evangelista, 54 reacted with joy - posting two black heart emojis in the comment section

In the cute snap, Augustin, who is clad in a grey t-shirt and a black Anaheim Angels baseball cap, is grinning broadly as Salma peeks out behind him with a wide smile.

'Here comes the weekend!! Viva el fin de semana!!! #tgif #weekendvibes,' she wrote in the caption of the photo, which was taken on a boat.

The Frida star announced that she was engaged to Pinault in March 2007 and also confirmed that she was pregnant. Hayek gave birth to their daughter, Valentina Paloma in September 2007.

Exes: Linda and Pinault dated briefly in 2005 and 2006. Pictured in 2005

Falling in love: The Frida star announced that she was engaged to Pinault in March 2007 and also confirmed that she was pregnant. Seen in 2020

Friendly: The Academy Award nominee appears to have a good relationship with her stepchildren. Last Thursday, Salma shared a photo in which she was seen on vacation with Pinault and Matilde

The Mexican actress and the Kering CEO tied the knot in a lavish ceremony on Valentine's Day in 2008. The pair, who reportedly met at a party in Venice later renewed their vows in the romantic Italian city.

Francois-Henri shares a son, Francois, 23, and a daughter Matilde, 20, with his ex-wife Dorothée Lepère. The Academy Award nominee appears to have a good relationship with her stepchildren. Last Thursday, Salma shared a photo in which she was seen on vacation with Pinault and Matilde.

In October 2006, Linda gave birth to Augustin but refused to name the baby's father. She later referred to him as a 'New York architect.' In June 2011, the Canadian supermodel filed court papers and stated that Pinault was Augustin's father.

Lovechild: In October 2006, Linda gave birth to Augustin but refused to name the baby's father. She later referred to him as a 'New York architect.' In June 2011, the Canadian supermodel filed court papers and stated that Pinault was Augustin's father. Seen in 2005

Evangelista and Henri-Francois had dated for four months in 2005 and early 2006, a few months before he met Salma. In August 2011, Linda officially filed for child support, initially asking for $46,000 a month.

The staggering sum even shocked the judge, who said it would be 'the largest support order in the history of the Family Court.' In May 2012, a heavily publicized court battle ensued in which both parties revealed sordid details about their relationship.

Pinault said that he broke up with Evangelista upon learning she was pregnant and asserted that they had only spent seven days together during their short-lived romance. Linda's lawyer claimed that the billionaire asked her to terminate the pregnancy.

A few days into the trial, the two reached an out-of-court settlement for an undisclosed amount. At the time, they said in a statement, 'We are happy that we were able to reach an agreement for the benefit and well-being of our son, Augie.'
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ryan Reynolds' thrice-delayed comedy Free Guy topped the box office this weekend with an impressive $28.4M opening domestically and $22.5M overseas.

On Saturday, the 44-year-old action star celebrated Disney officially confirming it wants a sequel.

'And after three years of messaging #FreeGuy as an original IP movie, Disney confirmed [Saturday] it officially wants the sequel,' Ryan - who boasts 79.2M social media followers - Instastoried.

$50.9M total! Ryan Reynolds' thrice-delayed comedy Free Guy topped the box office this weekend with an impressive $28.4M opening domestically and $22.5M overseas

'If it isn't called Albuquerque Boiled Turkey" we've failed.'

In Shawn Levy's PG-13 video game-set flick, Reynolds plays a bank teller/NPC Guy opposite Jodie Comer's Millie Rusk/Molotov Girl.

Free Guy received a 'certified fresh' 82% critic approval rating (out of 198 reviews) and 95% audience score on Rotten Tomatoes.

'It's been a labour of love for *checks notes* a very strange three years,' the Grammy nominee gushed last Tuesday.

Blockbuster: On Saturday, the 44-year-old action star celebrated Disney officially confirming it wants a sequel

Ryan Instastoried: 'And after three years of messaging #FreeGuy as an original IP movie, Disney confirmed [Saturday] it officially wants the sequel. If it isn't called Albuquerque Boiled Turkey" we've failed'

Buddy movie: In Shawn Levy's PG-13 video game-set flick, Reynolds plays a bank teller/NPC Guy opposite Jodie Comer's Millie Rusk/Molotov Girl

'I had so much fun making this film!' Free Guy received a 'certified fresh' 82% critic approval rating (out of 198 reviews) and 95% audience score on Rotten Tomatoes

'I'm so glad #FreeGuy will finally bring its unique brand of feel-good mayhem to the big screen. I had so much fun making this film and I hope you feel the same watching it.'

Free Guy also features Lil Rel Howery, Joe Keery, Taika Waititi, Hugh Jackman, Dwayne Johnson, Tina Fey, John Krasinski, and the late Alex Trebek.

In second place was producer Rodo Sayagues' directorial debut Don't Breathe 2 with $10.6M despite dismal reviews - according to THR.

The home-invasion horror sequel stars Stephen Lang, Brendan Sexton III, and Madelyn Grace.

Home-invasion horror sequel: In second place was producer Rodo Sayagues' directorial debut Don't Breathe 2 with $10.6M despite dismal reviews

Queen of Soul biopic: Liesl Tommy's feature directorial debut Respect, starring Oscar winner Jennifer Hudson as Aretha Franklin, landed in third place for its opening weekend with $8.8M

Liesl Tommy's feature directorial debut Respect, starring Oscar winner Jennifer Hudson as Aretha Franklin, landed in third place for its opening weekend with $8.8M.

The musical biopic on the Queen of Soul received mixed reviews and THR reported that 45% of the audience was African-American with the majority being older females.

Jaume Collet-Serra's Jungle Cruise, starring Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson and Emily Blunt, came in fourth despite mixed reviews.

Only earned $138.6M of its $200M budget back: Jaume Collet-Serra's Jungle Cruise, starring Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson and Emily Blunt, came in fourth despite mixed reviews

Earned $7.8M: James Gunn's The Suicide Squad dropped to fifth place despite being the best reviewed of the films with a 91% critic approval rating (out of 305 reviews) on Rotten Tomatoes

However, the Disney theme park-inspired movie has only earned $138.6M of its $200M budget back in its third week in theaters and Disney+.

James Gunn's The Suicide Squad dropped to fifth place despite being the best reviewed of the films with a 91% critic approval rating (out of 305 reviews) on Rotten Tomatoes.

The star-studded $185M-budget antihero flick, featuring Margot Robbie and Idris Elba, only earned $7.8M bringing the total box office to $87.6M.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SAG Award nominee Jason Momoa swept his Game of Thrones onscreen wife Emilia Clarke off her feet in a series of snaps they both posted on Sunday.

'When your sun and stars rolls into town you check that he can still bench press a Khaleesi,' the British 34-year-old - who boasts 26.9M Instagram followers - captioned her picture.

Emilia also hashtagged:'#drinkingwithdrogoimamazedwesurvived #theboysarebackintown #likeheneverleft.'

'When your sun and stars rolls into town you check that he can still bench press a Khaleesi!' SAG Award nominee Jason Momoa swept his Game of Thrones onscreen wife Emilia Clarke off her feet in a series of snaps they both posted on Sunday

Emilia also hashtagged:'#drinkingwithdrogoimamazedwesurvived #theboysarebackintown #likeheneverleft'

The Honolulu-born, Iowa-raised 42-year-old replied in the comments: 'Love u forever moon of my life!'

LBD-clad Clarke also hopped in Jason's lap during the mini-reunion while he sported a captain's hat and scrunchie on his wrist.

'MOON OF MY LIFE,' Momoa - who boasts 16.9M social media followers - gushed in his slideshow.

'You are wonderful love u forever @emilia_clarke #smilelyeyes.'

The Honolulu-born, Iowa-raised 42-year-old replied in the comments: 'Love u forever moon of my life!'

Cozy co-stars: LBD-clad Clarke also hopped in Jason's lap during the mini-reunion while he sported a captain's hat and scrunchie on his wrist

Momoa - who boasts 16.9M social media followers - gushed in his slideshow: 'MOON OF MY LIFE. You are wonderful love u forever @emilia_clarke #smilelyeyes'

The Justice League actor also included a loved emoji and seven heart emojis.

The reason for the reunion appeared to have been a celebration for Game of Thrones co-creator David Benioff.

'Happy birthday Benioff you handsome generous bada** leo! Aloha, J,' Jason wrote.

Curiously, the six-time Emmy winner's 51st birthday does not happen until September 25.

'Happy birthday Benioff you handsome generous bada** leo!' The reason for the reunion appeared to have been a celebration for Game of Thrones co-creator David Benioff (R)

Say what? Curiously, the six-time Emmy winner's 51st birthday does not happen until September 25

10 years ago! Jason only played warrior Dothraki leader Khal Drogo in 10 episodes (between 2011-2012) of the hit HBO series, but fans fondly remember his arranged marriage to Daenerys Targaryen (Emilia)

Momoa only played warrior Dothraki leader Khal Drogo in 10 episodes (between 2011-2012) of the hit HBO series, but fans fondly remember his arranged marriage to Daenerys Targaryen (Emilia).

In an 'icky' August 2 interview with the New York Times, the 6ft4in action star was asked if he regretted the infamous rape scene.

'I've never really been questioned about "Do you regret playing a role?" We'll put it this way: I already did it. Not doing it again,' Jason (born Joseph) stated.

'As if an actor even had the choice to do that. We're not really allowed to do anything. There are producers, there are writers, there are directors, and you don't get to come in and be like, "I'm not going do that because this isn't kosher right now and not right in the political climate." That never happens.'

2019 family portrait: Momoa has two children - son Nakoa-Wolf Manakauapo Namakaeha, 12; and daughter Lola Iolani, 14 - from his three-year marriage to Lisa Bonet aka Lilakoi Moon

Blended family: The 6ft4in action star is also stepfather to the 53-year-old former Cosby kid's 32-year-old daughter Zoë Isabella (R, pictured in 2019) from her six-year marriage to four-time Grammy winner Lenny Kravitz (2-R), which ended in 1993

Momoa has two children - son Nakoa-Wolf Manakauapo Namakaeha, 12; and daughter Lola Iolani, 14 - from his three-year marriage to Lisa Bonet aka Lilakoi Moon.

The biracial bohemian duo originally met at a 2004 Mickey Champion blues concert.

Jason is also stepfather to the 53-year-old former Cosby kid's 32-year-old daughter Zoë Isabella from her six-year marriage to four-time Grammy winner Lenny Kravitz, which ended in 1993.

Momoa will next produce and star as grieving husband Cooper in his friend Brian Andrew Mendoza's feature directorial debut Sweet Girl, which premieres August 20 on Netflix.

Premieres August 20 on Netflix! Jason will next produce and star as grieving husband Cooper in his friend Brian Andrew Mendoza's feature directorial debut Sweet Girl

The father-daughter revenge drama thriller also stars Isabela Merced, Amy Brenneman, and Justin Bartha.

Meanwhile, the four-time Emmy nominee confirmed last month that she'll join the MCU in Disney+ series Secret Invasion alongside Samuel L. Jackson and Ben Mendelsohn.

'The first people I spoke to from Marvel were their security team,' Emilia told The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon.

'And I am convinced, there is a man outside my house, there's been a car parked there for a long time, and I swear to god, it's undercover. They schooled me, and I don't know what to do.'

Surprise! Meanwhile, the four-time Emmy nominee confirmed last month that she'll join the MCU in Disney+ series Secret Invasion alongside Samuel L. Jackson and Ben Mendelsohn
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@