I’ve never been to a gym in my life. This explains why I look like a pear.

However, I do my best as I’m getting older. At 63, although I’m lucky enough to look about 50, I do have to work on my fabulous bod. And that’s harder now that we have to stay home and watch Netflix all day. The luckier of us live in semi-rural towns like Hoi An in central Vietnam so we’re not moaning so much as we’re trying to stretch muscles that usually only reach for the top shelves at VinMart. Those shelves are not high actually.

About 14 years old, there was no such thing as a gym except at the high-class resorts open at that time. Barely a few weeks ago, everything looked remarkably Western: Vietnamese cyclists in the latest skintight sports gear complete with snazzy sunglasses and water bottles while young adults run on a treadmill in body showing-off fashions.

Nowadays you can’t walk anywhere without falling over a yoga teacher. I can understand us flabby Westerners rolling on mats but when you get unbelievably slim Vietnamese women joining the classes, I have to wonder at the power of Vietnamese image-promoting media. Vietnamese do eat a rather healthy diet, I believe.

Now it’s fair enough if you’re stuck in Ho Chi Minh City in a shoebox with the kids screaming in the background and not much room to swing a cat, let alone do some decent body squats somewhere between the kitchenette and the pile of laundry blocking the TV set. For sure, you’ll shut your eyes as you pass the mirror trying to avoid staring at the love handles flopping over your waist.

Boredom does create an unwillingness to switch off the telly, shut the fridge, and not hit the alcohol during our present stressful times. But it’s got to be done! It’s time to wiggle a toe, bend a knee, and practice your marvel movie moves in the privacy of your own fantasy space!

But we’ll get back to that in a moment.

Fitness is a weird concept. We imagine that our prehistoric ancestors whizzed all over the place running down dangerous big things with nothing more than a spear. And some people want bodies like that. Amongst young Vietnamese and their young Westerner counterparts, the body becomes part of their attractiveness. Hey, wait until you’re my age and you’d be surprised how little difference that makes to your future romantic happiness.

So, what to do during these movement restrictions? Well, get some bricks, there’s your weight. Use your body weight instead of fancy gym gadgets. Stop eating huge meals, as you can’t afford them anyway. Start at the beginning, which means doing two or three of some exercises – not twenty or thirty, why? Your body needs to get used to all your madness.

Don’t let the house fall apart just because you don’t feel like doing anything – cleaning is important and good for your sanity. Actually, just rolling around the floor with your dogs is probably as effective as a half-hour walk around the block. If your partner is the main chef, do it yourself. You’ll lose half a kilo out of sheer nervousness.

Water is a great weight trainer for your arms and chest. Remember all those plants dying in Vietnam’s current heatwave? Go save the planet and feel proud of yourself remembering to do something meaningful.

OK, that’s it for tips. Now the warnings.

We’re all too long sitting in front of the computer. It’s bad for the eyes, heart, and legs. So go make a cuppa and while you’re waiting for the water to boil, squat up and down a bit – it will make your bum tighter and more attractive! Just ignore the giggles, you now have stronger willpower than they do!

For those who can actually leave the house, please don’t run or jog in the middle of the day. It’s the height of stupidity and you’ll collapse in the middle of a crowd debating what to do with you as you slowly die of heatstroke.

Keep this other idea in mind. We get around 80 billion heartbeats in a lifetime, why waste them running when it’s totally unnecessary at that time of the day. Haven’t you noticed that almost all Vietnamese do exercise in the early morning when it’s still cool?

And here’s a really good tip. Make a friend for exercise – nothing else – you can even do this via video phone these days, so there are no excuses for not stepping something up. People are important, they snap you out of daydreams and depression, they give you ideas and advice; and the best ones never judge you.

Fitness shouldn’t be a goal – ever. Enjoying your body’s groove when it’s in tune is rare, so savor it, treasure it and above all, don’t take fitness too seriously, prehistoric folks would have rolled on the floor watching us exercise.

But since it’s enhanced social distancing, I don’t blame you if you order takeaways, sleep a lot and get a little fat. After all, we did come to Vietnam to relax, hey?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Editor's note: This story is written by Ray Kuschert, an Australian who has lived in Ho Chi Minh City and experienced daily traffic in the city for more than eight years.

The first thing every visitor says as they arrive in Ho Chi Minh City is, 'OMG!! Look at those bikes!!” As the third largest consumer of motorcycles in the world, Vietnam thrives on the two-seater scooters for daily transport. In fact, around 50 percent of the population are said to own a bike. However, getting around town is actually much better than the critics would have you think.

With less than 10 percent of commutes being by car, motorbikes have been a symbol of life in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, for decades. In fact, local streets are often built just to accommodate motorcycles and many homes have a space in the living area to keep a motorbike safe at home.

From the outside, it can appear that Ho Chi Minh City is a gridlock of two-wheeled vehicles, however, logical designing and cultural respect have created one of the better traffic systems in the world.

Cars in major cities all over the world create massive congestion. In cities like New York and Sydney, commute times for private vehicles now far exceed one hour each way, but in Ho Chi Minh City, the average commute time of around 56 percent of the working population that use motorbikes is less than 40 minutes, with others walking, using bicycles, cars and public transport.

There are a few strategic reasons why this occurs. Firstly, this society does not have massive class differences across the city. This means that a worker can live in budget accommodation in an area that is within the reach of their work. Additionally, for the lower wage earners such as factory staff, accommodation and assistance are often given to allow workers to live within the walking distance of their factory.

For those that commute, there is a strange cultural process not seen anywhere else in the world. There is a culture of continuance of movement. Traffic occurs, and with the motorbikes it is like a colony of ants moving through the city, but there is this culture of movement that keeps traffic going.

Where a traffic jam occurs, riders will use footpaths or any spare space to get out of the traffic. Likewise, red lights are sometimes considered as not so important with police being flexible to disregard the lights to move traffic on when congestion happens. The whole foundation of movement is different from any Western city so you rarely find yourself sitting still for too long.

Sitting over this is the sense of community. It is a daily experience to be sitting in traffic and to find yourself talking to someone about something totally irrelevant. Whether it is a kid wanting to practice English, or just a person wanting to be friendly, the streets of Ho Chi Minh City are a melting pot of people getting to their destination and those who actually have a moment to acknowledge you.

As a comparison, my commute time in Sydney, Australia ranged from one hour to an hour 45 minutes each way per day. Here in Vietnam, my maximum commute is 45 minutes in traffic each way. The swarm of motorbikes is an illusion. Smaller and more mobile vehicles mean that the drivers have more options to maintain movement in their commute. Red lights are considered more a suggestion than rule and police maintain a very different view of the traffic compared to Western countries.

Even building design lends itself to better operations. Because everyone drives a bike to work, you can fit around six motorbikes in the same space you can fit one car. This means your business can plan for around 60 percent to 70 percent less space for staff parking. This is a massive saving for global companies choosing Ho Chi Minh City as an offshore operation location.

Don’t fear the swarm of traffic because it has purpose and function. In the modern world of Ho Chi Minh City, the average commute is under 10km and we will see the city evolve with electric modes of personal transport becoming more popular every day. Also, businesses will be able to accommodate this changing technological world with more ease than car-based communities. Ho Chi Minh City is quickly becoming a choice location for global businesses having skilled workers, with good English, unique infrastructure that is growing to meet the future world and a growing economy that is devoid of the stresses present in many Western countries. It really is the jewel of the east for companies and visitors alike.

Make sure you take the time to visit Ho Chi Minh City and experience how good ‘different’ can really be. It’s the city where timeless charm meets the future world. See you soon in Saigon.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As the food scene in Ho Chi Minh City continues globalizing at breakneck speed, many experts believe the southern metropolis is missing out on a tourism gold mine.

A combination of fresh ingredients, creativity, and a smattering of techniques influenced by cuisines from around the globe characterize the epicurean experience in Ho Chi Minh City, not to mention a bustling street food culture which earned acclaim from international media and tourism authorities alike.

In 2016, CNN revered the city as 'the food capital of Vietnam.' Two years later, it was named by U.S. news network as one of the 23 best street food cities in the world.

In 2019, Ho Chi Minh City was the supporting pillar in Vietnam claiming the title of 'Asia’s Leading Culinary Destination,' awarded by World Travel Awards.

Such media traction has shifted the tourism landscape in Ho Chi Minh City over the past few years, with culinary experiences becoming a unique selling point for both tourists and entrepreneurs looking to cash in on the hype.

According to the World Food Tourism Association (WFTA), foreign tourists spend roughly 25 percent of their budget on food during trips abroad, outranking other categories such as accommodation and shopping.

The WFTA also reported that 81 percent of foreign tourists are eager to learn about the culinary eccentricities of their destinations, believing it is the best way to understand local cultural values.

Nowhere is this cross-section of food and culture more apparent than in Ho Chi Minh City, where all of Vietnam’s most coveted cuisines, including banh mi, pho, bun bo (beef noodle soup), spring rolls, balut eggs, and a slew of soup dishes, can be found in just about every neighborhood.

With these strengths and opportunities taken into consideration, the city should consider launching a campaign entitled 'Saigon - Ho Chi Minh City: The World of Street Food.'

For such a campaign to achieve its intended effect, it is vital that the city develop a clear-cut execution plan.

Part of this plan must include partnership between Ho Chi Minh City and the Vietnam National Administration of Tourism, the municipal Department of Tourism, local hospitality firms, restaurants, food stalls, and international partners.

This group should then work with experts and industry leaders to draft a set of quality standards, focusing on quality service and polished branding for particular customer segments.

The city’s street food repertoire should be treated as a brand asset and promoted based on clear classification, such as snacks vs. meals, regional origins, or flavor profiles.

Additionally, tour guides should receive in-depth training on the city’s food history in order to lead visitors on food tours and trips through its top culinary spots. There should also be a focus on cooking classes guided by adept chefs.

Food safety should be deemed an utmost priority, with the origin of ingredients, safe cooking practices, and the look and feel of restaurants all considered.

As for making a digital presence, a responsive food map on mobile devices detailing the recipe, images, and pricing of local street food is a much-needed companion to guide visitors through the myriad of culinary destinations in the city.

Ho Chi Minh City authorities should contemplate the demand for processed versions of the city's iconic dishes, for tourists tend to purchase specialty items in droves to bring home after their trips.

With an all-inclusive approach as stated above, I believe Ho Chi Minh City can elevate its rich culinary heritage into a major draw toward international tourism.

The original story was written in Vietnamese by Nguyen Van Sinh and translated into English by Tuoi Tre News, in response to the 'Ho Chi Minh City Goes Global' contest, an open forum for readers to contribute their ideas and solutions to raise the position of Saigon - Ho Chi Minh City in the international arena.

The contest is co-organized by Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper and the Ho Chi Minh City Department of External Relations to prepare for the celebration of National Day on September 2.

For further information and how to take part, please click here.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Recently I captured a few photos of 'empty Saigon,' showing the quiet emptiness that has taken over the city following the most recent wave of COVID-19. The images give me the same feeling as when my two kids are unwell.

As the father of two boisterous boys, I am continuously looking for ways of keeping them calm and quiet while I desperately try to work from home.

Once in a while, they catch a fever and lie quietly on the sofa. In those moments, I long for them to be up and about again, make as much noise as they want, bounce off the walls, and drive me crazy.

It is the same story for me now when it comes to Saigon. Often in the past, I have sat in very heavy traffic and stressed about it being noisy, busy, and unpredictable. The recent COVID-19 outbreak has now made a calmness and emptiness descent upon the city; very few motorbikes, no crazy traffic delays, no noise, just an eerie quiet. Yes, the city is finally calm, but now I am longing for the traffic to pick up, the noise to take over, and the hustle and bustle of economic activity to resume.

The photo on the left in particular pulls on my heart, but at the same time it also gives me hope. I took this photo, looking out of my office window on a day when the guidance from the authorities had made the city calm, but for every 'quiet' photo I have taken, I have at least a dozen of that exact same view where the streets are packed, the energy is tangible, and the noise reverberates around my office.

That busy view is what I miss, not just because it’s beautiful but also because it is what energizes me. It is the same view that I look at between my work meetings; the same one that reminds me of why I do what I do and why I am where I am, in Saigon. This is the heart of where so much happens. This is a city full of potential, a people full of drive, and a community full of energy. That is what I see in its traffic, what I hear through its cacophony of noise, and what I envision beyond its chaos. It is those same characteristics that drive the city to thrive, to survive, and to surprise. It is these attributes that also point to better times in the future for this wonderful city.

There are not that many cities in the world where their noise, their traffic, and their chaos give me such hope, but Saigon has always been very different. Running deep in all these sounds, movements, and everyday life is a rich history, a will to survive, and a willingness to work hard and fight hard. It is that foundation which makes this city strong and resilient. You can take away the traffic, reduce the noise to a soft murmur, and shut down the outdoors, but you can never take away the strength, the resilience, the resolve, and the beating heart that runs deep below the surface of this city.

Now as I sit at my dining room table in front of my work laptop and I can hear my kids playing on their drum set in an adjacent room, the pulsating sound reminds me of the heartbeat of Saigon that I used to feel every time I visited the city in my previous regional role based in Hong Kong. I was often asked what the city could do more to ensure it takes its rightful place next to other financial centers in the region.

Some potential ideas are as follows:

1/ Establishment of an advisory board – Just like that of Vietnam’s prime minister. I think Ho Chi Minh City authorities could consider one including scientists, economists, and business leaders from the private sector. These people will provide invaluable advice for the future economic development of Ho Chi Minh City based on their collective experience;

2/ Digital transformation – Just like managing a corporation in this fast-changing world, the city also needs to adapt to the fast pace of digitalization and embrace it. Digital transformation can and will provide fast, secure, efficient, and convenient administration processes and procedures for future foreign investment and local business registration;

3/ Added incentives for the private sector – Ho Chi Minh City is the economic center of the country and the base for much of the future economic development of Vietnam;

4/ Investment in infrastructure development especially around transport and port connectivity;

5/ Sustainable development – This should be the ultimate goal of the city authorities as unfettered growth without an eye on the consequences on the environment will not ensure sustained growth into the future. We all need to play our part in balancing economic development together with the broader well-being of society.

So just like my children’s ‘quiet’ times brought about by a fever, the calm of Saigon triggered by COVID-19 will be short-lived. Kids have a passion for life; they have an energy inside that cannot easily be contained and they have strong minds that direct them toward a brighter and more hopeful future. That is exactly what the people of Saigon will do.

The fever passes and my boys bounce around the room and drive their dad crazy because that is who they are and that is what I love. Saigon will, too, overcome this COVID-19 wave, it will be filled with life, with noise, with traffic, and with hope because that’s what this city is all about and that is what we all love about. Good times will return and the future will be bright.

The story was written by Tim Evans, CEO of HSBC Vietnam, in response to the 'Ho Chi Minh City Goes Global' contest, an open forum for readers to contribute their ideas and solutions to raise the position of Saigon - Ho Chi Minh City in the international arena.

The contest is co-organized by Tuoi Tre(Youth) newspaper and the Ho Chi Minh City Department of External Relations to prepare for the celebration of National Day on September 2.

For further information and how to take part, please click here.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tourism in Vietnam was going gangbusters before the country closed to international visitors in early 2020, with Ha Long Bay resembling the Straits of Malacca at rush hour, Da Nang inching ever closer to mirroring Miami Beach, and destinations such as Hoi An and Phu Quoc bursting at the seams.

It’s a no-brainer that development is critical, but the 800-pound gorilla in the room is the lack of tangible plans leading to harmony between economic expansion and environmental preservation, both here in Vietnam and around the globe.

The world is in such a climate pickle that representatives of the 40 worst-offending countries recently huddled for two days to wrap their arms around the issue. It seems every country knows the solution, but almost none are able to convert strategies into plans, then put them in motion.

Let’s check in with a couple of foreigners sitting in a café in Vietnam:

Fred: “Geez, development in Vietnam is spiraling out of control – buildings and resorts sprouting up like weeds, traffic insane.’

Mary: “They’re ruining this beautiful paradise!”

Fred: “Yep, reminds me of (insert country name here), it was great in the good old days.”

Mary: “You’d think they would have learned the lesson.”

Fred: “Yep, well, hopefully they will before it’s too late.”

Mary: “At least the coffee is served in real cups instead of enough plastic to sink a ship.”

Fred: “That’s a start. Every journey begins with the first step.”

We’re all prone to such sentimentality, blubbering over our cherished memories, lamenting the cost of progress.

A bunch of us school chums from my hometown in Canada still rehash old times decades later, mourning the demise of the local billiard joint, main hangout, and sacred site of our misspent youths.

I don’t even want to go back to the center of Ho Chi Minh City any more, preferring the sweet memory of the charm it held thirty years ago when it held such mystique!

For a foreigner from a developed country, it was like a trip backward through time – people strolling, in rickshaws or on bicycles, colonial-style buildings lining the streets, little kids sneaking a peek at the afternoon ‘thé dansant,’ or tea and a tango dance, at The Continental Hotel, oh how those were magic times!

That’s precisely what drew many trailblazing types to Vietnam in the first place, and as others joined, exponential growth followed, there’s no way to avoid it.

Here’s a couple of young Vietnamese having a chat about how the progress impacts their lives. We find them on Phu Quoc, a hub of recent development, including the recently opened Phu Quoc United Center, a humungous resort covering over 1,000 hectares in the northern part of the island.

Vinh: “Yikes, they’re planning ANOTHER mega resort!”

Phuong: “Not only is Phu Quoc popular with Vietnamese, but foreigners have been coming in droves in recent years.”

Vinh: “Yep, there sure is something alluring about an exotic island in Southeast Asia. The new airport and 30-day free visit pass have been a shot in the arm as well.”

Phuong: “Hopefully we can snag good gigs in one of the resorts.”

Vinh: “Working in the nuoc mam [fish sauce] factory is better than nothing, but there’s not much future in it.”

Phuong: “Cut it out! Stinky work – skin, clothes, hair ewwww.”

Vinh: “Not to mention making only 5 mill a month [VND5 million per month, about US$217, slightly below average in Vietnam].”

Phuong: “Those tourism and hospitality degrees we’re working on could be just the ticket to get us out of the fish sauce business and into something with a bright future.”

The Phu Quoc United Center has over 12,000 hotel rooms, features pastel-colored buildings, 24-hour street markets, a golf course, conference facilities, the Vinpearl Land Amusement Park. (I swear I’ll go bananas if they name one more thing ‘Vin’-something.)

Then we’ve got the Casino Corona, which locals earning a minimum of VND10 million – roughly $435 per month – can enjoy as well, plus shopping, entertainment, and a few bells and whistles I’ve no doubt missed, all this billing itself as a ‘Sleepless City.’

It echos Macau, Las Vegas, Disney World, Disneyland, Universal Studios resorts scattered around the globe, and countless other local ventures of the same ilk.

Hell, if I was a developer, I’d have fallen over myself to bankroll the Phu Quoc United Center and begin development.

It’s an absolute winner, what locals and international visitors want. We can imagine the squeals of bliss from mainland visitors and foreign tourists:

“Double down on that ace!”

“Gin and tonic on the rocks, twist of lemon!”

“Mot, hai, ba, DZO!”

“Double down on that double down, we’ll shoot the works!”

“Let’s hit the amusement park and that Kamikaze ride next!”

“How about that slick new steak place?”

“Big yum bro, they’ve got imported Angus beef!”

The Phu Quoc United Center is a 21st-century version of old European charm – think of Amalfi coast or Portofino in Italy. Parts of it look like Venice of yore, before the sheer weight of us all stomping around St. Mark’s Square sank it under a meter or two of water every time the rains come.

Well-traveled foreigners may not be overly impressed, but for the average Vietnamese, the Phu Quoc United Center is a dream come true – a simulated trip to Europe with every imaginable distraction at a fraction of the cost and time.

What else could a visitor possibly want except an impromptu set by Drake and Den Vau, a Vietnamese rapper?

Phu Quoc National Park, located in the northern part of the island, consists of over 31,000 hectares, of which over 8,000 are strictly protected. That’s nearly seven times larger than the Phu Quoc United Center, with the remainder of the park designated as forest rehabilitation areas.

The island is definitely building up, but it’ll be a very long time before it’s even slightly congested, it’s just different from how it was.

Thailand’s Phuket is almost identical in size, yet drew double the number of domestic and international visitors the year before last. So there’s ample room for expansion without smothering the island.

Swanky, state-of-the-art sustainable resorts are the flavor of the day in this part of the world with Bali, The Maldives, and El Nido in the Philippines boasting some beauties, along with some notable examples here in Vietnam including right on Phu Quoc.

Two well-heeled tourists lounge around the eco-friendly swimming pool on one of those remote islands, sipping drinks from coconut gourds whilst soaking up the sun:

Jane: “Wow, this is the bee’s knees!”

Sam: “Sure is babe, I wonder what the poor people are doing now.”

Jane: “It’s pretty good, $220 per night but we have the satisfaction of spending our money at a place that generates a positive carbon footprint.”

Sam: “Rough without any air-conditioning, it’s 33 degrees today, plus the shower is nippy on days when the solar panels don’t kick in.”

Jane: “Harnessing climate change is important but next time we’ll try a neighboring country – a champagne vacation for beer money.”

Sam: “If we’re feeling flush, Bhutan is the poster child for sustainability, but that comes with an even heavier price tag for tourists.”

But it’s going to require time before economies of scale kick in, rendering sustainability affordable for all.

To illustrate how far out of reach such world-class sustainable resorts are for most locals and low-end international tourists, the average Vietnamese worker would need to work and save every penny for seven months in order to pay for one week at that resort.

Those enjoying higher salaries of, say, VND15 million ($650 per month, the low end of the middle and upper classes in Vietnam) would have to work over two months to enjoy those digs for a week.

Easy to see that if the big developers could bankroll such resorts, very few locals could afford to stay in them, with low-budget foreign visitors also left out.

The alternatives are hardly enticing: riding three to a motorbike and working in fish sauce factories so the island remains perfectly natural? Building a bunch of cheap, cardboard cutout ugly skyscrapers and indoor malls?

Even worse, how about an onslaught of global big brand package resorts that detract from local look and feel? They’re hideous, an oasis designed to separate visitors from local life and culture.

Per capita gross domestic product is a paltry $3,000 per year in this country, so it’s easy to see that priority must continue to be placed on economic progress for the local population here in Vietnam.

So what’s it going to be, anchovies or Angus beef?

The choice is obvious – or is it?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Editor's note: The story below is written by Do Ngoc Olivier Dung, CEO of EZLand, in response to Tuoi Tre(Youth) newspaper's 'Ho Chi Minh City Goes Global' contest.

Ho Chi Minh City and its close to 13 million people, eight million motorbikes, world-famous nerve wrecking street crossing at rush hour, fast-paced lifestyle, and noise and smells can be overwhelming similarly to other large cities in Southeast Asia but it is also what makes the city unique and magical.

It is that magic that needs to be conveyed to first-time visitors, tourists or business people. It is also needed for branding and marketing for the city. For that to materialize, many stakeholders need to come together, namely government agencies, the private sector, key players in tourism and hospitality, and the city as a whole.

Visitors will be mesmerized by the beauty of the Saigon River and traditional boats and barges passing by, just to then be put off by the plastic and pollutants floating on the river.

The Saigon River is truly unique yet not enough places and activities are taking advantage of it to offer unique experiences to visitors. Such experiences can be centered on the city's natural beauty as well as the connectivity it can offer.

Ho Chi Minh City is a multicultural city with a rich history combining modern and traditional Vietnamese architecture with old French buildings with great parks, fast modernizing infrastructure, and beautiful tree-lined avenues.

It is today one of the most dynamic business cities in Asia and home to a vibrant entrepreneurship and work spirit fostering constant novelty and innovation.

Visitors can also be exposed to many cultures and religions, from Cho Lon to Buddhist and Indian temples, Caodaism and its French-designed Notre-Dame cathedral, all living in what seems to be a constantly moving flow, a city that never sleeps.

Add to that great local markets with thousands of scents in one of the most diverse and delicious street food and restaurant cultures in Asia, together with a fast-developing and very creative local art scene. Most importantly, the people of Ho Chi Minh City who whether were born here or come from other parts of the country, expatriates or Viet Kieu like myself all help form an amazing mosaic of cultures and are the heart and pulse of this city. It is the people of Ho Chi Minh City who make the city so unique, in good times but also in times of crisis as the current pandemic has shown. It is also their warmth and kindness that can be extended to visitors.

As a personal perspective, Ho Chi Minh City as a city has so much to offer to the world as a place to visit again and again but we need to position it distinctively to the outside world in what makes it unique and exciting. Only then can we make sure that the whole eco-system delivers on its promise.

I believe the 'Ho Chi Minh City Goes Global' contest is exciting and very timely and would encourage everyone to participate with their input and ideas.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ho Chi Minh City is playing an important role in Vietnam’s economic development as well as integration into the world. In my opinion, the metropolis should put a focus on becoming a city of clean energy and green while action is key to addressing climate change now and next generation.

How to do that?

Plant more trees in new urban and suburban areas as well as the city’s belts.

Preserve diverse natural ecosystems within the radius of the city and neighboring provinces.

Connect with the southern ecosystem to become the center of biodiversity and grow forests inside the city or small forests between urban areas. The ratio of trees, or the investment in forests, is one of the first criteria of a green and friendly city.

Educate the population about the bond between humans and nature as well as about nature protection and climate change impact. Children’s small- and medium-sized playgrounds in urban areas need to be associated with trees to keep those places nature-friendly and safe.

Clean energy is sourced from nature such as solar energy, wind power or recycled organic waste. Using clean energy will help limit and reduce the production of CO2 from greenhouse gas emissions and pollution. Reaching a net-zero emission balance will benefit people and the environment.

Increase the participation of higher-skilled workers as well as appropriately distribute and replace the manual workforce to preserve traditional occupations.

Next, classify waste to recycle into clean energy or create a new source of soil for family gardening. It is essential and urgent to have waste recycling factories and renewables to preserve our living environment and nature.

City residents need to participate in producing and using more household items which are recycled products instead of freely exploiting nature and natural resources which are never renewable again in millions of years.

Districts in the city should see the need of establishing nurseries to preserve and develop local and imported plant varieties. This is also an opportunity to expand research on plant varieties in agriculture, thus creating more jobs and new research directions for green urban agriculture and forestry.

Developing a city of clean energy and green will facilitate residents gaining more knowledge and understanding. Instead of using electricity, urban houses should take advantage of more sunlight by installing large windows or skylights.

Innovate old and degraded houses with natural energy. Ensure buildings become more energy-efficient. Cut down the construction of unnecessary skyscrapers, focus on green social housing projects with surrounding green for underprivileged and low-income people in order to shorten the gap between social classes.

Develop a nursing home system with green and clean space for elderly people who live alone.

The above changes can create a motivation for the city to have a firm foundation in order to catch up with the world's development.

Let’s plant a tree every day. Every family should also have a garden or turn their balconies into a green space full of tropical flowers.

All shall bring the city a global status in terms of green living quality and clean energy.

The original story was written in Vietnamese by Quynh Iris de Prelle and translated into English by Tuoi Tre News, in response to the 'Ho Chi Minh City Goes Global' contest, an open forum for readers to contribute their ideas and solutions to raise the position of Saigon - Ho Chi Minh City in the international arena.

The contest is co-organized by Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper and the Ho Chi Minh City Department of External Relations to prepare for the celebration of National Day on September 2.

For further information and how to take part, please click here.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Editor's note: The story below is written by Aron Schuftan, a doctor of FV Hospital in Ho Chi Minh City, in response to Tuoi Tre newspaper's 'Ho Chi Minh City Goes Global' contest. It was edited by Tuoi Tre News for clarity, consistency, and coherence.

Developing Ho Chi Minh City’s brand image is paramount in differentiating it within the global landscape.

The goal of “Brand Ho Chi Minh City” should need no introduction and is built upon an emotional, simple, and universal concept. It should be embedded and adopted in people’s minds easily.

Ho Chi Minh City should be held in the same esteem as other major, established cities like Hong Kong, London, Dubai, and New York. In fact, it should even eclipse them as it is the fresh, “up-and-coming”, “new-kid-on-the-block”.

Situated in Southeast Asia, Ho Chi Minh City has proven itself as an economic and cultural hub in the region. Just hours from dozens of major cities in the area, Ho Chi Minh City, with its centrally located international airport, has a unique set up as a launching point for international commerce and tourism.

With its creative, enterprising, energetic, and multilingual educated youth, Ho Chi Minh City has seen a massive growth in tourism, development, and manufacturing industries especially in the tech sector, which accounted for about 23 percent of Vietnam's GDP in 2020. With the ambitious and driving energy here, Ho Chi Minh City is the “Silicon Valley of Asia”.

The entrepreneurial spirit is very much alive here and this vibrant community is still small and friendly enough to be able to effectively network with the influential decision makers in various growing economies. The adage of “one degree of separation” is very much a reality here and often just asking a few friends will get you in contact with the person you are looking to connect with.

Aron Schuftan

With its unique history, Vietnam, and Ho Chi Minh City in particular, has been influenced by many cultures. This is still visible today in its contrasting architecture, savory food, colorful customs, and lively spirit. It is a true melting pot of the Orient.

For a country that has seen its share of historical conflict, Vietnam has an incredible spirit of resilience and forgiveness, open to all newcomers, curious to broaden their experiences.

Using a brand's geographic origin and heritage to build its identity is a way to begin telling its story and brings extraordinary value and universal appeal.

The branding of Ho Chi Minh City should focus on two fronts.

Budding tech industry

Showcase current successful companies/entrepreneurs

Host more international competitions in different events (hackathons, tech, gaming).

Project ideas of dependability, reassurance, and authenticity.

Promote Ho Chi Minh City as being one of the most developed, and fastest growing cities in the world.

Creative, enterprising, energetic and multilingual educated cheap labor force.

World class computer coders

Tourism and culture

Information booths city wide to better accommodate tourists that are already here.

Establish homestays with Saigonese families for tourists and expats.

Promote Opera House events to all hotel guests.

Organize exchange programs for international students to come live in Vietnam.

Interview and publicize (both locally and internationally) interviews with famous people (artists, musicians, politicians, historians, chefs, entrepreneurs, etc).

More media coverage (both locally and internationally) of events and festivals.

Create documentaries of things uniquely Vietnamese and distribute internationally (water puppets, Ao Dai, non la, music, cuisine).

Create a food/travel show based on Vietnam to be distributed internationally.

Showcase the unique colonial architecture Vietnam has.

Create a high-quality documentary on the Vietnam War from Vietnam’s perspective.

Memoir of famous historical figures in Vietnam.

Promote your budding film industry and fashion industry to international audiences.

Host more international competitions in different events (fashion, music, art).

Showcase Landmark 81 as the tallest building in Vietnam, the tallest building in Southeast Asia, and the 15th tallest building in the world (I think relatively few people know that).

Set up a tourism body to establish offices in key cities around the world promoting Vietnam/Ho Chi Minh City.

Showcase events, products and services that are unique or popular here.

Possible symbols of the Ho Chi Minh City/Vietnam brand:

• Non la (Vietnamese conical hat)

• Ao Dai

• Cyclo

• Rice paper

• Banh mi (Vietnamese sandwiches)

• Women with long black hair

• Rice fields

• Bicycle

• Color red/yellow

• Bamboo

• Rice

• Coconut

Possible slogans:

• “Silicon Valley of Asia”

• “Brand Ho Chi Minh City”

• “Brand Saigon”

• “Saigon Star”

• “Pearl of Asia”

• “United, Together”

• “Quality, Credibility, Innovation”

• “Together, Forward”

• “Future, Together”

• “Pioneering spirit, commitment to innovation, prosperity, pursuit of excellence, while embracing vast cultural diversity”

Keep in mind: Give your audience something to identify with. Stand out from the crowd.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Editor's note: The story below is written by Ton Nu Thi Ninh, president of the Ho Chi Minh City Peace and Development Foundation, in response to Tuoi Tre newspaper's 'Ho Chi Minh City Goes Global' contest. It was edited by Tuoi Tre News for clarity, consistency, and coherence.

I find the theme 'Ho Chi Minh City Goes Global' exciting and the contest through an open forum quite timely.

I have been interested in nation branding for Vietnam for decades. Similarly, Ho Chi Minh City needs proactive and effective branding. Now may be a good time. Let me share just a few preliminary thoughts in this regard.

1. Why does our city need branding?

- Because this is a competitive world out there in Southeast and East Asia where such countries as Korea not long ago had a nation branding unit within the president’s office, which was thus in a position to foster the Korean Wave or Singapore, the city state, which has been single-mindedly strategic in how to promote itself. As for New Zealand, although somewhat geographically isolated in the region, it is also deliberately “marketing” itself through Enterprise New Zealand, which I have had the opportunity to visit.

- Because within Vietnam itself our city is facing stiff competition from sister cities such as Hanoi and the central region cluster of Danang - Hoi An - Hue in terms of attracting attention and interest from potential international visitors and partners.

- Because we have to position ourselves distinctively in the eyes, minds and hearts of the outside world so that we may stand out, provoke curiosity to find out and discover enticing opportunities that will keep international friends and partners engaged with us fruitfully over time.

2. What do we need to do?

We need to identify what we believe our defining features, salient strengths, and relative attractiveness are, how we wish to be perceived and recognized, but also to find out what the perspective is from people outside Vietnam, including the five-million-strong Vietnamese diaspora, or from the expatriate community in Vietnam.

There may be a gap between the two. Therefore, we have to, on the one hand, live up to expectations linked with our own desired self-branding, and on the other hand, to communicate that brand effectively to the international audiences.

This will entail pointing to less perceived salient points of attraction and differentiation besides broadly recognized features.

Reaching consensus on what defines our city’s brand will not be easy as opinions on the matter can diverge greatly. For example, which labels, characteristics stand out most from a long list of possibilities such as: vibrant, pulsating, energizing, creative, diverse, exciting, bold, enterprising, forward looking, contrasting, and so on?

- That is why an open forum where different views, ideas and suggestions can be put forth and debated is important because the end product - our city’s branding - cannot simply be the work of professionals if it is to be alive, strong and sustained: it needs recognition, support and contribution by all stakeholders from government to business, culture and communication professionals to city residents i.e. society at large. In other words, defining and building up the message is centrally important, but the message has to translate into consistent, coordinated and effective action by all relevant quarters, institutional and individual, public and private.

3. Allow me to round off this very succinct first take by sharing a few suggestive hints as to taglines, which are indispensable in any promotion or branding drive, just as food for thought. What about:

- Come to where East meets West: come to Ho Chi Minh City

- Ho Chi Minh City: Where legacy and future meet/merge

- Ho Chi Minh City: City of the future in the East

- Ho Chi Minh City: Mosaic of colours and cocktail of flavours

- Feel the pulse, listen to the buzz of Saigon – Ho Chi Minh City

4. Finally, a very specific recommendation: just as Incheon Airport made smart use of long airport corridors to welcome incoming international visitors with such nation branding posters as Dynamic Korea or Creative Korea, why do we not use such corridors at Tan Son Nhat Airport to promote Ho Chi Minh City to foreign visitors, such as ‘Vibrant Ho Chi Minh City’ or ‘Energizing Ho Chi Minh City’, and so on?

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@We all know the drill about stereotypical socialist countries in which everyone has a job but nothing much actually gets done, with red tape that could stretch from Thanh Hoa to Tbilisi.

Well, it’s time to shatter another myth as some of the best service in Vietnam comes from a place I’d least expect: the post office!

The other day I saw a Vietnam Post (Buu Dien Viet Nam in Vietnamese) delivery motorbike screech to a halt in front of a woman waiting on the sidewalk and the driver offered three products for her consideration. The lady rejected two items with a marked frown, selected the other, paid, and the driver disappeared down the road in a cloud of dust.

It turns out that new selection service is extremely popular, reducing personal contact in busy shops during these tumultuous times. Buu Dien Viet Nam returns the unwanted goods to the seller without any charge to the customer, so everybody is happy.

Internet shopping and delivery in Vietnam require an adjustment of mindset for foreigners because the post office’s processes are actually – brace yourself for this: designed with the customer in mind!

Eureka!

In “developed” countries, customer service has slowly deteriorated into a tug of war between vendor and customer whenever there is an issue, pushing the envelope back and forth until one or the other finally gives in, and that’s very often the party who’s paying the bill.

Let’s say you’re getting a home delivery, which typically takes place on weekdays during business hours, with limited service available evenings and weekends.

If you’re not at home to receive the item the first time, chances are you’re working and probably won’t be home the next business day either. So, what the hell, they deliver again, and if the second attempt is also futile, a note will be left saying the item has been returned to the post office or their warehouse.

Suddenly, the shoe is on the other foot, with you, the customer and recipient, performing the very activity you already paid someone else to do.

It’s tantamount to the service provider saying, “Nya nya nya - you’re it!”

I have never used one of the slick global courier services, but not for lack of effort on my part. I investigated only to discover that those outfits have double-digit delivery options, as many potential surcharges, and even more service add-ons available on top of all that.

I was looking for something simple such as: “Relatively normal person mailing normal letter to or from Vietnam” but “normal” in much of this world is obsolete due to endless versions and varieties of products.

It was more like “Mail letter weighing not more than 74.5821 grams for international delivery in less than 3 days, if our airplanes fly those days and there are no lithium batteries or grandma’s brownies included, and it’s a weekday, unless it’s one of a plethora of various religious holidays, assuming the neighbours’ dog doesn’t bite, and the designated recipient is right-handed for signatory purposes.”

Needless to say, that was the end of that.

Back to Vietnam, where I was recently awaiting two letters – one from overseas, the other from a domestic source. A Buu Dien Viet Nam delivery guy arrived at the building in which I live, domestic letter in hand, couldn’t figure out how to find my apartment, then made several calls to the sender.

Several calls! To the sender! He actually tried to resolve the issue!

In many countries, the guy would have disappeared like a fart in a windstorm, probably off to sip a cold one at the end of the afternoon.

The building security guard intervened, aided and abetted by the housekeeper. Note there are usually two people involved in such scenarios in Vietnam – teamwork being a principal theme, plus there is an instant witness should any extenuating circumstances arise.

I was asleep at the switch upstairs, oblivious to the entire scene unfolding between the security guard, housekeeper, and Buu Dien Viet Nam guy, but I have a damn good idea how it went:

Buu Dien Viet Nam guy: “Letter for a foreigner named Ellis.”

Security guard: “Yes, he told us, I’ll take it for him.”

Buu Dien Viet Nam guy: “Not so fast, this is valuable stuff.”

Housekeeper: “It’s his passport.”

Buu Dien Viet Nam guy: “Lady, I know, I do this all day long. I can feel a passport in an envelope at 50 paces.”

Security guard: “Fork it over.”

Buu Dien Viet Nam guy: “Ease up, I have to hand this directly to the recipient.”

Housekeeper: “Foreigner said you could give it to us.” Buu Dien Viet Nam guy: “Tough tamales, guys, nobody told me.”

The security dude, a strong company man (and loyal workmate – I know because he keeps trying to hook me up with the housekeeper, but that’s another tale for another day) tried everything short of ripping the envelope out of the Buu Dien Viet Nam guy’s hands, but it was a no-go.

And so the standoff ended with the Buu Dien Viet Nam guy riding off into the sunset, letter in side satchel like the Pony Express, while I was upstairs, blissfully unaware of the entire drama. (I was unaware because I turn off all the buzzes, beeps, blinking lights, and rings on my phone because they bug me, so none of the senders’ calls attracted my attention, but that too is a story for another day.)

The sender, also like a dog with a bone, kept phoning the Buu Dien Viet Nam guy though by that time it’s 6:00 pm. They ultimately agreed that he’d deliver the next day, and hand the letter over to the security guard if I was absent.

Vietnam Post delivery still works at 6:00 pm?

Hell yes they do.

It seems they’re always on the job – I know because I frequent a café right beside a small neighbourhood branch and that post office is open evenings, weekends, you name it.

Now comes the best part: as promised, the Buu Dien Viet Nam guy phoned the sender back the next morning promising to deliver at an indicated time.

Not only did he answer his phone in the first place, he followed up the next day, called back, and provided a schedule for delivery!

When the sender relayed that status and plan to me, I was amazed because in our highly developed countries Rule #1 for service providers is to be very, very difficult to contact, especially by customers with issues.

Anyway, just to be safe, I showed up on time – actual time, not VST (that’s Vietnam Standard Time, between 20 and 30 minutes later than the real time) – only to learn that the Buu Dien Viet Nam guy already delivered the letter half an hour early.

He actually delivered both letters, which can only mean he looked through his entire pile of goodies to be delivered before setting sail that morning, realized he had two items for me, and combined them.

Pretty slick, that’ll teach me to doubt the post office in this country.

Cynics would say labour is cheap here in Vietnam, so it’s easy to throw bodies at issues instead of using sophisticated processes, but I’m not buying it. As proven in this example, all that’s needed is a phone coupled with the right attitude. No doubt those drivers are busier than ants at a picnic.

Then naysayers would argue that Buu Dien Viet Nam delivery drivers receive an incentive for each successful delivery, which is true, but it’s peanuts, certainly not worth two trips and a boatload of phone calls.

Let’s say the post office guy in a developed country earns ten times more than his counterpart in Vietnam but salaries and overheads are also 10 times more, so it’s even up, with only attitude and effort making the difference.

I’ve sent and received at least a dozen important documents domestically and internationally over the years using Buu Dien Viet Nam and the service has always met or exceeded expectations.

I had a hunch something good was cooking with them because any outfit whose delivery vehicles play “Jingle Bells” whenever they’re thrown into reverse gear, winter and summer, 12 months of the year, is clearly an organization with a bright future.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The feedback I get from readers is absolutely priceless:

* Do you really like everything in Vietnam?” (Nearly.…)

* “Are you told to write only positive things about Vietnam? (Never…)

* “There must be things that get up your nose.” (Almost none...)

Let’s look at a few of the more charming local customs, those that highlight the unpretentious beauty of daily life in Vietnam.

Sidewalk hopscotch: Sidewalks (footpaths, pavements, trottoirs, etc.) are officially reserved for pedestrians. But in reality they are allocated as supplemental space for businesses, ideal for abandoning vehicles, staging and pre-assembly of renovations, welding, steel grinding, smoky grilling, kiddies’ play area, food vending, dining ‘al fresco,’ and anyone selling anything.

This configuration brings the business nearer to potential customers, which is always a plus, and frees up the shop for product inventory, cooking, eating, sleeping, babysitting, drinking coffee, guzzling beer, and raucous card games.

What could possibly go wrong?

Some have tried to rectify the situation, most notably the valiant ‘Captain Sidewalk,’ an official in Ho Chi Minh City who took on the challenge of cleaning up the sidewalks. Ultimately, he tendered his resignation upon realizing he’d never succeed, primarily because residents enjoy the mess exactly as it is.

Truth!

We love it! I swear the day this place turns into Singapore, I’m outta here.

We hop, skip, and vault over obstacles, getting much needed exercise while trying to walk around, meeting lots of people, and having a ball doing so.

I have perfected the ‘3/4 fruit vendor pike,’ deftly leaping and spinning over a crouching seller, and the ‘welding flash jab,’ a Hapkidoesque movement involving a sudden flick of the arm to shield my eyes against such flashes and flying sparks, akin to a rugby straight-arm.

Annoying re-re-reconfirmations of meetings: This one was a pain in the ass until I began arranging meetings with locals exclusively in places where I like to go anyway, whilst pretending to the other party that I was going for the express purpose of meeting them.

So far, so good, then this:

Phone rings half an hour before our meet…

Me: Just about to say hello, caller cuts in.

Caller: “Where are you?”

Me (thinking): “Silly, going to meet you. Where did you think I was?”

Me (aloud): “On my way to our appointment.”

Caller: “On your way to where?”

Me: “Going to the place we agreed upon.”

Caller: “OK.”

Caller: Click

Ten minutes later, phone rings again…

Me: Just about to say hello, caller cuts in.

Caller: “Where are you?”

Me (thinking): “Neurotic much? Did you think I got hit by a truck during the ten minutes since we last spoke?”

Me (aloud): “In the café waiting for you. Where are you?”

Caller: “On my way.” (Rubbish, the person is still at home, that’s an old trick.)

Caller: Click

Caller: Wanders in twenty minutes later, big smile on face.

Driving: Almost any foreigner could pen a tome the size of War and Peace about experiences on the roads in developing countries. All such places have their own driving peculiarities and Vietnam is no exception.

In these parts, it’s like bumper cars, except instead of trying to hit each other, everyone tries to miss, peppered with sporadic ‘who blinks first’ dares, and you know the rest.

Sometimes they miss, sometimes they don’t.

Everyone is in an incredible hurry, so they ignore everything and stare straight ahead like those pilots in scary old war movies, zeroing in on a target, oblivious to all beside and behind.

The one driving maneuver that amuses me most is the classic Vietnamese U-turn, invariably performed right in the middle of dense traffic.

Instead of executing the customary three-point turn or proceeding to the next intersection and turning around, an agonizingly slow six-point turn is made at the biggest choke point when it’s totally jam-packed with traffic.

Classic six-point U-turn

The reason for the three additional (and redundant) moves and the gingerly manner in which they are executed is most drivers grossly overestimate the size of their vehicle, so they think they’re about to bump into something when in fact they’re half a football pitch away from any object.

The excessive caution employed is not based on fear that drivers might damage anything around them, rather they’re worried about denting their own vehicle.

Looking at the cost of cars here, I must say I can’t blame them.

Plumbing: Vietnam punches far above its weight in this category, demonstrating the ingenuity and resourcefulness of the locals.

Fact is if you flash the cash, some clown who thinks he knows plumbing, or believes you don’t realize that he has no clue, will magically appear out of nowhere to relieve you of some cash.

Although the tune may vary, it’s the same dance from Hanoi to Honolulu and everywhere in between.

The prevailing plumbing style in Vietnam is for laborers to pick up a few hundred meters of PVC pipe then begin connecting it in an artistic fashion to the water supply, bypassing the design phase.

Blue pipe is ideal because it highlights the workmanship better than boring old gray.

A labyrinth-like network of T-junctions, joints, angles, and twists reminiscent of a plate of linguine is then constructed, winding around every joint and corner in the toilet from floor to ceiling, until, probably by divine intervention, fresh water flows in and waste water ends up on the shoes of those using urinals and sinks.

Unrivaled creativity

Last grain of salt: This item originates from days gone by when there was little to go around, so needs had to be prioritized and cash allocated to the most critical items each day, which, sadly, still applies to many people in Vietnam.

Despite all the significant progress made to date, the concept of ordering in advance usually does not resonate among locals. Believe me, I’ve tried everything short of slipping drugs into people’s drinks to convince them to plan consumption in advance, but it’s like peeing into a stiff gale.

Therefore, only when the last morsel of salt or rice, splash of oil, or clove of garlic is consumed can one then initiate replenishment, and not a single second before.

Thus, if you do venture into a local kitchen and find pots on the boil and ingredients strewn about but nobody present à la Marie Celeste, fear not, the cook ran out of something right in the thick of things and bolted for the nearest corner store.

Interrogation: Given the unceremonious behaviour of many foreigners both past and present in this country, it’s little wonder the locals want to keep tabs on us.

Hell, if this was my country with its history of scandalous invasions, I’d have a pack of trouble-sniffing bloodhounds following every foreigner.

In addition, most locals have no first-hand experience abroad, so they’re naturally curious about visitors, especially in view of the weird things we do.

We can mitigate this issue by carrying around translated copies of our full curriculum vitae and circulate it among interested parties as we stroll through town, similar to grocery store leaflets handed out en masse.

Cutting queues:This charming custom is practiced indiscriminately, with both locals and foreigners victimized without prejudice. It’s basically the Vietnamese equivalent of the guy who tries to crash the Express line in a supermarket back home with 13 items when only 10 are allowed.

Although they feign innocence, queue-jumpers know exactly what they’re doing and we know that they know, so confrontation is a viable yet time-consuming option, therefore defeating the purpose. The best defense is to distract them, then nimbly retake our rightful place whilst ignoring the jumper completely.

As strange as some of these idiosyncrasies may seem to foreigners, there is often a method to the madness. The sidewalk is breezier than the shop and does indeed bring the business closer to customers. Similarly, why drive half a kilometer just to turn around and go back to the point of origin if you can do it on the spot?

It’s all academic since there are only two ways forward, either:

We get used to these customs and laugh with the locals, or

We don’t, and are slowly driven to insanity.

So, fellow foreigners, kick back and enjoy, because the only thing that’s going to change is us.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hours after being assigned a new job at a state-run company on Tuesday, former District 1 vice-chairman Doan Ngoc Hai has tendered his resignation, citing lack of qualifications.

Hai, most widely known for leading a ‘sidewalk clearing’ campaign in Ho Chi Minh City in 2017, was on Tuesday morning named deputy general director of the Saigon Construction Corporation (SGCC).

The appointment was against his “personal aspirations," Hai said at a ceremony on the same day, adding that he lacks qualifications for the new job.

He said as a Party member he had to comply with assignments given by his overseeing Party organ.

Speaking to Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper on Tuesday afternoon, Hai said he had turned in his resignation and wished to make no further comment on the decision.

This is the second time Hai has requested to resign in less than two years.

Doan Ngoc Hai is shown leading a sidewalk clearing campaign in this photo taken in 2017, when he was deputy chairman of District 1 in Ho Chi Minh City. Photo: Le Phan / Tuoi Tre

In January 2018, a year after launching his signature sidewalk clearing campaign, Hai handed in a letter of resignation from all positions in the District 1 administration, keeping a promise made at the start of his campaign that he would resign if order was not restored to the downtown district’s sidewalks.

“My actions had interfered with the interests of the many parking lots, hotels, restaurants, and households that reaped huge profits from the district’s sidewalks, as well as those of a significant number of officials who have a symbiotic relationship with those violators,” Hai wrote in the letter.

He retracted his resignation letter in May 2018, saying he still wanted to devote his efforts to the development of the city and was willing to take on any new tasks at even the most dangerous and challenging places.

During many discussions with city leaders since then, Hai has made clear his wish to serve in Can Gio, one of Ho Chi Minh City’s rural and poorest districts, he said at Tuesday’s ceremony.

While his requests received no answer from city leaders, they repeatedly offered him positions irrelevant to his area of expertise, he said.

These offers included making him deputy head of the city’s food safety watchdog and general director of the Saigon Jewelry Company Limited (SJC), which is wholly owned by the Ho Chi Minh City People’s Committee.

While reluctantly accepting their latest offer to be SGCC deputy general director, Hai said he did not have any qualifications or prior training in engineering in order to perform well as the leader of a construction company.

Doan Ngoc Hai (L) receives a decision on his transfer to the Saigon Construction Corporation from Ho Chi Minh City deputy chairman Tran Vinh Tuyen at a ceremony on June 4, 2019. Photo: Tu Trung / Tuoi Tre

In his second resignation letter submitted on Tuesday afternoon, Hai said he would risk causing “grave consequences” working a job that is neither his “forte, expertise nor passion."

“It would damage the reputation of the Party and be a waste of the people’s money,” Hai wrote in the letter.

Hai said he would take a two-month unpaid leave while waiting for his resignation to be processed.

At age 50, Hai is not up for retirement in another ten years according to Vietnamese law.

Ho Chi Minh City deputy chairman Tran Vinh Tuyen said any resignation by an official at Hai’s level must be approved by the municipal Party organ.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The red flags will be out in force for the long weekend coming at the end of April. It’s going to be busy with people on the move to hometowns to celebrate two holidays this weekend.

April 30 marks the end of the American war in Vietnam, as Westerners sometimes call it.

The date is known among Vietnamese as Reunification Day – one of the final moments in the process of north and south becoming reunified.

The names surrounding April 30 can be confusing. It is sometimes also called ‘Victory Day’ or ‘Liberation Day,’ depending on whether it is used in an official title or as locals prefer to name it.

Foreigners sometimes confuse the occasion with ‘National Day’ or ‘Independence Day,’ which occurs on September 2 and celebrates Vietnamese independence declared by President Ho Chi Minh on September 2, 1945 following the end of the Japanese occupation of Vietnam.

Got all that?!

It’s handy to remember if you’re trying to impress people in a pub with your knowledge of the local history!

The long holiday weekend basically runs from April 30 until May 3 and if you haven’t made any travel bookings yet then you’re stuck! Trains will be full, already the two major airports in Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi are experiencing major crowding problems and buses will be full, too.

But probably the best way as usual with Vietnamese events is to stay close to home and just enjoy life where you are with family and friends. There’s no better demonstration of peace than that, hey?

Unlike Independence Day, which very official and serious, Reunification Day is a more celebratory occasion with the parades, festivals, and public festivities we’re familiar with prior to COVID-19. You could see the military parades but there’s also a very strong visual emphasis on Vietnam’s long history, its variety of ethnic groups, and the traditional songs and costumes of the nation.

Looking around a bit at the posters strung across the top of the roads will give you a good clue to local events associated with Liberation Day.

With both Reunification Day and May 1, or International Workers’ Day, coming back to back, this creates quite a long weekend for the population with many heading to the beaches, taking rural holidays or just sleeping over it! I like the upbeat mood at this time and for sure, anyone who has the opportunity and money will do their best to enjoy it after so much stress during our ongoing COVID-19 situation in Vietnam. It’s the perfect time to travel anyway before the sweltering heat of high summer hits. I do feel, having lived here for fourteen years, that it’s just getting hotter every year so it’s best to get your suntan early.

For Hoi An and Da Nang, it should be a very revitalizing time for the tourism industry with lots of bookings from the local area as well as Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh city. While wearing masks and social distancing are still recommended, I doubt it will feel over-bearing for most visitors.

I guess you could also celebrate Vietnam’s continuing success at keeping the coronavirus at bay and managing to still grow the economy in the middle of so much financial pressure on both the general public and the nation’s purse strings. I’ll ‘mot, hai, ba, yo!’ (one, two, three, drink!) to that!

Last year, I wrote about this day, commenting at the time on Vietnamese resilience during times of crisis and the ability of this country to work together on common goals without people going off in multiple directions on how to handle the resolutions of social problems. That this still holds true is unsurprising given what I have experienced of Vietnamese toughness, often with far less grumbling and complaining than in the Western world. Solidarity, albeit a dirty word in Western culture, is sorely needed worldwide and at least Vietnam is showing a good example of that.

Vietnam’s future, in spite of the health crisis escalating around the world, looks pretty rosy at the moment to my eye. We all know that millions have lost jobs and businesses and it will be some time before life gets back to anything near normal. However, it’s growing economically faster than most of the developed world. Industry is picking up customers again and it’s rapidly attracting foreign investment and manufacturing to shift here as world supply chains reposition themselves against the economic fallout from the virus.

I think Liberation Day will feel much more special this year since the nation celebrates this achievement after such a rough time last year. So there’s a lot to be thankful for if you’re Vietnamese. And if you’re not Vietnamese? You’re still lucky to be living here than anywhere else!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Some of our most cherished discoveries when living abroad spring up when we least expect them, in the oddest locations, so, whatever you do, don’t take your eyes off the ball – even for a second.

Thanks to a storied history and diversity, Vietnam is a treasure chest of cultural goodies that could easily escape detection, a brightly colored mosaic in a world of boring, plain tiles.

I found one piece of classic Vietnamese culture nailed to a tree of all places, right under my nose yet where I’d least expect it.

I often hang out at Bike Dude’s station, which is also his office, dominated by a big tree that throws off a lot of shade. We shoot the breeze (that is, he shoots the breeze while I try), do stretching exercises, ogle passers-by, and have a giggle.

He has implements and tools, greasy rags, rusty motorbike parts, cleaning implements for his rig, plus random props and memorabilia stashed all around the tree. In addition to being his office, that tree is his repair shop and a place to grab a nap after lunch.

At first glance, Bike Dude is a bit of an imposing figure, tall and muscular, decked out in full military regalia boasting a camouflage uniform, a matching helmet, and combat boots. The only things missing are a row of medals across his chest and a pistol in his belt.

Everybody knows him, and, I suspect, is aware that he has every street, alley, pot hole, and short cut indelibly etched in his memory. Plus he has a few driving tricks up his sleeve, enabling him to skirt obstacles and ensure passengers and cargo arrive safely at the desired destination.

He may be ‘only’ a taxi driver in some people’s eyes, but he commands respect. He’s a professional – experienced, reliable, and trustworthy. I think he can even see around corners because any potential danger or risk that arises is quickly quelled.

The truly indisputable proof of his prowess lies in how, without exception, he grasps my hokey directions and horrid pronunciation. Anyone who can decipher my gibberish is very sharp, let me tell you.

He never gives me that empty stare we foreigners have all received at one time or another, when we’re convinced that what we’re saying is clear but the listener is left in the dark.

I’m riding pillion, of course, giving directions:

Me: “Phải!” (right, as in please turn right, but when pronounced incorrectly it can mean “Yea” as in yes)

Bike Dude: (Abruptly turns right, I hear a stage whisper, probably a curse)

Me: “Trai! (left) No, wait, thang tien (straight ahead)!” As the panic mounts, I always throw in some English, which makes things worse.

Bike Dude: “OK” (thinking “My goodness, what a klutz this guy is.”)

We advance, with Bike Dude shrugging off the confusion and forging ahead, often intuitively, in full control of the situation. Oh well, at least one of us always knows where we’re going, and half the time it isn’t me.

I don’t actually call him Bike Dude, rather ‘Chuyen Gia,’ (Professional), to underline my respect.

Whilst hanging out in his office in Da Lat, I noticed some interesting objects mounted on the tree – a couple of areca nuts (‘trau’ in Vietnamese, which come from the plant of the areca palm ‘cau’), a little bag of pink-stained crushed slaked lime (‘voi’), a couple of dried up old leaves, a few rusty old washers, screws, nails, chain links, and, naturally, some wooden toothpicks, critical for plucking out unsightly morsels after lunch.

Forget all that hardware – the story, as it turned out, is in the nuts, leaves, and slaked lime, and, to my delight, the tale rekindled an important lesson about life abroad that had faded from my mind.

Chuyen Gia’s office

While surveying the tree and contents, my mind suddenly snapped, curiosity piqued, and I took photos of the objects on the tree. I carried them around for weeks, poking around in my network of friends to learn what the objects symbolized, and, the more I asked, the more variations on one traditional theme surfaced.

The single common thread in all versions is the nuts, leaves, and slaked lime (I’d never heard of it, looked it up, and discovered it’s calcium hydroxide, whatever that is), referring to a classic Vietnamese fairy tale called ‘Su tich Trau Cau’ (The Legend of the Betel and Areca). The tale chronicles the sad fate of identical twin brothers and the wife of one of them, all three of whom lived together in a cute little house.

One day the unmarried twin arrived home before his brother and his brother’s wife confused him with his sibling, offering him a warm, tight hug!

Anyone would be the victim of such an innocent oversight since the twins were identical. Nonetheless, the unmarried brother felt very sad because the incident ruined their domestic happiness, and he left the home carrying a heavy load of guilt on his conscience.

That single brother traveled on foot for many days, eventually fatigued, then dying by a river, and was transformed into limestone (I warned you this is a fairy tale). The married brother was concerned about the disappearance, so he went on the hunt, eventually tired from the journey, sat down near that large limestone rock, and also died. In time, a strange tree grew in the place where the married brother had died.

Sure enough, the wife took off looking for the brothers and she in turn died by the river, morphing into a small plant with heart-shaped leaves which wound itself around the tree trunk.

Out of the blue, the king happened to pass along and learned of the story from local villagers, then sat down and chewed a betel leaf together with a hunk of an areca nut spiked with slaked lime, getting a nice little drug-like high that is associated with that combination. The king spat the juice of the nut onto the large limestone causing that part of it to turn red.

This tale takes place before the days of dentists, toothbrushes, and tooth paste, so it was fortunate people discovered that chewing the betel leaf with the areca nut dabbed with some dampened slaked lime reddened their lips, strengthened their teeth, and, joy of all joys, provided a little buzz similar to caffeine or dope.

Slaked lime (‘voi’) with betel juice

The elder generation in this part of the world, women in particular, still chew on wrapped betel leaves with pieces of betel nuts and slaked lime inside (‘nhai trau’ – literally ‘chew betel nuts’), rendering their teeth bright red, and that little buzz paints the big smile we usually see on their faces.

Over time, the leaf, nut, and lime became an inseparable trio, a unit, symbolizing a warm welcome into a home and an initial offering from bridegroom to the bride’s family, believed to assure a loving, warm future for the betrothed.

Areca nuts are always offered in even-numbered amounts with 60 being the most popular quantity, one per year that the new marriage is predicted to last.

The moral of that fairy tale is elusive – at least to me: an innocent mistake made by the wife led to several sad events – hardly an earth-shattering moral lesson, but the story does give meaning to the betel nut’s importance in Vietnamese culture.

I also remain in the dark as to why Mr. Chuyen Gia hung the symbols of the tale in his office, but I dare not ask in case it leads to an unpleasant personal incident that he’d rather not discuss.

My own takeaway is less about the story itself and more about other cultural gems that may lie under our noses undetected. If that children’s tale is behind an innocent display of fruit and ornaments on a taxi driver’s tree, so easy to overlook, what other tales of Vietnam lie just beyond our grasp?

And that is the real lesson I was taught long ago, which had slipped my mind, then returned to the forefront while learning ‘Su tich Trau Cau.’

The deeper we dig, the more we discover.

Turn that proverbial stone over every chance you get, you never know what lies beneath.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They should have compulsory singing lessons, shouldn’t they?

It will not fix the problem but if you’re going to drive everyone nuts, at least do it in style. Moves have been afoot to crack down on street noise in Da Nang and Ho Chi Minh City from shop front karaoke speakers to the outrageously loud music coming from pubs and bars in these crowded cities.

COVID-19 did affect the number of outdoor and street venues which made things quieter in Ho Chi Minh City for a while but with the lifting of bans and restrictions, it will all come back with a vengeance. The current plan for both cities is to issue warnings until June, when fines and penalties will be imposed. There’s obviously little sympathy for the street singers worried about losing their businesses yet some karaoke venues fear that they’ll struggle to recover economically from recent lockdown measures.

At least it’s good on the police for trying. Although some vexing issues about shortages of noise metering equipment exist, given the staggeringly high volumes, I don’t think anyone’s going to have much difficulty identifying the culprits. Unfortunately, defiance is rampant and moments after the police have left, owners and managers allow the din to continue.

It’s unclear at the time of writing if fines rise in cost from June but the more difficult question would be what to do if people repeat their annoying behavior. Can and will the local authorities confiscate the outdoor music equipment and how would locals recover their stuff later? Could you take the gear from someone’s living room? Would anyone bother to crack down on wedding and party functions?

Finally, would the local authorities respect these upcoming enforcements on their own events. Could anyone really have the presence of mind to turn down the loudspeaker announcements and broadcast at a reasonable hour instead of first thing in the morning and evening?

The logistics of storing seized equipment are not that difficult given the large areas already storing confiscated counterfeit goods and motorbikes, as well as an additional threat to force locals to modify their habits. There could also be regular auctioning of goods not reclaimed or for which fines have not yet been paid, say within three months. This happens in my home country of Australia, where noise penalties are much higher than those in Vietnam.

The only realistic option in the long run is attitudinal training; changing social behavior though education and government campaigns – similar to the efforts to get everyone to wear crash helmets. Yet to achieve that requires a better understanding of how excessive noise has become such a ‘normalized’ part of Vietnamese life.

A beer joint blasts loud music at night along Pham Van Dong Boulevard in Ho Chi Minh City. Photo: Chau Tuan / Tuoi Tre

Long before anyone could buy music systems, noise was still everywhere, such as the banging of gongs for festivals and funerals, including bands; public announcements shouted in the streets; fireworks and banging anything to scare away evil spirits and ghosts; and so on. Besides, as every member of a rock concert knows, loud is fun!

What’s changed is the modern ability for anyone with enough money to become an amateur public performer. That’s also been fueled by the explosion in public festivals and community performance venues. That’s a chance to show off and let off steam. Ordinarily, this wouldn’t be a problem with an abundance of karaoke bars with soundproofing. But this is the public factor, directly out of your living room to invade the street without agreement from other people. For the sake of peace, most folks put up with the occasional neighbors needing to entertain themselves at 120 decibels (the sound of a jet engine). If that goes on for more than thirty minutes, it can cause serious hearing damage and health stress such as lack of sleep or the inability to relax at home.

In my area, people calm down the noise after 10:00 pm; however, there’s always that one idiot who decides to use a hammer at night. I’ve given up trying to get neighbors to reduce the volume – even worse – how dare a foreigner tell a Vietnamese what to do?

So why? One shop owner told a friend of mine that he does loud music to attract customers, which makes no sense if you can’t be comfortable and talk without shouting. One of my neighbors told me it’s because everyone does it, which doesn’t make sense to be as loud as the person next to you. In the end, I guess people do it just for something to do.

One approach (with attitudinal training) could be to promote the idea that loud noise is socially unacceptable (many tell me this, but are afraid to challenge their friends) and it’s not normal. I believe many Vietnamese want to see change, especially if they’ve traveled to another country which is quieter. If this is already possible regarding helmets, then why not noise?

I think it will get interesting in June!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A province-wide ban on mobile karaoke services as well as food shipment to quarantine centers has been ordered by the leader of An Giang Province in southern Vietnam after the locale logged five new cases of COVID-19 transmission.

The direction was stated on Tuesday by Nguyen Thanh Binh, chairman of the An Giang People’s Committee, during his visit to COVID-19 prevention facilities, including control posts along the bank of the Binh Di River in Long Binh Town and the quarantine wards at Luong The Vinh High School in An Phu Town.

The fight against COVID-19 in the province is facing considerable threats as volatile developments of the epidemic have been reported in Cambodia, which adjoins An Giang, district-level officials reported during Binh’s visit.

Officials visit the Binh Di River, a pathway that border jumpers from Cambodia frequently use, in An Giang Province, southern Vietnam, March 2, 2021. Photo: Buu Dau / Tuoi Tre

Tran Hoa Hop, chairman of the An Phu District People’s Committee, said the campus of Luong The Vinh High School has been utilized to quarantine those entering the province from Cambodia since reports of the latest outbreak in the neighboring country first arrived on February 20.

“COVID-19 cases were reported in areas of Cambodia that are very close to Long Binh Town, which seriously concerned us as the topography in the border area here is tricky and harboring risks of illegal enttry,” Hop said.

Tu Quoc Tuan, director of the An Giang Department of Health, stated that the agency has required local hospials to prepare for COVID-19 treatment as the number of infected individuals among the Vietnamese diaspora in Cambodia is soaring.

“Our resolution is sending suspicious cases to COVID-19 wards of our district-level hospitals to prevent them from penetrating further into the country,” Tuan said.

Soldiers at a COVID-19 control post near the Cambodia border of An Giang Province, Vietnam receive gifts from local authorities, March 2, 2021. Photo: Buu Dau / Tuoi Tre

Chairman Binh pointed out that the provinces surrounding An Giang have seen imported cases from Cambodia, which calls for stricter patrols to detect illegal entrances via canal networks.

“Quarantine wards must ensure safe distancing between each room and bed. Food from outside must be prohibited,” he underlined.

“Considering its risk of enabling transmission, mobile karaoke must also be banned in the whole province."

Zoning tape lines are used to ensure safe distance at the quarantine ward in Luong The Vinh High School of An Giang Province, Vietnam, March 2, 2021. Photo: Buu Dau / Tuoi Tre

A form of entertainment that thrives off the crowds at street stalls in Vietnam, mobile karaoke is often run by a duo, one of whom will try to catch attention by singing onto a portable loudspeaker while the other will sell snacks to the drinkers or diners.

They also let singing enthusiasts take over the micro at a certain price.

This is not the first time mobile karaoke has been brought up as a pressing issue by Vietnamese authorities.

On Friday, the Ho Chi Minh City government ordered relevant authorities to crack down on mobile karaoke services following complaints about their loudness at night.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Another Women’s Day recently whizzed by – oh how quickly they come, go, and are forgotten. One day out of the entire year (ok, two days are celebrated here in Vietnam) with a bouquet of flowers, maybe a box of chocolates or a cake, a meal out, then in the blink of an eye it’s in the rear-view mirror.

Even if all 48,566,839 men (49.4 percent of the population) in Vietnam were on board regarding the tribute, the fact is most women don’t have time to stop what they’re doing and enjoy a special celebration totally dedicated to them, ironic as it may seem.

They’re simply too damn busy keeping the ship afloat.

Just walking down the street in any neighbourhood in Vietnam, women are seen humping away in markets and supermarkets, washing, preparing produce, cooking, serving food and drinks in restaurants and cafés, then cleaning up the mess left behind.

These old hands have seen…

We all know those activities, see them each and every day, but what about some niches and sectors in which women make major contributions, but are less noticeable, taken for granted.

Stick your nose in a local bank and check out who’s doing the heavy lifting.

A bank?

Oh boy, let me tell you, as odd as it may sound, a visit to the bank reveals a lot about how well things work here in Vietnam. In most countries, banks are austere and intimidating (they hold the cash we need and often send subtle messages through their posture and mannerisms to remind us), but not around here, we actually feel like customers, hooray!

Queuing up for service is not one of the highlights of commercial transactions in Vietnam, so there is no taking a number and a seat while awaiting one’s turn. It’s more like jostling for position in the Tokyo subway at rush hour, everyone pouncing on the teller announcing their business simultaneously and expecting immediate service.

That local flare adds to the challenge we customers face, but just imagine being on the receiving end of all that commotion as the tellers are!

To add to the ambience, the Vietnamese dong still includes smallish denominations of banknotes and the economy has been expanding at breakneck speed for years on end, so the VND500,000 notes are a dime a dozen.

It’s not uncommon for a client to stagger up to the counter with an entire backpack stuffed to the gills with VND500’s. Ever notice it nearly always seems like a nondescript, humbly dressed person that has the biggest clump of cash?

I vividly recall sitting in my Da Nang bank branch a couple of years ago waiting for my little transaction to conclude, during which time an elderly lady pulled up in an SUV chock-a-block full of cash.

I’m dead serious, the cash was piled up everywhere inside the vehicle, no way you could roll down the windows or it would have started blowing all over the parking area.

It turned out it was VND8 billion (US$350,000), which I know because the lady informed me with great pride that she was buying a hotel and had brought all that money to the bank to seal the deal.

That begged several questions, which of course I could not ask, such as:

* Where did she get so much cash from? (Under the mattress seems unlikely given the sheer volume.)

* Why schlepp it over in an SUV instead of doing a wire transfer? (Mistrust of electronic transactions, fearing money will disappear into cyberspace.)

* What happened when she stopped at stoplights and other drivers saw all that money piled up all over her vehicle? (Nothing, this is Vietnam.)

* Did the lady toss a few notes to any needy people she encountered along the way? (Nope, in a hurry.)

* Who counted it prior to hauling it over to the bank? (Her staff I guess.)

Anyway, the lady’s minions hauled the huge mountain of cash into the main office of the bank and an entire brigade of sharp-looking female tellers magically appeared through a discreet rear door and started counting the whole mess at a feverish pace.

If every note had been of the VND500,000 denomination, that would come to 16,000 notes, but I saw lots of stacks of VND500’s and VND200’s, so there must have been a lot more to count.

All I wanted that day was change for a couple of large notes (I hate giving them to vendors, forcing them to run around looking for change, plus the VND500’s draw attention in the wet market). I received them in a flash, then got the hell out of there, terrified something would happen and I would somehow be implicated in the drama.

I shuddered imaging the headlines: ALERT BANK STAFF STOPS LUNATIC EXPAT ATTEMPTING TO STICK UP LOCAL BANK!! SUSPECT CLAIMS HE JUST WANTED SMALL NOTES FOR BANANA VENDOR.

That huge deposit was a special case, no doubt, but the overall point remains: those tellers are sealed tightly in the pressure cooker all day, every day.

Just prior to Women’s Day, and completely unrelated to the festivities, I popped into my local branch once again, this time to deposit a payment into my buddy’s account.

Outside, I saw a female staff member placing a note in Vietnamese and English kindly advising customers that their ATM was down, going that extra step.

Bilingual warning: ‘ATM not working’

Thanks to ATMs and online options, I rarely set foot inside the actual branch itself. The first thing that grabbed my attention is most (if not all) of the employees running the show were women.

Once again, endless questions popped into my mind, but people can’t just hang around in banks observing the workflow and asking questions while trying to be inconspicuous. So I had to make due with a few furtive sideways glances at the operation here and there.

The tellers are like machines, moving at a blistering pace and leafing through mounds of cash, slips, and signed papers. The bill counting machines clatter away like a locomotive in a Western movie, bills of VND500,000 flying by faster than the eye can follow.

Rat a tat, rat a tat, then a tidy clunk when the end of the stack is reached.

The teller was going like a one-armed wallpaper hanger, yet never lost focus of my little transaction, while at the same time fending off other customers. She even grabbed the wad of small bills I had placed on the counter because I forgot how much the service charge was for a deposit.

She then deftly removed the requisite VND11,000, waved those bills at me as proof, and neatly put the rest of the cash back.

Now, that is a take charge, professional attitude, quick and efficient, smooth and seamless, focused on the customer.

Truly, banks are the ideal showcase of women’s contributions to this country, but that’s just one example. They’re omnipresent, on construction sites, struggling alone to deliver heavy, bulky items by motorbike, selling trinkets, and hauling recycling items around with their ‘don ganh’ (shoulder-borne carrying poles). You-name-it, they’re doing it.

It’s high time we men turned it all up a notch, less flash, more class, choosing informal scenarios and random moments scattered throughout the year to show our gratitude, instead of a big hoopla once or twice.

This revolutionary approach has a boatload of advantages over the current celebrations, which are predictable, and, quite frankly, boring. And, gentlemen, we all know how women love surprises (as long as they’re good, that is), so let’s surprise them.

Bear in mind that if you do decide to take a gift for your favourite bank teller, make sure it’s in a transparent container or plastic bag, lest it be confused with a weapon. I can see the headline now:

‘WEIRD FOREIGNER APPREHENDED TRYING TO HOLD UP A BANK USING A GOURD – INSISTS IT WAS A GIFT!’

Random gestures, treats, goodies, and gifts big or small, invitations, it doesn’t matter, they’ll all be appreciated. Let’s just do it, every change is like a journey, starts with the first step taken.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Recently, one of the global expat living publications released a whizz bang study on the cost of living in various countries around the world for expatriates, and Vietnam came out on top of the pile as the absolute cheapest.

Exactly how affordable is Vietnam?

A while back I went through a line-by-line exercise detailing typical expat living expenses, but now let’s take a different tack, looking at what can be bought for one little ole U.S. dollar in Vietnam.

In Vietnamese dong terms, that U.S. dollar buys about VND23,000. The Australian and Canadian dollars weigh in at about VND18,000, whereas the euro pegs at VND27,000.

The UK’s pound sterling converts to just short of VND32,000.

Confused yet?

Me too, so screw it, we’ll just stick with the U.S. dollar and use VND20,000 as the local currency equivalent, a nice, easy round number. I include the VND amounts below to facilitate easy conversion to other currencies.

Actually, using a lower value than the prevailing exchange rate may not be a bad idea, because the U.S. Federal Reserve continues to put money into circulation like a bunch of drunken sailors on shore leave.

Vietnam, working conservatively with the future in mind, is busy squirreling away foreign currency, leading me to think that rate may well change one day, but we have no idea whether indeed it will change, by how much, or when.

In the meantime, let’s go on a typical little daily trip to your local market and see what a dollar can buy us.

First up, you need to park your motorbike, which you can do seven times at markets in most cities for that dollar – i.e. it’s usually VND3,000 a pop, give or take.

Bread always comes in handy, so how many ‘banh mi’ can we buy (just whole loaves, not prepared sandwiches) for that dollar?

There are many different grades of that little slice of heaven ranging in price from VND1,500 to VND3,000 each, and no doubt there are designer versions that come in pricier featuring seeds and nuts, even emitting a cute little jingle when sliced open.

The VND1,500 loaves are extremely light and airy, the VND2,000 loaves are a bit denser, while the more expensive ‘heavyweight’ versions are nearly twice the weight, more concentrated and tastier, so we’ll go with them at VND3,000 each, that’s seven for a buck – damn good deal.

Heavyweight ‘banh mi’

Now let’s pick up some veggies, you can buy two majestic heads of broccoli or cauliflower for a buck – those big enough for two servings cost about VND10,000 each.

For the same amount, you can snag two pomelos, which look like a grapefruit on steroids, called ‘buoi,’ but only the smallish variety, a bit old, possibly with some blemishes, they’re discounted but still great for eating. What’s inside is delicious and freshly preserved by that extra thick pith, and that’s what matters. The largest and prettiest versions of pomelo will run closer to two bucks.

Stuck between washing days with no clean socks? Damn, don’t you hate it when that happens?

Fret not, you can even buy three pairs of socks for VND20,000, that’s the very short ladies’ version that only comes up to your ankle bone (irritating) and develops holes in the heels and toes in no time flat. Still, if you’re in a jam, those socks will bail you out.

If you stub your toe wandering around the market, no worries, you can pick up no less than 20 average-sized plastic band aids for that buck.

Every household needs fresh hen’s eggs – I personally prefer them all natural with blobs of poop and gunk on the outside – adds realism to the whole buying experience. I assume, but can furnish no proof to back up the claim, that the poopy variety come from happier hens than those who lay the squeaky clean industrial supermarket eggs by the thousand.

You can buy ten poopy eggs for that buck although they are typically sold by the kilo, just remember to wash them thoroughly before cracking them open to avoid any bacteria.

Poopy eggs

How about a nice freshwater snakehead fish (‘ca loc’ – yep, the very one I struggle to pronounce correctly as analyzed to tears in my previous update). You can choose any two of the large chunks below (each is enough for one meal for one person) for a buck, which do not include the head and all the guts in the center of the photo, from which I made a tasty soup stock.

I pulled that live fish out of the tank myself and whacked it senseless with a steel pole, you can’t beat that for freshness.

Snakehead (ca loc) fish

The entire fish cost me VND85,000, which comes out to eight good-sized chunks, or two for VND20,000.

To round out your meal you can buy enough chilies, coriander, basil, and spring onions to choke a horse for a buck, or for VND2,000 you can get enough of each to prepare a single meal. Hell, if you buy several items from a market vendor, they’ll throw them in for free.

Let’s stop off for a snack, there’s always a ‘bun thit nuong’ or ‘banh uot’ stand within spitting distance. The two dishes are similar – a thin rice crepe with grilled or ground pork, hunks of sausage, sprouts, greens, and, naturally, some mild fish sauce.

If you spot some woven rice noodles that resemble little cross-thatched blankets, those are ‘banh hoi.’ Grab them, that design soaks up the fish sauce delightfully! You can pick up any one of these three dishes for VND20,000 and enjoy it whilst sitting on a kiddie-sized plastic stool.

A wicked ‘banh out’

Let’s top that dish off with a nice local coffee cups, some are made from a blend of local Vietnamese robusta beans (known to make the hairs on your arm stand up), others are made from a mixture of robusta and arabica seeds.

A cup in a nice café will go for a dollar, sometimes more, but if you don’t mind drinking in the kind of dump I frequent you can get one for half that, so for a buck you can invite a friend to join you for a cup.

Thirsty? You can pick up two large glasses of sugarcane juice (‘nuoc mia’) squeezed right on the spot for VND20,000, which can’t beat that with a stick. It’s packed with electrolytes to stave off dehydration in hot, sticky weather.

Let’s say that on your trek around the market, you catch your clothing on a nail, resulting in an unsightly tear. Don’t worry, on your way home just pop into the Miracle Sewing Lady, she can fix anything.

She sits there all day, from 7:00 am to 5:00 pm (I checked), hardly moving, just sewing her brains out. She memorizes every repair job dropped off by each customer, the time by which she promised to complete the work, and the price she quoted. I’d bet a tidy sum that she never muffs up a job or forgets what she promised her customer.

Miracle Sewing Lady just sits outside a house, has no shop of her own, but I wouldn’t be surprised to see her take over the entire block one day, she’s that good. Anyway, she can fix up any clothing misfortune in no time flat, charging VND20,000 or less for a repair.

Miracle Sewing Lady

And if you’re feeling lucky after all that shopping, you can pick up two daily lottery tickets for a buck and give one to a friend to ensure maximum luck.

You never know, somebody who wins it might be you.

In the meantime, enjoy the affordable prices here in Vietnam, they probably won’t remain that way forever.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Editor's note: Bruce Delteil is the managing partner of McKinsey & Company’s Vietnam office. He is based in Hanoi, where Patti Wang works as a consultant.

Over the past few years, Vietnam has seen progress in gender equality. Almost three-quarters of Vietnamese women have been active in the workforce over the past 20 years, according to the World Bank and IMF. This is much higher than Vietnam’s regional peers and other advanced economies.

Fortunately, the COVID-19 pandemic has not derailed Vietnam’s progress toward gender parity. In November 2020, the International Labor Organization reported that women in Vietnam are increasingly well-prepared for decision-making roles in businesses. Sixty-three percent of enterprises surveyed in Vietnam indicated that women were present at the supervisory management level and 73 percent confirmed that they had women as middle managers.

Looking ahead, Vietnam will need to build on this progress by taking stock and preparing for the future of work. The country is facing challenges of different sorts, particularly as digital adoption is accelerating across key sectors of the economy.

How digital technologies impact women in the workforce

Digital transformation has had wide-sweeping effects on every country and industry. Recent McKinsey research suggests that in Vietnam, digital technologies will create a revenue pool of US$100 billion by 2025, generated by the formation of ecosystems. Digital is also transforming the way people work as workplaces increasingly automate tasks and adopt new technologies. This is especially true in service-heavy industries that account for a significant share of women’s employment.

These trends will impact women and their livelihoods. In 2019, McKinsey found that 40 million to 160 million women worldwide – seven to 24 percent of those currently employed – may need to transition across occupations to ensure that they are positioned for shifts in labor demand. The demand for tech-enabled jobs has only accelerated in the past year as a result of the coronavirus pandemic.

There are two noticeable workforce shifts. Process automation technologies will impact jobs in meaningful ways as humans learn to work alongside machines. The job requirements of secretaries, teachers, and other professionals have changed significantly as computers have automated several manual tasks, such as basic data collection and processing. New jobs related to developing and deploying new technologies may also emerge.

Women in Vietnam cannot afford to miss out on a digital future. If Vietnam is to reach its goal of building a digital economy that accounts for 20 percent of GDP by 2025, it will require the right supporting enablers to help women benefit from the skill transition.

Facilitating the transitions and challenging the barriers for women

In facilitating the workforce transition for women in Vietnam, existing barriers across three major areas must be eliminated. There needs to be concerted and targeted effort aimed at helping women gain access to more jobs, overcome financial constraints, and get into Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields.

1. Enabling broader access to jobs through reskilling

Women must overcome long-established and pervasive structural and societal barriers to employment or upskilling opportunities. These include having less time to refresh or learn new skills, or search for employment because of the time spent on unpaid care. Women do an average of 75 percent of the world’s total unpaid-care work, including childcare, caring for the elderly, cooking, and cleaning.

To address this, there needs to be greater flexibility and mobility to negotiate labor-market transitions successfully. Technological change, in itself, should help to make women’s working lives more flexible by enabling teleworking, for instance. Governments can help, for example, by enabling better access to maternity and parental leave and childcare.

It is also important to introduce more ways to equip women with the skills that will be in demand. The private sector can invest more in training and reskilling their female employees, either within their organizations or in partnership with academic institutions. Public and private investment in digital learning platforms would open up another avenue for women; and governments could, for example, provide incentives such as subsidies for undertaking this training.

2. Closing the gender gap in financial inclusion

Women generally don’t have equal access to the professional networks and sponsors needed to easily navigate job transitions. Financial support such as unemployment benefits and insurance could help facilitate these transitions. Labor agencies can focus on providing assistance to the unemployed: serving as job counselors and enabling access to potential training and job opportunities for those temporarily out of the workforce.

Women’s access to basic enabling technology, notably Internet and mobile technologies, also needs to expand. Barriers to women working in the gig economy need to be addressed, including risks to their physical safety and the lack of social protection for such workers, which may expose women to income insecurity.

3. Increasing women’s participation and engagement in STEM fields

Girls’ education in Vietnam has improved markedly in recent years, with the country scoring relatively highly on the World Bank’s gender parity indices for primary, secondary, and higher education. This suggests that women should be better positioned now than in the past to take advantage of shifts in labor demand.

Leveraging this momentum, there is a need to create pathways in getting more women into STEM fields – by both enabling broader access to technology and participating in its creation. Companies in STEM fields can invest in and partner with non-profits and colleges to develop a broader pipeline of women going into tech fields.

Finally, more can be done to address the funding gap faced by women tech entrepreneurs, as part of the broad effort to encourage women to create technology and work in new ways. Measures can include eliminating biases in recruitment and selection processes for incubators or accelerators, and introducing special funding pools that focus on women-owned enterprises.

The good news is that the forces of technology and innovation that characterize the automation age can also pave the way for more gender equality in the workforce. There is a huge opportunity for private- and public-sector leaders to enable women to make the necessary transitions in the three areas.

Across all verticals, women must have the skills necessary to participate in Vietnam’s digital transformation – as consumers, workers, and business owners. The dividends that will flow from this will be felt in the economy and in society at large. This is a true win-win that everyone should embrace after they celebrated International Women’s Day earlier this month.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Monday, March 8, marks the worldwide series of events and celebrations highlighting women’s continuing struggle to achieve equality in society and the workplace.

Two themes are running this year. The first aims to point out the lack of female representation in government and senior business roles under the banner of ‘Women in Leadership: Achieving an Equal Future in a COVID-19 World’ and ways to address the issue.

“Women have also been acknowledged as some of the most effective leaders during the pandemic, with female heads of government, including New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, having been praised for their handling of the crisis,” the World Economic Forum said on its website.

Within this, it’s noted that women are twice as likely as men to lose (or already lost) jobs and the vital income that predominately supports them and their children, especially since COVID-19 hit the world.

It’s noteworthy that the Asia Pacific UN women’s group also pointed out: “Women are also at the forefront of the battle against COVID-19, as frontline and health sector workers, as scientists, doctors and caregivers, yet they get paid 11 percent less globally than their male counterparts. An analysis of COVID-19 task teams from 87 countries found only 3.5 percent of them had gender parity.”

The second theme, I’ve noted from the International Women’s Day official website is 'choose to challenge,' meaning to forcefully identify and bring to public attention gender equality issues, by people involved in attempting to bring about real and significant change.

In Vietnam, the Vietnam Women’s Union (VWU) Central Committee will run a number of events to mark achievements and ongoing issues. At the same time, the annual Kovalevskaya Award was given on March 5 to the leader and team from the Institute of Natural Products Chemistry under VAST, and Associate Professor Dr. Truong Thanh Huong, senior lecturer at the Department of Cardiology of the Hanoi Medical University for their work in creating products to assist in the treatment of public healthcare problems, such as 'Khuong Thao Dan' (a drug for the treatment of arthritis, degenerative spine pain, and bone pain), Cordyceps Sinensis, and essential oils. (Dan Tri International News)

The government recently adopted a new ‘National Strategy on Gender Equality for the 2021-30 Period’ making commitments to increased female representation in the workforce and politics, particularly at local and provincial government levels. While these seem like lofty ambitions set somewhere in the future, the very fact that this is a publicly ongoing discussion makes achieving the realities of gender equality just that bit more solid. (Vietnam Law magazine)

Yet the problems remain much as they have always been worldwide: a reluctance to view Vietnamese women being as good as men in senior management roles. The International Labor Organization points out that without women running things at the top, it’s that much harder to encourage and create higher-level roles for women throughout businesses in the nation. Still women at the top will bring that goal much closer as people see the effectiveness of their work.

One fascinating initiative was a national forum titled 'Engaging Men and Boys in the Promotion of Gender Equality and the Elimination of Gender-Based Violence' in Hanoi, which was held by the UN Women in Vietnam and the Institute for Social Development Studies (ISDS).

As ISDS deputy director Tran Kien noted, many Vietnamese men have realized that to avoid being left behind in the new era they must participate more in promoting gender equality and sharing opportunities with women. This is the basis behind the establishment of a network of men and boys partaking in the promotion of gender equality and the elimination of gender-based violence.

Now that’s a step forward, hey?

One worrying issue is the continuing preference to have a baby boy and the imbalance that is creating could create problems in the near future. It will likely take decades to unwind all the traditional rituals that created these issues while at the same time promoting women as worthy as men. There’s not going to be an easy solution. As with so much of what needs to change in Vietnam, it’s a matter of educating and training the next generation to see the world in a different way and realize equality will make life better for both genders.

I have to say it’s amazing just how many Vietnamese females have battled on to help COVID-19 patients in what can be dangerous conditions both in the hospital and out in the field, tracing and tracking. Many women have found ways to make income in the middle of the mass unemployment as factories and businesses have closed down, many for forever.

Hopefully the empowerment and legal framework now being created will enable local women to speak up more and locate assistance.

As for the future?

As UN Women (the official group of the United Nations) praised Vietnam’s commitments to agreements, a representor, Elisa Fernandez Saenz, explained the five main goals for the immediate future:

"Eending violence against women and girls, promoting women’s economic empowerment, mitigating impacts of natural disasters, enhancing Vietnamese women’s leadership, and ensuring the principle 'no one is left behind,' with a view to realizing the UN’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.”

Good on you, Vietnam, you’re getting there! And remember: ‘choose to challenge!’

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Things are looking up for this year. We’re all, Vietnamese and foreigners, anticipating the arrival of vaccines and getting an injection (the ‘jab’) in the near future. Woo-ho!

Sure, we’re not out of the woods as far as COVID-19 is concerned and certainly Vietnam’s economic recovery will take a few years more, I suspect. Yet the locals around my neck of the woods in Hoi An, central Vietnam are pretty upbeat and making plans.

Whether any of the investment is justified in the present economic climate I don’t know, but that’s not stopping a zillion Vietnamese in my area building coffee shops all over the place, in the faith that domestic tourism, at least, is going to save everyone’s bacon. Strangely, more than a few foreigners have whizzed into the local beach scene with newly opened bars as well.

With names that belong more in fantasy novels than in real life such as Comirnaty, Moderna, AstraZeneca, Sputnik V, CoronaVac, EpiVacCorona, and much more still to be bizarrely named, the first four are the front runners to hope for arrival in Vietnam.

Sadly, the expat community in Vietnam will be the last on the list – let’s face it, we really don’t have that much on the Vietnamese economy. I wonder if I married a local, would that help speed things up vaccine-wise?

Being something of an introvert and a loner, a few more months or another year or so of waiting for a vaccine and the ability to travel overseas is not that much of a problem for me. At least around Hoi An, life’s so comfortable that staying put is an easy ask. But there’s so much still to be sorted out.

Which jab is the best? When can foreigners get it? Will we get documents acceptable to other countries as proof of vaccination? This worries me a bit as that could be a potential flashpoint for a money grab from unsuspecting travelers. Will the documents be universal? Will this allow us to avoid the quarantine on arrival at overseas destinations, and finally, can we return to Vietnam?

In the end, there’s not much choice when it comes to vaccines. Get a jab of something or you might be looking at not traveling or even limitations on obtaining employment. At least, I’m not weasy about needles.

Just for fun, I asked a few of the Vietnamese in my neighborhood and their answers were pretty much what you’d expect anywhere – “We hope will it work out; we don’t really understand what’s the best thing to do and we’ll wait until someone else tries the vaccine first before we have a go.”

When I was a kid, I was chronically sick, bed-ridden for nearly a year at one point. So, I’ve had a bucket load of vaccines and medicines. No one asked me if I wanted to have these things, just “be quiet and swallow.” However, I’m still alive and as far as I know I didn’t make anyone else sick. Sooner or later, we have to take risks to stay healthy and protect others; we’re just lucky enough to be living in an era when this is medically possible.

Yeah, I’ll have the jab, thanks – now where’s my ticket out of here?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s time to fess up: after several years of living in Vietnam, my Vietnamese language skills remain a disaster. It’s a veritable train wreck, there’s no getting around it.

I have excuses which I replay in my mind in an effort to dull the pain of defeat, most of which are pretty lame. Vietnamese is a tough language for most foreigners to grasp, with endless pronunciation quirks representing the biggest obstacle between us and success. Fair enough, we all know that.

Every Tom, Dick, and Harry wants to practice their English with us, so we, as guests, should indulge them, even at the expense of our own progress. That approach conveniently twists a feeble excuse for tires spinning in mud into a benevolent gesture, so that we feel we are making a contribution to the community when the truth is it’s laziness on the part of us foreigners.

Those damn accents are the crux of the problem, and the cause for much despair, and there are lots of them – rising, falling, short, long, flat, bim, bam, bop, humpty, dumpty, and probably a few I’m forgetting.

As if that’s not enough, sometimes the accents are stacked up on top of letters, while others appear underneath – a circle, a French-style circumflex hat thingy, a teeny-weeny dot, and a rising or falling symbol. The speaker needs to decipher them together with all the corresponding letters, then amalgamate the entire mess, and spit it all out masterfully in one fell swoop.

Some words demand complementing facial movements and gesticulations, which are as critical to the word as the letters and accents, such that without those gyrations a listener won’t have the faintest idea what we’re on about.

All that is great theory, very logical, so now let’s put ourselves in a day-to-day scenario in the local market. Check out this linguistic work of art: ‘cá lóc’ (snakehead fish), a freshwater beauty commonly used in Vietnamese soups and hotpots.

A snakehead fish – ‘cá lóc’

‘Cá’ is the generic term for fish – pretty straightforward if pronounced with a rising tone. (If it’s so simple, why do I screw it up so often? It’s only two damn letters.)

I try various versions of it with moderate success, then finally in desperation making a swerving, twisting motion with my hand to mimic a fish wriggling through water, which works just fine.

The real challenge comes with ‘lóc’ because we must billow out our cheeks ever so slightly for a brief moment or the word will be incomplete and unintelligible, just as if letters were absent. I’ve tested it ad nauseam and am thrilled to report that at least this one mystery has been resolved:

Me: “Ca”

Poor Vietnamese victim trying to understand: (blank stare)

Me: “Ca”

Victim: “Cá? Cà?”

Me: “CA!!” (thinking if I say it louder it will be easier to understand, but in fact it just intimidates the victim, ultimately hindering communication)

Victim: “Tên ngốc này đang muốn nói gì vậy?” which loosely translates to “What is this idiot trying to say?”

Me: “Cà” (with a falling tone) which when uttered alone defaults to “cà pháo,” that funny little oft-pickled round, white member of the eggplant family, which has absolutely sod all to do with the fish at hand.

Me: “Cá lóc” (without billowing my cheeks)

Victim: (blank stare)

Me: “Cá lóc’ (billowing cheeks)

Victim: “Cá lóc!” followed by a huge grin as light suddenly goes on…

‘Cà pháo’ white eggplants

The cheek billowing business also includes names, such as ‘Ngọc’ (which means jade or a precious stone) and ‘Lộc’ (a plant bud, also symbolizing fortune or wealth).

When researching this piece, I found a 56-second instructional video about how to pronounce the Vietnamese name ‘Ngoc.’ No joke, it’s out there.

In an effort to repair my damaged ego, I watch it again and again doubled over laughing at some of the attempts to say it. One university official at a graduation ceremony (of all places to muff up a name!) actually said ‘En-gok’ when congratulating a student named Ngoc.

En-gok!

After years of toiling away, studying your arse off in a foreign language, that’s what they call you? The Vietnamese student never blinked, took his diploma with gratitude and carried on, where many of us would have kicked the presenter in the shins.

Thinking of that clip lifts my spirits even during the darkest hours of Vietnamese linguistic hell.

Language limitations have never presented an obstacle to forging friendship with locals in Vietnam, a true testament to the welcoming spirit of the Vietnamese. Some of my dearest friendships are with people who can’t understand a word I’m saying and vice versa, so we’ve found ways to understand each other through our movements, demeanour, sleight of hand tricks, pantomime, sketching in the dirt, and dancing little jigs.

Props help too, so I carry fruit around with me in case the situation gets dicey.

Here is an excerpt from a real-life conversation between myself and the lady that sells vegetables and fruit up the street:

Me: “Xin chao!”

Lady hears: “Xin chao!”

Me: “Tôi hy vọng bạn tận hưởng một ngày!” (I hope you enjoy the day!)

Lady hears: “Tôi chúc bạn một ngày kinh hoàng.” (I wish you a horrid day.)

Then I hand her a tangerine, a peace offering in the event I insulted her, which I sensed I had.

Me: “Tôi hy vọng điều này làm cho bạn bị ốm!” (I hope this makes you ill!)

Lady laughs uncontrollably: “Bạn hoàn toàn mất trí.” (You are surely insane)

Staying with a commercial theme, I’ve realized a healthy dialogue really takes two to tango. Some people squint and make an effort to understand, others look at me as if I’m from a faraway planet, and the odd person grasps the message of my rant immediately.

The elderly lady in the local market definitely gets it, but that’s mostly thanks to her intuitive skills and ability to anticipate. She knows that nine times out of 10 I forget something critical to the success of my recipe and will return to fetch it, and, I suspect, often knows what I’m going to request before I do so.

I’ll say ‘quen hung que’ (forget basil) and she hands over that treasured herb without further ado. No blank stares, she has a mind like a trap, maybe even knows which dish I’m trying to make (unlikely since I make them up as I go). She also gives me a humble, foreigner-sized portion of chili peppers instead of the enormous clump locals get, tosses in coriander and spring onions knowing they’ll come in handy, often saving me another trip.

Let’s move over to Daytime Headquarters for another glittering example of what us students are up against. I always drink the same black coffee at HQ and the entire staff know it. The confusion starts based on the weather and how far I’ve walked – I sometimes drink hot tea on the side, sometimes cold.

‘Nóng’ is hot – I have it down more or less, so people know what I mean.

The issue is with ‘đá,’ meaning ice, rock, icicle, or ice cube. The word is only two bloody letters, what could possibly go wrong?

I started off by using all possible pronunciations of the word which include ‘đã’ (means ‘is already/was’ and ‘right away’), ‘da’ (skin), ‘da’ (leather), ‘da’ (cloth), and đá (ice), which is what I was trying to say in the first place.

Suppressing hysteria over my pronunciation

The staff try to stifle their giggles, or pretend they’re laughing at something else, but I know exactly what they’re up to, and I can’t blame them in the least.

Stubborn as always, I keep flailing away like a blindfolded kid trying to hit a pinata at a party. I’ve noted greater success with ‘đá’ if I say it with a screech and a little scream, like a crow, as if I was angry or being bitten by a snake.

Despite all these challenges, sooner or later I will speak passable Vietnamese, simply because I can’t avoid success forever. The fact is if enough monkeys tapped on enough typewriters for long enough, they would spit out the entire works of William Shakespeare.

There is a faint glimmer of hope - after all, even an old, blind squirrel finds a nut sometimes.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vietnamese man turns roof terrace into garden in Hanoi

Video

Tuesday, August 10, 2021, 16:27 GMT+7

While Vietnam is grappling with the COVID-19 pandemic, vegetables, tubers, and fruits have become many families’ concern, but Lo Ba Ngoc and his family harvest vegetables from their 75-square-meter terrace garden in Hanoi every day.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From the outside, it may seem that Ho Chi Minh City is a gridlock of two-wheeled vehicles; however, logical designing and cultural respect have created one of the better traffic systems in the world
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From the outside, it may seem that Ho Chi Minh City is a gridlock of two-wheeled vehicles; however, logical designing and cultural respect have created one of the better traffic systems in the world
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The ITU Virtual Digital World 2020, an event co-organized by Vietnam’s Ministry of Information and Communications and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), kicked off on Tuesday evening.

Themed ‘Building A Digital World. Together,’ the three-day online event brings together more than 50 ITU member countries.

The technological foundation used during the event was developed by Vietnam's military-run Viettel telecom group.

In his opening remarks, Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister Vu Duc Dam said the Vietnamese government has paid attention to telecommunication infrastructure development and considered IT one of the top priorities.

Digital transformation has been regarded as a crucial solution for helping the country develop more rapidly and sustainably, Dam added.

The deputy PM reiterated the Vietnamese government’s commitments to supporting and coordinating with the ITU and its member countries in building a digital world for peace, cooperation, and prosperity.

Minister of Information and Communications Nguyen Manh Hung said Vietnam’s digital infrastructure is now ready for a digital-based economy and society.

Delegates attend the ITU Virtual Digital World 2020 in Hanoi on October 20, 2020. Photo: Le Son / Tuoi Tre

Vietnamese technologies not only deal with domestic but also global issues, the minister said, adding that the country is striving to make technology a driver of development and global cooperation.

ITU Secretary General Houlin Zhao said Vietnam is an important partner in many markets in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean region, which has made the nation become a bright example in IT development to many other developing countries.

ITU is a United Nations specialized agency for information and communication technologies.

The first ITU telecom event was held in 1971. Since its 40th anniversary in 2011, the event has been held on an annual basis in a different location worldwide.

The 2020 edition is named ITU Digital World and takes place online from October 20 to 22.

The ITU Digital World 2021 will be back in its usual form in Hanoi in October next year.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A golf tournament aimed at supporting Vietnamese start-ups first organized by Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper last year is set to return for the second edition this September.

‘Golf Tournament for Start-up 2020’ is meant to support start-ups in the beginning period of their business by helping to connect young entrepreneurs with seasoned and successful business people.

During the tourney, which will be launched on September 18, the organizers will also present awards to the most excellent entrepreneurs of the start-up community.

Excited to participate

Many entrepreneurs, who are experienced golfers, are excited to take part in this year's competition. In their opinion, the tournament will give them a chance to both play golf and help the upcoming generation of business people.

“I appreciate Tuoi Tre for holding such a golf competition to promote start-ups and help experienced entrepreneurs have another approach to supporting them,” said Le Hai Binh, founder and chairman of the IT services company Mat Bao Group, who is also a golfer taking part in the tournament.

“The competition will provide young entrepreneurs with opportunities to meet with their potential investors among the golfers who participate in the tournament."

The competitors interviewed by Tuoi Tre applauded the paper's idea to create ‘a playground’ for start-up owners.

Meeting with other entrepreneurs on the golf course is certain to bring a different vibe than traditional environments like offices or working space, and may help generate stronger bonds between the participants, they said.

Overcoming COVID-19

Start-ups have been hit particularly hard by the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

Golf Tournament for Start-up 2020 was also rescheduled to begin in September instead of April, when it was held last year, because of the pandemic.

Against the backdrop of the global health crisis, many entrepreneurs consider the tournament an occasion for them to support young entrepreneurs in getting over the adversities of the pandemic, especially since it is currently under control in Vietnam.

“The current situation is different from last year’s. The pandemic has presented start-ups with difficulty in accessing funds as almost all companies are impacted by the coronavirus,” Binh remarked.

“Of course [potential investors] must fight for the survival of their own companies first before considering investing in others."

According to Binh, in 'the new normal,' customers are likely to spend less so start-ups in the fields of services, travel, and food would be considerably impacted.

“Despite that, I am not quite pessimistic because there are always opportunities in challenging situations,” Binh said.

The chairman of Mat Bao Group believes that during the pandemic, entrepreneurs who can flexibly adapt to the new situation will emerge victorious and even achieve new breakthroughs.

“Tuoi Tre’s golf tournament for start-ups will offer them the opportunity to do so,” Binh said.

Lawyer Nguyen Thi Thanh Nha, legal director of the investment firm Openasia Group, said her experience as a shareholder in a few start-ups when she was younger helps her understand the advantages that start-ups have, such as youth, ambition, and knowledge.

But she also acknowledges the rigors they must face on the way to success such as networking, calling for suitable investors, and developing relationships with other start-ups.

“Participating in the [golf tournament] will help them partly solve these problems and build more new business relationships,” said Nha, who has played golf for 12 years.

“Business opportunities may come to them unexpectedly during this tournament, who knows?”

A golfer watches his golf ball after hitting it on a golf course in Vietnam. Photo: Quang Dinh / Tuoi Tre

Honoring 25 excellent start-ups

With the aim of promoting and empowering the start-up community both in Ho Chi Minh City and the rest of Vietnam, Tuoi Tre and partners jointly present the Golf Tournament for Start-up 2020.

The tourney will also mark the 75th anniversary of Vietnam’s National Day (September 2), the 89th founding anniversary of the Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union (March 26), and the 45th anniversary of the founding of Tuoi Tre (September 2).

Dozens of inspiring start-up stories have been published in Tuoi Tre in various formats since July in the lead-up to the tournament.

The opening gala is scheduled to take place on September 18 at the Long Thanh Golf Club in Dong Nai Province, 35 kilometers from Ho Chi Minh City.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For students from poor families, education is the best way to help themselves and their families get out of their plight and lift their communities out of poverty. Ironically, after all the effort of studying in difficulty throughout 12 years from elementary to high school, these students even with high academic records to enter college are unable to live their dreams because of their family’s financial situations. They simply cannot afford tuition fees and other expenses of higher education.

The “Give a Helping Hand to Needy New College Students” scholarship program of Tuoi Tre Newspaper has made great strides in helping these poor students. This program gave the first scholarship in Quang Tri Province in 2003. It has gradually spread to other provinces and now it covers the whole country.

Over 17 years, this scholarship program has helped more than 19,000 new college students who otherwise would not be able to afford higher education. Last year, there were more than 1,200 new college students from all over the country receiving scholarships.

Each poor student is given a standard scholarship of VND10 million (US$430). Very poor students are granted special scholarships worth VND15 million (US$645) each.

This year due to the adverse economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, there will be more poor new college students in need of help, although the donation could be less than last year.

We would like to appeal for new and current donors to “Give a Helping Hand to Needy New College Students” so that at least 1,000 poor students around the country, among them 80 from Thua Thien-Hue Province, could receive scholarships this academic year.

Please send your donation to Bao Tuoi Tre, bank account: 113000006100 (for VND) at VietinBank, Branch 3, HCM City; or bank account: 0071370195845 (for USD) or 0071140373054 (for EUR) at Vietcombank, HCM City Branch, Swift Code: BFTVVNVX007; for “Give a Helping Hand to Needy New College Students” Scholarship Program.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A charity initiative administered 700 care packages on the weekend to workers affected by the coronavirus pandemic in Binh Tan District, as well as Lao and Cambodian students in the Pre-University College of Ho Chi Minh City.

The initiative was undertaken by Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper, supermarket chain Saigon Co.op, and e-commerce platform Shopee, with support from the Ho Chi Minh City chapter of the Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union.

The organizers prepared essentials, including rice, cooking oil, and fish sauce, and divided them into thousands of gift packages, each of which was priced at VND145,000 (US$6.3) on Shopee.

The packages were delivered on Saturday directly to the beneficiaries, including 500 workers who are struggling financially in Binh Tan District, 200 Lao and Cambodian students and those of Vietnam's ethnic minorities at the Pre-University College in District 5.

Among the recipients was Tran Ngoc Sang, a manufacturing worker in Binh Tan District who hails from Soc Trang Province in the Mekong Delta.

“I feel blessed to receive these essential items, which will help ease the burden on my family during social distancing,” said the sole breadwinner for the family of seven.

Other demographics, including youths in locked-down areas of Hoc Mon District, as well as unofficial workers in Cat Lai Ward of Thu Duc City, also received the care packages of the initiative.

After the first run on Saturday and Sunday, the organizers plan to hand another 2,500 packages to struggling people in cordoned-off areas in Ho Chi Minh City on July 22 and 25.

They are currently accepting donations on Shopee and ShopeePay.

In June and early July, many working-class residents in Ho Chi Minh City suffered from lay-offs or reduced income as the southern metropolis emerged as Vietnam’s coronavirus epicenter, with its caseload rising in the thousands daily.

The alarming situation has prompted authorities to put the city under a tightened social distancing mandate that forbids public gatherings of over two, bans non-essential businesses and services, and requires people to stay home, effectively cutting off the livelihoods of many unofficial workers.

Representatives from Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper hands care packages over to struggling workers in Binh Tan District, Ho Chi Minh City, July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Vuong My Phuong, a resident in Binh Tan District, Ho Chi Minh City receives a gift ticket on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Struggling workers in Binh Tan District, Ho Chi Minh City keep a safe distance while waiting to pick up their care packages on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Tran Ngoc Sang, a furloughed manufacturing worker and breadwinner of his family in Binh Tan District, Ho Chi Minh City, receives care packages on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

A student at Pre-University College in District 5, Ho Chi Minh City receives care packages on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Khammoungkhoun Khampasong (front), a student at Pre-University College in District 5, Ho Chi Minh City, holds a care package on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Students at Pre-University College in District 5, Ho Chi Minh City receive care packages on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In his ongoing sketch project, Ho Chi Minh City-based artist Le Sa Long strives to portray the small acts of generosity among residents, a virtue that has once again been highlighted during the tough time of social distancing in the southern city.

An established painter in the domestic art scene who has multiple solo exhibitions and awards under his belt, Long picked up urban sketching as a habit in mid-May.

He wandered the city which he has called home for over 30 years for live sketches for a few weeks, until it began to be put under social distancing measures on May 31 and later a citywide ban on non-essential travels on June 15.

Cooped up at home under this hibernation phase, Long decided to create a new series of sketches inspired by heartwarming photos of Saigonese that he spotted on social media and in newspapers.

He has so far portrayed 40 vignettes on paper and is planning to create more.

Artist Le Sa Long completes a sketch in his studio in Ho Chi Minh City. Photo: Phuong Nam / Tuoi Tre

“These images of Saigonese residents helping each other out during hard times touched my soul," he said.

"I was inspired to translate these moments and put them under a new light through the language of art.”

A standout in his collection is the vignette of a five-year-old wearing PPE overalls, standing by herself, waving goodbye to the camera before boarding an ambulance to enter quarantine.

Another sketch pays tribute to pop singer Ha Anh Tuan, who donated 25 metric tons of rice to help the struggling citizens.

Other optimistic news stories, including no-cost grocery stores for the needy, community fridges, and charity efforts benefiting pandemic-struck people, are also portrayed.

The sketches have earned Long showers of praises after they were posted on his social media account.

Many individuals have even asked to buy his pieces online, despite not having seen them in person, Long revealed.

He plans to auction several slice-of-life works to raise funds for charity causes for underprivileged people in the city, while portrait pieces of Ha Anh Tuan or frontline doctors will be gifted to the respective subjects as a tribute.

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts a five-year-old in PPE overalls waving goodbye before boarding an ambulance to enter quarantine in Vietnam.

A portrait sketch of singer Ha Anh Tuan by artist Le Sa Long

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts a no-cost grocery store distributing complimentary items to people in need in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts Ngo Duc Ke Street in Ho Chi Minh City during social distancing days.

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts a lottery seller in Ho Chi Minh City.

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts a Ho Chi Minh City resident and her dog.

A sketch by Le Sa Long shows a lottery seller receiving a box of instant ramen from a woman.

A sketch by Le Sa Long captures Con Rua Lake in Ho Chi Minh City during social distancing days.

A sketch by Le Sa Long shows Nhieu Loc Canal in Ho Chi Minh City during social distancing days.

A solo exhibition features caricatures of famous figures in face masks in Vietnam.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I’m somewhat objective in any food discussion, having grown up in Canada, where the food is pleasant but not outstanding, and certainly not renowned on the international food stage.

Have you ever heard of a Canadian restaurant overseas? Me neither.

Typically, no cultural topic stirs up an emotional debate quicker than food. Many of us think our native country’s cuisine is best and will debate it until our last gasp. I settled on Vietnamese food as my favourite years ago but other countries have me slobbering over their offerings including Peru, Thailand, Indonesia, France, and Italy.

So then, why is Vietnamese food at the top of my list?

1. Taste

I can only recall eating a handful of boring meals in Vietnam - delicious food is found everywhere. Most places are run by entrepreneurs who live from their passion for food, using handed-down recipes and cooking techniques, and Vietnamese customers are knowledgeable and fussy diners.

Sweet, salty, spicy, sour, bitter, and pungent all figure prominently in Vietnamese cuisine so there is a dish available for every craving and mood.

2. Variety

Vietnamese cuisine dates back well over 1,000 years, morphed and modified over the centuries into what we have today. You could practically go forever and not repeat a dish, that’s how varied the offerings are.

All told, there are over 3,000 dishes in the entire Vietnamese food arsenal, so you could literally go for years without repeating the same dish.

3. Personalized flavours

Many dishes in Vietnam are prepared with only the herbs and spices required to create the basic version, while using minimal spicy chili peppers or none at all. It’s then easy for diners to use fresh chilis, chili sauces, pastes, and spicy oils served on the side to dial up just the right amount of heat based on personal preferences.

No need to order mild, medium, or spicy, leaving the fate of your dish up to the servers’ and chefs’ interpretations of what level of spiciness you want, as is often the case with many cuisines.

The range of condiments offered is staggering - not just chili and soy sauce-based, but pickled onions, daikon radish, carrots, and garlic, then fresh raw garlic, salt, pepper, and lemon, kim chi, pickled or fresh mustard greens, soy bean sprouts, crispy fried onions and shallots, lemon wedges, fish sauces galore, and plum sauce.

Then comes a barrage of fresh herbs depending on the dish, including perilla leaves, coriander, chives, basil, cilantro, and mint. I’ve probably missed a few on that list!

A hearty bowl of pho with the fixings

4. Foreign influence

Pure indigenous food is great to try wherever we go, but what about when we crave a dish with an overseas twist to it?

Vietnamese cuisine has a ready supply - heavily influenced by Chinese, French, and other cuisines.

Sizzling steak and eggs (bo ne) for breakfast? Got it! Various hams, sausages, and head cheeses? Yup! Pate? You can have it on every sandwich if you wish.

Vietnamese head cheese gio thu

French-style meatballs are common in pasta dishes and Vietnamese xiu mai dumplings are mouth-watering. Bread? A Vietnamese banh mi baguette is a crunchy, crackly version - lighter and easier to chew than the original French creation.

How about beef stew on a cool day? Ginger and lemongrass make the local bo kho a knockout! Need something pizza-like? Banh trang nuong is the grilled rice paper treat somewhere in between a Mexican quesadilla and an Italian pizza.

Best is you don’t have to pay exorbitant prices for dishes made from fancy imported ingredients because many Vietnamese versions of foreign dishes use tasty local ingredients costing a fraction.

5. More than just rice

Many Asian cuisines feature rice, rice, and more rice - until it’s coming out of your ears. In Vietnam you’ll find endless varieties of noodles - both egg and rice-based, thick, thin, stringy, glass, flat, macaroni as pictured below plus nui (elbow macaroni), then rolled rice-based creations such as banh cuon and banh uot, cute little woven bundles of banh hoi, and turmeric-infused such as mi quang.

You name the noodle, the Vietnamese have it!

Vietnamese-style macaroni dish

Then come dumplings, mini-pancakes such as banh can or crispy banh khot, wraps like goi cuon (fresh cold spring rolls), sizzling banh xeo crepes, banh gio dumplings, and rolled or grilled rice paper-based concoctions.

Banh gio dumpling in banana leaves

6. Nutritional value

I usually eat in restaurants so I try for a balanced diet - easy to do in Vietnam since most dishes are packed with nutrients. Choose a soup and you’ll get a mound of fresh greens and protein-packed soy bean sprouts on the side.

Go to a typical local com binh dan (working class) restaurant and the steam table will be packed with freshly cooked vegetables of all types.

It’s easy to find vegetarian (chay) food in general in Vietnam, especially during the two days each month when passed loved ones are commemorated by family members.

Vietnamese diners expect fresh offerings, so you’ll almost never see wrinkled, stale, old vegetables or garnishes in Vietnam.

Bun chay noodles and cha gio spring rolls

7. Light

Most Vietnamese meals are light yet full of flavour, featuring broths and light sauces that don’t leave you bloated. Soups are eaten by many on a daily basis usually featuring rice or egg noodles and garnished with plenty of fresh vegetables.

Absent are heavy, creamy, rich sauces that end up putting you to sleep and heavy fried meats and vegetables found elsewhere. Also, Vietnamese people are usually more inclined to marinate and grill meat and seafood rather than fry them in oil.

Here is a divine starter, sup mang cua (asparagus crab soup), balancing the crab, asparagus, and corn perfectly - light and tasty.

Sup mang cua / asparagus crab soup

Hotpot dishes are cooked in broth such as this lau ca tam (sturgeon), another example of a light broth-based dish that will knock your socks off!

Lau ca tam / sturgeon hot pot

8. Low cost

Price only matters if local food passes the other tests. What good is cheap food if it’s lousy? In Vietnam we get some of the best and cheapest food around, a tough combination to beat!

I usually eat for about VND100-120,000 per day (US$4.30-5), and I eat well – freshly prepared dishes with mostly non-processed ingredients. I typically eat all meals outside with breakfast typically costing between VND15,000 and VND30,000, lunch VND30,000 to VND50,000, and a light dinner somewhere in the same ranges.

Typical com binh dan (working class) meal - VND30,000/$ 1.30

If you prefer, there are upmarket restaurants charging VND200,000-300,000 ($9-13) and much more, so the range is large enough that you can choose just what you desire at the price you are willing to pay.

9. Anytime

Typically, Vietnamese people start the day with a hearty soup or banh mi baguette, then eat rice at lunchtime and a light dish in the evenings.

Meals aren’t cast in a concrete schedule in Vietnam. You can find most dishes at any time of the day or evening. It drives me crazy when I travel to some countries only to hear that some dishes are only available at specific times of the day.

Feel like bun rieu cua crab noodle soup for breakfast? No worries, I have it often in the morning. How about in the evening? Available nearby. How about a banh mi in the evening instead of the morning? Just look to your left or right on any main street and you’ll see a banh mi stand. Barbecued bun thit nuong or banh uot pork with noodle for breakfast? Easy to find!

10. Banh mi

This tasty baguette sandwich deserves a point all on its own because it’s the national snack - light, tasty, varied, and cheap at between VND10,000 and VND20,000 (US$0.45-$0.90) at a typical street stand or bakery.

Up-market versions with lots of meat and other fillings are available at prices up to VND50,000 if you’re really hungry for a feast.

The banh mi comes in seemingly endless varieties using different ingredients and condiments. It’s quick and cheap, has both pickled and fresh vegetables, so when you’re on the go it’s just perfect.

What gets your taste buds going?

Each of us has a different set of boxes to tick when determining our most preferred foods, that’s the beauty of it all.

The best way to determine your favourite cuisine? Try things you’ve never had in international restaurants and on trips abroad. Close your eyes and stab at the menu! Sure, you’ll blow a few choices, but you’ll also open your mind to different dishes and cooking styles.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As communities around the globe begin focusing their much-needed attention on the gender inequality issues facing modern society, many in Vietnam feel the country’s efforts to put women on par with men lag far behind those made by developed countries.

Male expats living in Vietnam have shared with Tuoi Tre News their observations on how Vietnamese women are treated by society.

General disrespect

As a foreigner in Vietnam, I often witness men judging Vietnamese women on their beauty, appearance, and attitude, especially in the streets.

This daily ‘harassment’ can be aggressive and violent, and is typically sexually oriented. There are often long stares at women’s private parts, trying to get their attention in rude ways, and even following young women.

This happens frequently and I’ve noticed that the response from women to such a behavior is very different in Vietnam compared to Western countries.

Often Vietnamese women don’t even respond to such harassment. They usually just look down at the pavement and walk away, maybe because they are worried that if they raise their voice they will be met with physical violence.

In my work as a sociology and culture researcher, I am collaborating on a project led by Ms. Doan Thi Ngoc from Hoa Sen University labeled: Sexual Harassment in Vietnam and Understanding Gender and Gender Equality.

For a long time, women’s education was based on four specific virtues: Công (Hardworking), Dung (Beauty), Ngôn (Articulation), and Hạnh (Good Behavior). Accordingly, the ‘ideal woman’ should have all of these traits.

The result of this ideology has led to the submission of women to men and the judgment of parents’ towards their daughters.

Countless young women who we’ve surveyed have shared that the pressure and criticism they face from their parents is heavily painful, especially as it relates to their beauty, virginity, and how their abilities stack up to their peers. In the end, it destroys their self-confidence and self-respect.

Many also share the differences between their education and treatment compared to their brothers'.

Education is the key to changing this mindset. Families and schools may need to update the way men are taught to interact with women as new standards become the norm.

This process is already taking place, but there is still a long way to go in the workplace, in families, particularly in terms of bridging socioeconomic gaps.

What everyone can do is focus on their basic behaviors and attitudes: refraining from sexual jokes, inappropriate staring, unwanted touching, and showing respect.

Beauty standards also must not be discussed because they can often limit the way people try to represent themselves or can be the cause of unrealistic standards.

Some feminist movements argue that ‘opening the door’ for women, inviting women in a courteous way and other signs of basic ‘gallantry’ are a form of domination.

I would say that these acts are okay for those who, as individuals, want to show respect to women. And they offer an opportunity for men to learn how to gently accept a ‘no’.

(Christopher Denis-Delacour from France)

This caricature depicts how women in Vietnam are still subject to physical abuse by men. Photo: Tuoi Tre

Beauty standards

I have seen several heated exchanges in the streets of Hanoi where men were mostly catcalling women, but in those instances I observed that Vietnamese women were quite strong in arguing their case.

The married men I know in Vietnam are very respectful of their wives.

However, there is one particular problem for younger people: social media.

The habit, particularly for girls, of making themselves look beautiful and posing for their selfies to post on social media is much more noticeable in Vietnam, and Asia in general, and suggests that there is a high degree of pressure to conform to a certain idea of appearance.

This pressure in Asian countries is a lot higher than in the Western world and I believe that comes from the way people treat and comment on each other’s appearance. Society seems to dictate that women have to be good-looking.

It takes a long time to change attitudes in any society but the pace of development in Vietnam is extraordinary to watch and I expect social attitudes to also change quickly.

It will be young people who set future standards and therefore I am optimistic that women and girls will be better respected in the future.

I hope that girls develop the confidence to confront bad behaviors from boys at an early age in order to change the general perception of what is appropriate and what is not.

These problems, however, are still less noticeable than in countries with political or religious doctrines that seek to suppress the freedom of women.

(Paul Sansome from the UK)

This caricature suggests that men should help women with housework. Photo: Tuoi Tre

Women’s workload is too much

I've lived in Vietnam for over three years and what I have seen and know is that Vietnam’s culture is set up in such a way that women are expected to do all the housework, like cooking and cleaning, while men can do as they please.

This mindset runs deep in Vietnamese culture. The wife is expected take care of her husband, the kids, and the house, all while holding down a 9-5 job.

This can be traced back a few hundred years to when men would go to work and the wife would stay at home, take care of the kids and look after the house. But nowadays it’s different. Both parents have to work to provide for their family, and when a woman comes home, she still has to cook and clean, which is definitely unfair.

To solve this problem, men and women should talk to one another more often so that men can see how hard it is to be a woman in Vietnam. We have a saying in the West: “Don't judge a man until you've walked a mile in his shoes.”

I think respect comes from the heart. If you truly love your woman, there’s nothing you wouldn’t do for her. My Vietnamese girlfriend is amazing and works her socks off at home and at work. I try to show my appreciation by my actions. When I have time I try to help her with the washing or cleaning. It's the small things that make a difference.

In regard to women, I treat them with the same respect as I do with men. For me, there’s no difference.

(Wayne Jordan from the UK)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Editor's note : Australian Stivi Cooke offers a look at the online life in Vietnam he has witnessed over his years living in the Southeast Asian country.

Following a request by Tuoi Tre News, Cooke’s comments were made with a focus on the negative behavior of Internet users in Vietnam, in response to a recent index by Microsoft labeling Vietnam as having the fifth most uncivil Internet discourse out of 25 countries.

The Microsoft Digital Civility Index (DCI) measures the tone and tenor of online interactions as reported by 500 consumers in the 25 countries, with the UK, the Netherlands, Germany, Malaysia, and the U.S. being ranked in the top five in terms of online civility.

Meanwhile, rounding off the list of the 25 countries were South Africa, Peru, Colombia, Russia and Vietnam.

Australian Stivi Cooke. Photo: Dong Nguyen / Tuoi Tre News

I do think the Vietnamese can be pretty rude online, depending on the topic they are complaining about. I see a lot of harsh comments posted on Facebook -- the only real social media I use.

However, I’m not so sure about the Microsoft ranking. If this had been a survey of Facebook, Twitter and other platforms, I believe it might be a bit more credible because there would be a lot more data or evidence to back up the claim.

I’ve read a lot of posts mainly on Facebook and in English-language media although the posts often link to Vietnamese web content which I can half read and the rest I get translated.

The recent posts about the man peeing on a mountain and the beating of the girlfriend in the elevator attracted a lot of comments which included threats of violence, some really rude language and unjustifiable judgements about the behavior of the people involved in the incidents.

The most common arguments and hostility occur with those ‘if you don’t like Vietnam, then get out!’ postings. I understand that the Vietnamese, like everyone everywhere, are very proud of their culture and express strong nationalist feelings, yet that shouldn’t be used as an excuse for nasty, mean or crude replies.

Over the years I have watched Internet etiquette deteriorate a lot. I think a lot more people are using the Internet as a kind of dumping ground for their rage and inability to express in public what they wish they could really say. The anonymity of the Internet is getting more abused every day. Trolling and repeated attacks on innocent posts are frequent.

When it comes to people behaving online, I hate racial comments, particularly against the Vietnamese, that seem to want to justify Western superiority (we don’t dump rubbish, for example – but you do!). But the opposite can be just as bad such as when some Vietnamese user excuses (hey, it’s our culture - don’t you criticize us!) for clearly wrong behaviors (violence against women or queue jumping).

Another thing that I really hate is many people’s reluctance to admit they may be wrong or that the other person has a good point to make. It often just escalates into shouting online.

I do like a good discussion - but not usually an argument. I care a lot about social issues such as education, equality for women, poverty reduction, climate change, and a lot more. I like to ask questions to other people (Why do you think that? Can you explain more fully?) and their comments can be very educational and useful to me, particularly when I’m planning to write an article or opinion piece on these topics. I don’t worry too much about people shouting at me online or being nasty because I have a choice whether to reply or not. Generally, I try to stick to my topic and not to get distracted or emotionally involved. I can often see when someone is trying to bait me or attempt to change the subject. I suspect that is more about their ego wanting to be the most responded to, so they can feel good about themselves.

I think people should not use religion or politics as an excuse for anger. Don’t attack the person – attack the topic. Don’t shout and share the posting space for others to get involved; don’t ‘drown out’ other points of view. Don’t deliberately try to change the subject because you feel you are ‘losing’ the online argument. If you are truly educated, then you are capable of calm discussion instead of throwing rocks at people. And if some people online are stupid -- ignore them -- responding only feeds them.

It costs nothing to be polite and people should also remember that others have long memories, employers do check your online personality and you are not always as anonymous as you think you are, online. Finally, there can be real world repercussions to online behavior and comments -- you never know if someday you might meet that person you abused online!

Manners in most cultures developed as a way/method to stop people killing each other over trivial things – the live and let live idea. Humanity’s ability to accept, without raw anger, another person’s beliefs, race, and other characteristics is one of the ways we’ll become a more civilized world.

Stivi Cooke from Australia

Why the UK tops for online civility? I think the root of the [negative] behavior is the lack of the previous generation being aware of it. Because a lot of these people are the first generations to get online and engage in things like social media, there is no one to monitor it or give them a moral compass. I think that everyone has a bad side to them but online it’s easy to let it out because, unlike real life, the true person can’t be seen or judged. The difference in behavior among netizens in the UK is due to many reasons. First of all, I feel that the oldest generations in the UK actually taught themselves how to use the Internet, social media and so on. So, funnily enough things like Facebook and Instagram, your parents and even grandparents may be able to see what you’re doing. It’s very much the norm in the UK for your parents to be online these days, much of the time they use it more than us! Another thing is that, yes, we are shown through school and such, examples of bullying online or abuse to where someone has killed themselves or has been killed so we understand the dangers of such things online. I think another huge thing for us in the UK was the show “Catfish”. I remember when the film and eventually the show was released, we had no idea that people made fake profiles online to affect people; so after we saw it, we began looking at the Internet differently, making our profiles private, and asking questions about people like “Do I know this person?”, “Should this be affecting me?” as a result. You can actually get in trouble with the police regarding online matters so I think that the UK takes these things very seriously. Even our TV shows and soaps create scenarios where such things happen so that every generation in the home is aware of these dangers. I think, to tackle online behavior, you need to give education to everyone, not just those who you THINK is using the Internet. This way, parents and children have an idea of what is happening and how best to prevent it. You never know how someone will best gain influence. Someone may consider their age mate as more influential than their parents and may stop such things when spoken to by a brother, for example; so I think education and widespread information are best. Another good way of educating people would be showing examples of people whom it has actually affected. People who have killed themselves due to being abused online or bullied. I think that sometimes people don’t realize that it can really affect others. Penalties would also be a good thing to put in place, if people have consequences then they are unlikely to do such things. However, the penalties need to be seen through. It’s OK if the law states that you get in trouble if you do things, but if no one is convicted then people take the law as a joke and will continue to do such things. Shaquille Stewart from the UK

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Although I’ve been a big fan of anime for years, I didn’t realize how big the anime (animation) production industry is in Vietnam.

Anime is more or less the Japanese word for an animated cartoon or movie. Yet the way the Japanese themselves use the word is the same as Westerners calling a movie like ‘Frozen’ or ‘Toy Story’ an animated story. And it’s big business nowadays.

The name refers almost exclusively to cartoons and movies although many of the themes, artwork and production houses cross over with other forms of media and merchandise such as manga comics (manga basically means a style of drawing and presentation that originated in Japan), promotional gimmicks and fan participation events such as cosplay (dressing up as your favorite or most popular anime character) and model figurines – Godzilla or Astroboy (if you’re old enough to remember!) would be one example.

During the French occupation of Indochina, Vietnamese craftsmanship and art were held in good regard and the French encouraged the creation of fine art schools. Although there aren’t many of these around nowadays, some of the better-known institutions are the School of Fine Arts in Ho Chi Minh City and the Vietnam University of Fine Arts. Other places such as FPT Hanoi teach computer graphics and software applications.

Up until around 1991, Vietnam only had one state-owned animation company – called, unsurprisingly, the Vietnam Animation Film Company (VAF). But the birth of the Internet in Vietnam, the demand for computer experts and the increasing ability of animators to use English created a new wave of companies producing content with high quality. In recent years, VAF has produced much more content to match private companies in supplying television, paid TV providers and its own YouTube channel.

Anime’s popularity has spread over forty years across Asia and occasionally into Western audience markets. Netflix now commissions anime production for Western markets as well as translation and dubbing (voice-over English translations) of original Asian anime shows; for example, ‘Carol and Tuesday’ – a show about two ambitious female musicians seeking fame and fortune on the planet Mars sometime in the future. And ‘Crunchy Roll’ streams anime shows with either subtitles or dubbing for audiences worldwide.

So what does this have to do with Vietnam?

Well, as it turns out, Vietnam has more than twenty animation studios churning out artwork, 2D and 3D special effects for commercials and Vietnamese cartoons as well as for Japanese and Korean animation studios, and more frequently, for international clients in the West and across Asia.

Part of the reason is the booming interest in anime, the high demand for fresh content and the pace of production involved in generating series after series. To understand this needs a bit of background information.

Anime in Japan is conservatively worth more than 20 billion U.S. dollars and worldwide more than 150 billion dollars. It’s non-stop content creation and many studios have multiple production schedules and projects running concurrently. The studios, in whatever country, regularly produce shows ranging from a few episodes to full-blown 24 episodes that run over a season, usually about three to four months. Shows can also range from ‘fillers’ – three-to-nine-minute episodes and anything up to an hour, although the standard is usually just under a half hour with commercial breaks. So that requires a heck of a lot of artists and computer specialists!

It’s expensive, too. It can take months to produce a few hours of animated screen time and production crew numbers can be large. Some larger shows with 24 episodes or more can cost up to two million dollars per show to make. Why? Because you need directors, musicians, background artists (more on them later), rendering artists who take an image and convert that to 2D/3D or computer generated effects (CGI), voice actors, writers, production assistants, sound effects and freelance artists filling the gaps in production.

And this is where the Vietnamese come in. Vietnamese artists and studios have a good reputation for creating high-end art, backgrounds and effects for shows and that’s encouraged the birth of animation companies in Vietnam for local and international content.

No animation studio in Vietnam can survive purely on anime movie or TV series production, either within the country or working with overseas companies. Yet there is a booming market for locally made cartoons for TV, animated shorts for advertising and particularly educational games and programs for children. So the work becomes a wide variety of projects often at the same time within the locals.

By comparison, Japanese and occasionally Korean production houses can generate enough hours of anime to make decent profits while Vietnamese companies constantly teeter on the edge of going broke unless they work extremely hard at their marketing and networking.

Originally a joint French-Vietnamese project started as a small company around 1995, Sparx is now a highly successful and innovative production house in Vietnam with offices and overseas worksites. It’s also the only Vietnamese company to make a full-length animation movie called Igor.

Colory Animation Studio, another local company, created a 3D film in 2011 but it and many other companies now work more with foreign firms than producing local content.

In part two and three of this series, I’ll be explaining more about production, money, issues and the future of Vietnamese animation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It is time for a rewind to the beginning of this year when I was scrolling through the daily media updates and saw a blurb from a global publication informing readers that Da Nang, Vietnam was perched atop the list of world destinations most queried on Google for travel in 2020.

Not Paris, New York, Tokyo, not Rome nor Rio de Janeiro, rather our beloved Da Nang. We have all known about Vietnam’s emergence on the international travel stage over the last few years, but to see that group of all-stars upstaged gave me quite a jolt.

Then the dreaded virus hit, and the note I made got lost in the shuffle only to recently resurface in my pile of random tasks and forgotten things that I diligently track so they will not go astray, but they usually do.

It should not have been a surprise — I vividly recall my first glimpse of breathtaking My Khe Beach, then the Han River in the evening, flanked by beautifully-lit bridges, fine dining cruise boats plying the river, local people watching over an ice-cream at sidewalk cafés, and the Bach Dang promenade full of couples strolling and enjoying.

That Google rating prompted that daydream about Da Nang, but there are dozens of picturesque destinations to visit all around the country, with many more in development.

The capital Hanoi and former imperial capital Hue, Ho Chi Minh City, Ha Long Bay and Cat Ba Island, the Mekong Delta, Phu Quoc, Hoi An, and a host of other sites in Vietnam all have a place on any global tourism map.

On top of that impressive list, the timing is just right as Vietnam sits squarely in the proverbial tourism 'sweet spot,' meaning there are plenty of reasonably priced accommodation, welcoming locals, great sights and activities, and foods to die for, while costs are still reasonable.

Infrastructure is limited in some areas because the country is still developing, but it is stable overall and constantly improving.

Electricity and water supplies are abundant, the Internet is average or better, except when those darned sharks eat the undersea cable, and major areas are connected by decent roads and highways.

The two largest airports in Vietnam, Tan Son Nhat in Ho Chi Minh City and Noi Bai in Hanoi, have been running over capacity for years with no remedy on the immediate horizon.

With several airlines from which to choose, prices are reasonable and many domestic and international routes have been added between other cities in Vietnam and abroad, thus taking some of the pressure off those two largest airports.

We all know that the budget carriers often run late due to the congestion, but there is no quick fix in sight, and the national flag carrier Vietnam Airlines usually gets priority. So we place our bets and hope for the best, or bite the bullet and pay the higher fares.

So, how was tourism trending here in Vietnam when we were so suddenly interrupted by COVID-19?

In 2019, international arrivals rose by 16 percent year-on-year to tally 18 million, continuing the dramatic upward trend in recent years.

Of those 18 million visitors to Vietnam last year, 5.8 million came from the People’s Republic of China, 4.3 million from South Korea, and just short of a million each from Japan and Taiwan.

Therefore, those four destinations were the source of roughly two-thirds of all overseas visitors, prompting me to refer to them as the 'Big Four,' thus belonging in the forefront of any discussion about reviving international tourism to Vietnam provided they have control over the pandemic.

Old risks fade away and new perils appear as cases and hotspots pop up in the Big Four without warning. A cluster of infections appeared last month in China’s capital Beijing and another recently surfaced in a remote northwestern region.

Japan is also suffering from a surge of new cases, while Taiwan and South Korea have a firm grip on the virus at this point.

Vietnam had been without locally transmitted infections for over three months, so even with recent new infections the government is in a strong negotiating position with other countries about who will be allowed to enter.

Discussion about when regular tourist traffic can resume is ongoing, but it is possible that airplanes will fly between some or all of those countries and Vietnam as early as next month.

The other hot issue is mandatory quarantine, which works for returning residents and those wishing to stay a while, but is impractical for tourists.

Who wants to go on a three- or four-week vacation and spend the first two holed up in a facility even if they can manage to stay at a swanky resort on the beach?

If approval for some or all of those countries is granted, flights to Vietnam will slowly ramp up, and hopefully at some point rapid COVID-19 tests prior to departure and upon arrival coupled with regular tests during visitors’ stays will replace quarantine.

Should virus cases start to spike the authorities will no doubt take the necessary measures to contain any spread, and they will do it quickly.

We have seen how the government has made shrewd decisions throughout the battle against the virus, and it has paid off handsomely.

Even if visitors from those selected countries were to return during the latter part of 2020 at the same rate they visited last year, the financial reward would not be worth the risk taken in hurriedly opening the borders.

We all want the borders to reopen as soon as possible so visitors stranded here and Vietnamese stuck overseas can get back home and businesses can operate normally as before.

That said, throwing away many months of effort from virtually everyone in the country for the sake of short-term gain is not worth the risk, and the number of virus hotspots that have popped up around the globe in places where reopening was hurried backs up that thinking.

The worst of all scenarios is to give the 'all clear' only to later learn it was too early, and must be undone, which is what is happening in a number of countries around the world.

International tourism contributes over six percent annually to Vietnam’s GDP with hundreds of thousands of livelihoods dependent on inbound tourists.

To put that in perspective, Portugal’s tourism industry contributes nearly 20 percent to its GDP, with Spain close behind, so despite the risks, they were both practically forced to reopen for the summer tourist boom without quarantine.

Closer to home, tourism in Thailand also accounts for nearly 20 percent of GDP, but its government is very cautiously working on plans to reopen the borders to tourists in stages.

Sadly, it is unlikely Vietnam will be welcoming many tourists from Europe, the Americas and Australia this year, if any at all.

Countries in those regions accounted for 15 percent of all arrivals in 2019, less than one-quarter of the 12 million visitors from the Big Four Asian neighbors, so we all must accept that priority goes to the lowest risk visitors who contribute the most to the economy.

What’s the longer-term outlook?

When the dust finally settles on the pandemic, and it may take a long time given the resurgence of cases that is happening in so many countries, then things look rosy going forward.

Not only can Vietnam pick up where it left off as a tourist destination that has emerged on the global map, the LowCo (low number of COVID-19 cases) status will become a highly-valued attribute as time goes on.

That top ranking on Google for Da Nang as a tourist destination was no fluke, and tourism will be back even stronger than before given Vietnam’s LowCo status, but it is going to require more time and patience from us all.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The abrupt enforcement of a new movement declaration system at COVID-19 checkpoints in Ho Chi Minh City on Wednesday baffled the majority of commuters and clogged up traffic flow for hours.

The novel movement declaration requirement, devised by the Ministry of Public Security and considered part of the national population database, was simultaneously introduced at COVID-19 checkpoints in the city around 1:00 pm on Saturday.

This is meant to keep track of people's travels in case contact tracing is needed to stall coronavirus spread.

As witnessed by a Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper correspondent, all commuters passing these checkpoints would be pulled over and could only leave when they scanned a QR code on their phones, completed their movement declaration online, captured a new QR code, and presented it to checkpoint officers to see if it matched the database.

A police officer guides a motorbike rider on how to complete movement declaration in Ho Chi Minh City, August 14, 2021. Photo: M.H. / Tuoi Tre

A police officer guides a motorbike rider on how to complete movement declaration in Ho Chi Minh City, August 14, 2021. Photo: M.H. / Tuoi Tre

The steps were deemed rather complicated and time-consuming by the public due to a variety of reasons, including the reduced sensitivity of mobile phone cameras for QR scanning under broad daylight, or the lack of Internet connection at checkpoints.

Several officers were ill-prepared for their duties, as the batteries on their mobile devices died while they logged commuters’ information.

“Some senior citizens had their smartphones with them, but did not know how to declare the information on the apps and required officers' help,” an checkpoint officer explained.

“Some individuals took as long as 15 minutes to complete their declaration.”

The unoptimized process impeded traffic flow, causing lines of delayed vehicles to snake out as far as a few kilometers.

On Phan Dang Luu and Le Van Duyet Streets in Binh Thanh District, hundreds of motorbikes were seen struggling to inch toward the checkpoints, where officers were still strictly upholding the declaration protocol.

A police officer guides a motorbike rider on how to complete movement declaration in Ho Chi Minh City, August 14, 2021. Photo: M.H. / Tuoi Tre

An app-based delivery worker presents a QR code he got after completing movement declaration in Ho Chi Minh City, August 14, 2021. Photo: M.H. / Tuoi Tre

“Residents can scan the QR code and declare their information at home," said Senior Lieutenant Colonel Huynh Thi Thu Trang, a senior official at the Ho Chi Minh City Department of Public Security.

"They will receive another QR code, which they can save to their phone and use for the next three days.

“When passing the checkpoints, they only need to bring up the QR image so officers can instantly check their information, reducing processing time and avoiding congestion.”

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Editor’s Note: Stivi Cooke is an Australian expat living in Quang Nam Province, which houses Hoi An Ancient Town, in central Vietnam.

As much as I love the rain and the heat of Vietnam, it’s a tough environment. Bopping along on my motorbike I get hammered by dust, sand, wind and rain drops that feel like Ping-Pong balls. Mother Nature is tapping us on the shoulder. “Oi! Wanna see what I can do to your flimsy, fragile tourist sites?”

We’ve been pounded in the central region by weeks of heavy rain exposing the flaws in our beliefs and technical confidence at building and protecting tourism sites. It also brings into question the notion of what is ‘national heritage’ and the processes involved in protecting Vietnam’s precious and vital environmental treasures. Why ‘vital’? All these issues have an impact on the development of sustainable tourism and Vietnam’s need for jobs and a revitalized economy.

It’s not easy to see a connection between them but all of them have problems with preservation of the environment, their management and the national heritage of Vietnam. The question is, is the process of deciding about the development of projects in heritage areas good enough?

It’s been an unseasonably hot and on/off rainy season so far on the central coast. With winter yet to really bite the possibility of more damage is very likely.

The My Son Holy land B3 and B5 Towers are tilting and need urgent conservation treatment as the rain has softened the ground around the previous protection work. Is it time to limit access around the site?

Add to this the news that structural deterioration of the Hue Citadel is threatening its UNESCO heritage listing and you start to wonder what’s going on.

The growing discussion on the issue of installing a cable car system in the world’s biggest cave – the stunningly beautiful and ethereal Sơn Đoòng Cave (hang Sơn Đoòng, "Mountain River Cave" in Vietnamese) is another good example.

Local officials commenting on the cable car idea are citing the need to be cautious as the poor tourism infrastructure – including training in hospitality and environmental protection – needs upgrading before mass tourism impacts the district. If a tourist loved the cave but hated the hotel, what will they tell the world? Indeed, UNESCO has just requested a ‘please explain’ detailed plan of the project.

The coastline near Hoi An’s harbor has been drastically eroded, threatening the economic survival of at least two resorts and the long-term viability of two others. There are two more resorts under construction in that area as well. Perhaps it’s time to limit the building distance between the shoreline and the structures...Typhoons love gobbling up the sand and they laugh at vertical metal seawalls going up against salt water. My money’s on the ocean.

The enormous Phoenix towers project in Nha Trang will be built out onto the sea creating unpredictable changes to the shoreline. Already there have been questions raised about the project. It was discussed by local professional groups, yet how many local businesses actually know what impact it could have on them? Moreover, how will the project provide sustainable jobs for locals if the project only attracts the super-rich?

Part of the problem is the staggering number of agencies – twenty three, according to my research, national and provincial bodies involved in looking after these issues. Another aspect is the pressure on local provincial governments to develop their economies, and fast. This leads to a reluctance to publicize and invite public discussion on major tourism developments.

So what should be done? Vietnam’s law on ‘cultural heritage’ covers both the environment and tourism structures and development, yet is weak on mandating public consultation and disclosure of the progress of heritage protection and the actions that agencies will take. Re-writing and including new sections covering these points would give the law ‘teeth’.

It may also be time for Vietnam to create a more powerful and effective central agency bringing in all the diverse functions of those twenty three agencies – and scrapping them – to bring focus and a coordinated approach to heritage protection and tourism growth.

Finally, listen to the experts. Warnings have been sounded again and again regarding these projects. Vietnamese can’t afford to ignore sound advice as the regional tourism markets are becoming more aggressive in opening their countries via generous visa waivers and savvy promotion. This doesn’t mean stopping all developments or losing out on economic benefits, simply find better solutions, make projects smaller, legalize sensible limits on coastal development and create new lines of revenue to fund heritage restorations such as Hue City in the central part.

Vietnam may have decreasing choices on foreign funding for these projects as donors begin to place conditions of funding availability based on visible progress in improving the process of selecting and managing tourism projects. Already some European nations are asking for this.

Vietnam’s heritage sites, both historical and natural, are amazing and deserve to be shown to the world. Yet the process and the decisions made need to be shared by all. Look at Facebook and you will see millions of Vietnamese visiting the mountains, the coasts and the history of their culture and they are mostly young. What is the heritage that we should leave for their children?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From the outside, it may seem that Ho Chi Minh City is a gridlock of two-wheeled vehicles; however, logical designing and cultural respect have created one of the better traffic systems in the world
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In 2015, Thao was able to sell enough handmade accessories like bracelets and various pieces of jewelry to cover her tuition instead of asking her parents for it
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I always imagine this conversation:

First person has a large clump of minced beef and pork in hand.

Second person says: “Hey, have you eaten French-style meatballs yet?”

First person says: “Yes, very pleasant, but a bit bland.”

Second: “Yep, they’re good but could use a little zip.”

First: “The tomato sauce is nice but needs something extra, that’s the problem.”

Second: “Let’s try adding some chilis and fish sauce to the mix!”

First: “We start the same way using dried out banh mi crumbs and eggs to keep the meatballs together.”

They made the base of their sauce using fresh tomatoes, garlic, onions, fish sauce, fresh chilis, and a bit of beef or pork broth, then let it simmer for a while. They briefly fried the meatballs to seal the flavour and keep them firm before adding them to their sauce, then let the concoction slowly simmer a while longer.

Second person: “Wow, these would be great with elbow macaroni [nui, which is derived from the French “nouille”]!”

First: “Or banh mi mmmmmm!!!”

Second: “Let’s toss some cilantro on top for colour and flavour.”

And thus a smashing Asian version of the French meatball was invented:

Exquisite Vietnamese meatball

This next bit of creativity always puts a smile on my face when I think of the ingenuity behind such a simple idea.

I went into my favourite com binh dan (working class) lunch joint a few weeks ago and was shocked to see an interesting-looking potato dish among the offerings. Sometimes they make potatoes in a creamy French-style sauce but the version that day was made with fermented soybean paste (chao).

I could smell the chao among all the other aromas on the steam table – that bitter, salty, and exquisitely stinky pungent creation that adds a kick to anything. The “aroma” is something between dirty old gym socks and blue cheese. When served as a condiment – often alongside vegetarian dishes – it resembles potato salad to the Western eye.

The chao was almost invisible in the potato dish but the flavour sure was there! Geez, if you’re sensitive, squeeze your nostrils closed.

The boiled potato base for the dish, bland to the Vietnamese palate, definitely needs something to tickle the taste buds. Here is the ideal combination – perfectly balanced flavours between the two, yin and yang come to life on a plate!

Pungent, stinky chao

Boiled potatoes with chao

Another favourite is bo kho, the Vietnamese version of the French “ragout de boeuf” (beef stew), closely related to “pot-au-feu” (pot on the fire), both dishes being medleys of inexpensive cuts of beef including oxtail or marrowbone that need to be simmered for hours to come out tender.

The French dishes include a variety of vegetables, especially carrots, onions, potatoes, seasonal offerings such as leeks and turnips, and the ragout features a dash of red wine. The dish is a typical family meal, the main difference being that the ragout truly is a stew, not dry or a soup, just like the Vietnamese version.

The Vietnamese version follows the same theme as many fusion dishes, featuring local ingredients such as rice wine (instead of red), pickled tiny onions, lemongrass, star anise, and a blend of chili and tomato pastes.

Bo kho, Vietnamese beef stew

Practically all foreign cuisines have a version of beef stew, so bo kho (bo is beef and kho means to braise) and its distinct Asian spin may not be for everyone. The real game-changer is that foreigners can enjoy this local version in Vietnam without the need for high-priced Western ingredients, so it’s easy on the wallet as well as being delicious and authentic.

Any discussion about foreign influence on Vietnamese food must include banh trang nuong, the grilled round rice paper snack that is served sliced into triangular pieces like a pizza or quesadilla, or wrapped resembling a burrito.

Given that rice paper has been used for centuries in Vietnam to make all types of rolls and wraps, any connection to the West is dubious at best, but based on similarity to the Western treats mentioned above, banh trang nuong is definitely worth a look.

The standard offering starts with a round rice paper or sheet, dampened to create a soft wrap, or dry and firm to create a cracklier texture when cooked on a hot grill.

A chicken’s egg is (or a couple of tiny quail eggs) spread all over the paper with a wedge of “La Vache Qui Rit” cheese added on the fly. The trick is to keep spinning the rice paper so that it’s evenly cooked without being burnt.

Then diced scallion, browned, fried onion bits, dried pork floss, those teeny-weeny dried shrimp, and even chopped up hot dogs are added. Chili sauce is added before serving along with mayonnaise, resulting in the perfect snack for a chilly night.

Wrapped banh trang nuong

Another example of how foreigners can enjoy a local Vietnamese creation featuring local ingredients at a fraction of the cost of what is imported.

And the list goes on and on including sizzling beef hot plates bo ne and bo luc lac, “patiso” (originating from the French “pâté chaud,” the warm pâté pastry), and banh flan (flan caramel), not to mention feats of reverse engineering such as Vietnamese giam bong (from the French ”jambon” meaning ham), pâté (the liver-based spread), gio thu (head cheese), sausages (cha lua, nem chua and others) and, of course, the banh mi itself.

Vietnamese giam bong and gio thu

Every one of these culinary delights started with someone thinking out of the box, asking “What if we…..?” instead of doing things the way they were always done.

The old adage “necessity is the mother of invention” sure is true, but it’s curiosity and innovation that make the difference in the way foreign influences are handled in Vietnamese cuisine.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@