Many residents in Ho Chi Minh City have reported a price upswing, coupled with late conveyance and constant cancelations, on delivery apps like Grab, Ahamove, and Now, which could be attributed to a shortage of delivery workers during the extended social distancing period that the city is going through.

Quynh Anh, a resident of District 12 in Ho Chi Minh City, said she has relied on an app-based delivery service to source groceries from the nearby Co.op To Ky Supermarket for quite some time.

After the city has been put under an extended social distancing drive that forced everyone to stay home since late May, the service was shut down, leading her to find groceries at a shop farther away in Go Vap District.

However, she no longer has that option as a recent update in Ho Chi Minh City's epidemic prevention guidelines stated that delivery workers are not allowed to travel cross-district, except for some necessary cases.

In a desperate attempt, she contacted another supermarket in her district, only to find out that it has stopped receiving new delivery orders due to high demand.

“Multi-service apps no longer work as there are no drivers who pick up orders,” Anh said.

“In the end, I have no choice but to go out and queue at a supermarket."

Anh’s situation is echoed by many other customers as they struggled to place grocery delivery orders on Thursday.

Nguyen My Chi, a dweller in Thu Duc City, was charged VND70,000 (US$3) by Ahamove for a delivery trip from her house to a relative’s, an almost three-fold rise from the normal fare.

“The fee is high, but there is hardly any driver to take my order,” she complained.

Such issues are attributed to the new restrictions that the city imposed upon the local roster of delivery workers.

Delivery workers on tenterhooks

According to digital delivery solutions, the Ho Chi Minh City administration has recently ordered their drivers to wear name cards and arm bands to prove their work status.

Besides, they must restrict their movement within an area of their choice, while the companies are told to cut around 10 percent of their delivery workforce.

“I only dare to drive around my home district now, which means I can only pick up a few orders per day,” said The, a delivery person in Thu Duc City.

These restrictions, while crucial, have greatly hindered delivery workers from fulfilling customers’ orders.

Hiep, a driver for Ahamove, said the company only provided them with a QR code for identification, while they had to source out name cards and arm bands by themselves, at a time when most printing shops have closed following the city’s order.

Delivery workers are stopped at a checkpoint in Nha Be District, Ho Chi Minh City. Photo: Tu Trung / Tuoi Tre

“Without paperwork and identification, we are on tenterhooks every time we fulfill an order,” said Tam, another delivery driver.

“In the past, cross-district orders made up 80-90 percent of our commissions.

“The area limit and night-time travel restrictions have greatly affected our income.”

In theory, delivery workers can travel cross-district when they convey essential items to lockdown areas and quarantine centers.

In reality, many have reported being pulled over and penalized by officials at COVID-19 checkpoints for leaving their respective district, delivering non-essential items, or not wearing identification accessories for delivery workers, even when their duties are legally justified.

In order to fulfill an order, they now have to figure out ways to dodge checkpoints, going winding routes to reach the destination.

“As checkpoints make it harder to convey orders, not to mention risks of financial penalty and virus transmission, many have dropped out of the job,” said Minh, a delivery worker.

“The monitoring of epidemic safety guidelines among delivery workers are necessary, but an all-inclusive definition of essential items is also needed, as it is standing in the way of delivery operations,” said Nguyen Ngoc Dung, deputy chairman of the Vietnam E-Commerce Association (VECOM).

According to Dung, VECOM fully supports the city’s decision to tighten control on delivery workers, including the issuance of a special ID for all active workers, but limiting a person's travel area to their respective home district is unreasonable, as it disrupts the supply chain and impedes circulation of goods.

“We suggest that the city utilize a QR code-based system or an ID card system to manage delivery workers," he said.

As city authorities have introduced a 6:00 pm - 6:00 am travel restriction to combat the spread of COVID-19, Dung also proposed that delivery workers wear special reflective outfits to signify their essential working status as they work during the restrictive hours.

Inflated delivery fees

Seeing the delivery worker shortage, digital solutions like Grab, Gojek, and Ahamove are scrambling to complete QR code identification and delivery worker profile registration for their remaining drivers.

Approved drivers will receive a confirmation message from the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and will be allowed to operate in a specific area.

Discussing with Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper, the apps’ representative confirmed that they had to hike up the fares in order to incentivize their driver partners to stay with the job and refrain from canceling orders.

According to Phan Tuong Bach, chief operating officer at Ahamove, the current fee surge does not seem to be sufficient, as the app has not found enough drivers to fulfill customers’ demand.

“Many delivery workers want to stay at home as they will have to face risks of COVID-19 transmission and penalties at checkpoints,” he expounded.

“Residents of Ho Chi Minh City are placing around 100,000 delivery orders per day, but there are not enough drivers.”

Responding to the dearth of delivery workers, mobile application Grab has limited their delivery services within each district’s border, which is anticipated by the firm as a solution to cool down the fare raise.

Meanwhile, Grab’s competitor Gojek has promised not to raise delivery fees during social distancing, even when demand is rising up to six times and manpower is in short supply.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A 29-year-old woman in Saigon has earned a reputation across the city for outfitting motorcycles with one-of-a-kind leather upgrades.

Tran Thuy is living her best life, working for herself and making a living off her two passions: leather and motorcycles.

“Working for someone, no matter how highly that person thinks of you, means you have to live up to their expectations,” she said.

“I prefer the freedom to make things I love instead of the confinement of an office space and predictable salary.”

Command and conquer

“I developed a passion for leather when I was in college,” Thuy said.

“I used the Internet to learn more about it and found it to be quite interesting. At that time, leather craft in Vietnam was nowhere near as common as it is now.”

Thuy’s passion for leather led to several job offers.

According to Thuy, working for others had several upsides, including learning about management, but overall, the four years she spent as an employee, rather than an employer, left her with a bad taste in her mouth.

“Two employers refused to pay me for work I had done,” she recalled.

“I managed to get my money in one of those situations, but had to give up in the other because it became too exhausting.”

Now, as a manager herself, Thuy makes sure not to repeat the mistakes of those she has worked for.

“Ever since I started my business, I’ve made it a point to stick to payroll deadlines. I sometimes even pay my staff early.”

Thuy believes a friendly work environment is the key to motivating the 12 designers and craftsmen that work out of her shop in an alley of Nguyen Trong Tuyen Street, Phu Nhuan District, Ho Chi Minh City.

“I listen to them and make sure they have a comfortable workplace that they can consider as a second home,” she said.

“We need to have a positive mindset if we want to offer positive values to our customers.”

The positive values are how she proves to customers she is worthy of caring for the high-value motorcycles, including Harely Davidsons, Honda CD 125s, Triumphs, Royal Enfields, BMWs, and Kawasakis.

Besides leather products for bikes, Tran Thuy also designs leather armor suits for entertainment events and movies. Photo: Le Van / Tuoi Tre

Luong Anh Thuan, an owner of a Honda CD 125, is a loyal customer at Thuy’s shop.

“I saw her ads on a biker group and contacted her,” he said.

After visiting Thuy’s shop, Thuan was so impressed by her work that he asked her to reupholster the seat on his bike.

“I watched her at work and I believed in her. She’s creative and she builds the final products to her customers’ needs,” he said.

Over the years, Thuy has found it easier and easier to earn the trust of her customers.

“The owner [of the first expensive bike I worked on] was watching very closely. He didn’t even want my fingerprint on the gas tank,” she said.

“Eventually, he came around and asked me to do all the leather work on. He even recommended me to his friends.”

Hoang Hai Thoai, a Harley Davidson owner, is also one of Thuy’s faithful customers.

“Original accessories are limited and mundane. People like Thuy offer a wider variety and more artistic options,” he said

“I love the work she does,” Thoai added.

Thuy’s success is due, in large part, to her dedication to quality.

Though such dedication occasionally means missed deadlines because a piece is not perfect, her customers still appreciate her work and are typically willing to wait extra time for a perfectly made product.

But despite her success, her shop has not been spared from the economic devastation of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

“Rent, payroll, and tools amount to more than VND100 million [US$4,350] per month,” she said.

“We’ve been on edge for quite a while. There have been many months that we’ve spent more than we’ve earned, and many others we’ve merely broken even.”

Restrictions on movement due to the pandemic have not helped either.

“My neighborhood has been placed under quarantine,” Thuy said.

“It’s been difficult, but we’re trying to finish our pending order. I have two employees here to help me and the others work from home. Our landlord has also been helpful by slightly reducing rent.”

Building a homegrown brand

Thuy hopes that by incorporating Vietnamese culture into her work, she can continue attracting customers who appreciate traditional values.

In this way, she hopes to continue growing her businesses and her passion.

“Some of my customers purchased things from overseas at a much higher cost without any insurance or after-sales services,” Thuy said.

“I want to make a name for myself, but I also hope that the Vietnamese people switch to Vietnamese products and believe in the hard work of their fellow nationals.”

Aside from leather motorbike accessories, Thuy also makes purses and jackets.

She has even tried her hand at armored suits for the entertainment and movie industry.

When she is not busy at her shop, she works as a visiting lecturer at her alma mater, Ton Duc Thang University, giving lectures on craft design to industrial fine arts students.

“I always try to help graduate students with their final projects,” she said, explaining that many of her employees are college students.

“I’ve found that those who do internships at my shop tend to choose leatherwork for their graduation projects and future careers.”

Huynh Minh Tien, a senior in the industrial fine art faculty of Ton Duc Thang University, is one of the many students who is thankful for Thuy’s mentorship.

“I’ve learnt so much from Thuy. She’s an inspiration for my future career,” Tien said.

In return for her help, many college students have also offered to lend a hand to Thuy as she struggles to stay afloat during the pandemic, providing shipping and customer services.

“[My university students] talk to me a lot and are willing to help with my financial issues,” she said.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A two-man team embarked on separate paths, each full of challenges, but decided to leave behind their stable city jobs to launch a farming startup to make full use of deserted land in the Mekong Delta province of Kien Giang.

As many young people leave the paddies in their hometown for office or factory work in big cities, 38-year-old Bui Vu Linh (elder Linh) and 27-year-old Nguyen Vu Linh (younger Linh), who hails from Kien Giang Province, decided to reverse the trend.

The pair have devoted their youth, passion and knowledge to forging their own path so they can live with no regrets.

After four years and bitter failures, all their hard work paid off as their initiative, An Moc Farm, nestled in younger Linh’s hometown, began to yield sweet fruits.

Same name, same will

Elder Linh, who goes by the nickname ‘Wanderlust Yogi’, also runs a cozy coffee shop in his hometown Ca Mau City, the capital of the namesake southernmost province.

The man had carved out success for himself during his years in Ho Chi Minh City, where he was in charge of scouting for actors and actresses and settings for local and Thai film companies, and was even promoted to art director when he was only 24.

He was even honored as one of the city’s exemplary youths.

Despite the decent incomes, he realized he did not really fit in and his heart lies elsewhere, elder Linh shared.

Tired of the showbiz buzz and wasteful, extravagant lifestyle it entails, which took its toll on his own health, he decided to make it home.

His turning point came in 2018 when he came across and befriended younger Linh on a social network.

Nguyen Vu Linh, or younger Linh, decided to turn his childhood passion in farming into a career by helping his mother run a shop in Ho Chi Minh City after graduating from middle school to save up for a future farm in his hometown.

He shared he has a former employer to thank for the part she has played in his career.

Around 2011, the owner of a food workshop where he was working advised him to get back to school and finish what he had left off.

Workers harvest sam bo chinh, a Vietnamese ginseng plant, at An Moc Farm, located in Kien Giang Province, Vietnam in this photo retaken of an original one.

Thanks to the kind woman’s support, the young man was able to work his way through high school and later gained entry into two colleges at the same time.

However, he never accepted any, including Information Technology, out of fear he’d be trapped in a career he would not like.

Younger Linh decided to do his two-year military service before helping around at farms in Long An and Tra Vinh Provinces, also in the Mekong Delta, in the next three years.

During that time, the enterprising man completed distance education courses in Business Administration and Microbiology offered by a college in the Netherlands and put the knowledge he learned into practice at the farms he was working at.

He later left the farms and the stable incomes and founded his own startup, An Moc Farm, by building everything from the ground up and resurrecting barren fields as most young people in his hometown joined the rural-to-urban migration.

Linh started out with a 3,000-square-meter facility before expanding it to 17 hectares and building a 350-square-meter raw material production workshop with a drying system and a warehouse.

After procuring a stable source of materials and securing several large businesses across the country as customers and partners for export, he began to rake in the cash in 2017 and 2018.

That was when the elder Linh jumped on board, impressed by how his younger friend had taken a shot at achieving his dreams in clean agriculture.

“We first met in person in Kien Giang. I was stunned seeing the marooned villages and huge land parcels unattended,” elder Linh recalled, adding he was also concerned by local farming households’ abuse of pesticides.

What he had his heart set on was helping his like-minded friend spread the seeds of clean agriculture among the local farming community and adding value to homegrown produce.

“I find it quite ‘face-losing’ that made-in-Vietnam produce are generally beaten by Thai counterparts. It hurts my national pride,” Linh noted, explaining why he stepped right in to lend a hand.

Elder Linh now serves as the sales and marketing director at An Moc Farm, tapping into the expertise he gained from his previous jobs with the entertainment firms.

The man has also set up a club called ‘Doi Books’ (Books of Life), a project involved in aiding street children, collecting used books and clothing items and raising funds for community activities.

Weathering storms

Things were not always so easy.

Following initial successes, one disaster after another hit in recent years, dealing the two Linhs devastating blows.

The duo faced tough times after a typhoon which swirled across Kien Giang in August 2019 devastated younger Linh’s hometown and swept away nearly 10 hectares of plants on his farm and much of their hope.

“The typhoon coincided with the typical floating season of the Mekong Delta. We were left almost empty-handed as the prolonged downpours wreaked serious havoc on the plants,” younger Linh sadly recalled.

The damage was estimated at nearly VND3 billion (US$130,361), he added.

As the duo struggled to pick up the pieces and worked to revive the destroyed fields, which then shrank to only 10 hectares, they suffered another setback: resurgences of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.

After securing contracts to export herbal materials to India and South Korea in 2018 and 2019, the pair saw all their preparations in money, staff, and time down the drain as India was grappling with a massive wave of COVID cases in the country.

With no outlets found for sam bo chinh, a kind of ginseng plant cultivated in many localities across Vietnam, ordered by India to produce anti-cancer dietary supplements, the two Linhs found themselves switching to other markets including South Korea, Thailand and local businesses while the remainder ended up as warehouse putaways.

Investors refused to renew their funding and even long-time shareholders withdrew from the project.

“Losses, debts and broken relationships are what most startup owners have to go through,” the two Linhs shared.

With the financial support from Thu, director of a local paint company, they pressed on and charged ahead to overcome their most trying time.

The pair has also received a funding package for spearhead agriculture firms from the provincial authorities to expand the scope of their business.

They are looking to join hands with U Minh Thuong raw material zone to step up production.

The entrepreneurs shared the key to their survival through the third and fourth relapses of the COVID-19 pandemic, the most severe so far, is that their products, including food and drinks, boast long shelf and warehouse life.

Latest additions to their wide range of products intended for retail markets are herbal coffee and cocoa, healthy herbal tea, as well as teas, noodles and flour from butterfly pea.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hundreds, if not thousands, of children living on the streets in Hanoi have found themselves amongst the city’s most vulnerable groups amidst the resurgence of COVID-19 in Vietnam.

After nearly two years of economic havoc caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in Vietnam, many local youths have been fleeing their hometowns for bigger cities in search of meager incomes they can send back to their families.

Unfortunately, the vast majority of these children have found themselves without a roof over their heads, either working in terrible conditions or with no work at all.

No place to call home

As COVID-19 causes conditions to grow worse in the capital city, ‘camps’ of street children are popping up near sewage pipes, under bridges, and in open spaces under freeways, typically marked by worn-out clothing and bedding slung over railings and empty packages of instant noodles scattered nearby.

The most popular of these ‘camps’ are located near some of Hanoi’s most famous landmarks, including My Dinh Coach Station in Tu Liem District, Thong Nhat Park in Dong Da District, and Hoan Kiem Lake in the city’s downtown area.

While bridges and pipes shelter the children from downpours and blistering heat, they fail to protect them from the clouds of mosquitoes that invade the city at night.

One of the youths who calls these camps home is Nguyen Xuan Dung, whose name has been changed to protect his identity.

Though Dung looks like a 12-year-old, he is, in fact, a 19-year-old from Phu Tho Province who has spent the past two weeks sleeping on the streets since the restaurant he worked at was forced to close.

Broke and in an unfamiliar city, Dung has found himself with nowhere to turn.

“I have no choice but to stay here. I’ll be put in quarantine if I come back to my hometown,” Dung said.

Dung ran away from home five years ago after his parents’ divorce.

Since then, he’s been working odd jobs trying to make ends meet, from peddling small goods and helping out at eateries to day laboring on construction sites.

Dung’s most recent employer was a pho stall in Thanh Xuan District. Prior to the pandemic, Dung had been working daily from 4:00 pm to 4:00 am, bringing in VND4 million (US$173) per month, with much of that money being sent home to support his younger brother each month.

Minh and Hung, two other boys living in one of Hanoi’s youth homeless camps, were in a similar situation.

Though Minh, 14, was born in Hanoi and Hung, 16, was born in Dien Bien Province, about 456 kilometers from the capital city, the two have been friends since they first crossed paths.

Prior to the newest wave of COVID-19, the duo had been working at a construction site in Tay Ho District during the day and spending their nights sleeping outside gaming centers.

Now, after losing their jobs and with gaming centers shuttered, the duo have found themselves struggling to find safe spaces to sleep.

Easy prey

The International Labor Organization estimated in April that between 4.6 and 10.3 million workers in Vietnam have been affected by the pandemic.

As estimated, over one million children between five and 17 years old are already engaged in child labor in Vietnam, with more than half working in hazardous conditions.

These children are particularly at risk due to the impacts of COVID-19 and vulnerable to other safety concerns, including trafficking and sex abuse.

Dung (right) is pictured on his way back to his ‘sewage pipe’ shelter in Hanoi, Vietnam. Photo: Tam Le / Tuoi Tre

From the north-central province of Thanh Hoa, Hoang and Linh, whose names have been changed to protect their identities, had just arrived by bus at My Dinh Station when they began receiving tempting job offers from complete strangers.

They were promised light work and high monthly salaries as construction workers and peddlers, with salaries fluctuating from VND7 million (US$303) to up to VND15 million ($650), with room and board included.

With money still in their pocket, Hoang and Linh thought the offers were ‘too good to be true”, but admitted that they may change their minds when their money runs out.

Dung shared that he once took a job from a broker, a decision he quickly regretted as the work was taxing and the pay was low.

He added shared that he once worked as a candy, flower, and toothpick peddler, racking up nearly VND15 million ($650) in sales after roaming streets in harsh weather for 12 to 16 hours a day, but pocketing only VND5 million ($216).

Sexual abuse is also a constant threat to Hanoi’s homeless children.

“Street children are particularly prone to male pedophiles, with no food to eat and no place to take rest in,” one social worker said.

Dung himself has been the target of such abuse, and has a photo of himself amongst a group of older males to prove it.

Fortunately, he was rescued by Blue Dragon Children's Foundation, a non-profit organization dedicated to aiding street children in Hanoi.

“The sexual abuse of male children is just as vicious as that of their female counterparts. The victims are hurt both physically and emotionally,” said Do Duy Vi, director of the foundation’s street children program.

Vi has come to multiple rescues of children from Vietnamese and foreign pedophiles.

Like everyone else, Dung is yearning for the situation to return to normal.

“I hope the epidemic will soon wane and be finally over so that I can find a job,” Dung shared.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A couple have adopted a visually impaired mother in the Hoa Binh seaside village in Binh Minh Commune, Thang Binh District, Quang Nam Province of central Vietnam. Their neighbors and local authorities lend a hand in taking care of the old woman.

Nguyen Thi Coi, 70, is a blind woman living next to the People’s Committee of the Binh Minh Commune.

Phan Thi Thiet, 58, took her in as an adoptive mother out of compassion.

A mother for the local people

Coi’s house resides along the coastal way into the heart of the Binh Minh Commune.

Sitting on a wooden table placed in the middle of her place, the old woman was chewing some betel and areca leaves, making guesses at what was happening from the sounds around.

Hearing the increasing sound of footsteps, she said: “Is that Thiet? I can’t find a VND50,000 [US$2.17] banknote. I must have lost it.”

The foster daughter dropped her hat and pulled out a roll of money wrapped inside four layers of used plastic, with rubber covers on the outside.

Nguyen Thi Coi’s blindness stops her from doing daily housework, so Phan Thi Thiet adopted her as mother to help her out. Photo: B. D / Tuoi Tre

“You put it in this pile by mistake. Here it is,” she said.

It was near the evening, but the 70-square-meter house was still burning with heat.

Thiet has not been selling fish in the local market for days. She has spent time cleaning the house and waiting on her mother.

Blind as she is, the old woman keeps everything nice and neat.

The floor is shiningly clean. The broom is placed tidily in the front yard. The clothes are finely folded.

In the kitchen, all the dishes are properly washed and arranged on the shelves.

Two small closed pots were resting on the kitchen board. Inside were some fried egg and some vegetable soup with shrimp cooked earlier in the afternoon.

Thiet took with her some fresh fish from the sea and placed them in the fridge.

She also ran a thorough check of all the dishes and foods in the kitchen before heading home.

“I have to come here every day to check on the food and help with cleaning up. I can’t rest assured if I let her do it all by herself,” Thiet said.

“She’s blind and clumsy. She might have an accident or get caught in a fire.”

“I feel happy to have her. Everyone else is happy too.”

A happy mother

Coi has been considered a common mother to all the people in the seaside village.

Her father was dismissed from the military and passed away from malaria in his hometown.

Coi, in that same year, was born a blind girl. She was raised by a single mother who passed away 10 years ago.

Now, there is only one member left in the lonely house.

The foster daughter has brought much warmth to the lonely house of the old woman. Photo: B. D / Tuoi Tre

Thiet and her family were living in a nearby commune a few years back when her children were still in school and her husband was on regular business trips.

But five years ago, when her children got married, she and husband sold their piece of land and moved to Hoa Binh Commune.

They saw that Coi was blind and childless and decided to call her their mother.

“My husband agreed at my idea immediately. We had the discussion the night before, and the very next day, he bought a new TV set and came to fix her bed and furniture,” said Thiet.

“Coi had no idea why my husband was so caring.”

Thiet has four children, who have been on sea journeys with her husband for years.

At the age of 62, her husband still lives with the waves and hardly ever makes it back home.

But every time he does, he is eager to see Coi and to do maintenance work around the house.

“I decided to call her my mother because I felt much love for her. She is no relation, but she’s kind-hearted,” Thiet said.

“She’s old, like my own parents. If there’s anything I can help her with when she’s still alive, I will just do it, because she does not have many years left to live.”

The story of Thiet and her husband taking Coi into their custody moved the authorities and their neighbors.

The Binh Minh Commune’s Women Society once planned to host an adoption ceremony, but Thiet rejected the idea as she felt it was not necessary.

Ever since Thiet came around, Coi’s house has been warmer.

From dawn till dusk, Thiet is like a “Cinderella” who takes care of all the food preparation and house cleaning.

Blindness prevents Coi from doing her daily chores.

Fortunately, the neighborhood and the local authorities have joined hands to assist her.

Sometimes, the old woman gets a free can of raw rice, and sometimes a bag of fresh marine fish.

Coi still needs regular hospital visits due to her breast cancer and diabetes.

“Last November, she got a snake bite in the kitchen and I was not aware of that,” Thiet said.

“I noticed her scratch her leg for two days and her thighs got swellings and blisters.”

“She only told me it was a snake bite when I asked her about the wound.”

“We immediately called an ambulance. The doctor said that if it had been delayed for a few hours, the legs would not have stood a chance of recovery.”

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A ‘rice ATM’ and charity groups offering free meals have emerged recently in Long Xuyen City in the Mekong Delta province of An Giang to give support to people in need.

On July 13, the ‘rice ATM’ at My Binh Ward, Long Xuyen City was relaunched after a brief pause, giving free rice to households, ticket vendors, and hawkers, who lost their jobs because of the COVID-19.

The Vietnam Fatherland Front Committee in My Binh Ward has enlisted needy households eligible to receive free rice and given them rice tickets.

When coming to get the free rice, the locals would submit the ticket, sign their name, and then 'withdraw' 3.5 kilograms of rice each time.

Tran Thi Kim Dung, 61, a resident with an adult son who has lost his working ability in Binh Long 2 Hamlet, My Binh Ward, was furloughed during the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, rice, among other food items, is the most necessary for her.

“I work as a garbage collector, but I had to stay home during the period of social distance,” Dung said, crying.

"We can temporarily overcome the suffering now thanks to the rice portion.

"While others can get free rice once each week, I can get two times due to our poverty-stricken situation.

"I am so thrilled."

A woman waits while another is getting her free rice at a 'rice ATM' in My Binh Ward, Long Xuyen City, An Giang Province, Vietnam. Photo: Dang Tuyet / Tuoi Tre

According to Nguyen Hoang Tu, vice-president of the Vietnam Fatherland Front in My Binh Ward, local authorities distribute 227 tickets of free rice weekly.

The poor can go to get free rice every Tuesday and Thursday. They intend to expand the list in the hope of supporting more impoverished people.

“There are around 9,000 households that have been supported with 17 tons of rice since the rice ATM in My Binh Ward was launched,” said Tu.

“The rice ATM was financed by the Vietnam Fatherland Front Committee in the ward and some donors."

Apart from the 'rice ATM,' a restaurant offering free meals at a cost of just VND2,000 (nine U.S. cents) apiece has been open for more than one week on the street of Thoai Ngoc Hau, My Long Ward.

A restaurant that serves vegetarian food at a cost of VND2,000 has offered over 300 meals each day in An Giang Province, Vietnam since July 8, 2021. Photo: Dang Tuyet / Tuoi Tre

This is an initiative launched by donors in Long Xuyen City, arranging for volunteers to deliver meals directly to the pandemic-affected people.

There were so many people rushing to obtain meals that the restaurant had to temporarily shut down. Until they could eventually maintain social distancing properly, they could not continue to receive the meals.

According to the restaurant’s owner Le Hong Hoa, they have delivered over 1,000 meals since July 8.

Many poor people come to the restaurant to get their VND2,000 meals during the COVID-19 pandemic. Photo: Dang Tuyet / Tuoi Tre

On the opening day, the restaurant served 200 meals at the same cost of VND2,000 for both vegetarian food and food with meat.

Each person can buy a maximum of two meals.

“We serve on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, from 10:00 am to 12:00 am. We plan to serve every day when we have enough staff,” Hong Hoa told Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper.

“We hope that this can share a little bit with the poor during the social distancing period."

An old man gives VND2,000 to a young man at the restaurant to get his meal during the COVID-19 pandemic in July 2021. Photo: Dang Tuyet / Tuoi Tre

On July 13, the charity group of Lang Thang An Giang, which is also based in the Mekong Delta province, brought seven cash gifts with various values to visual-impaired individuals. The gifts, fetching VND4-6 million (US$174-261) were delivered depending on everyone’s specific situation.

On top of the cash gifts, the recipients were supplied with rice and necessities previously because of their massage parlor’s shutdown.

Duong Thu Dong (center) and two women prepare vegetables to make vegetarian food meals to support the poor living in Long Xuyen City, An Giang Province, Vietnam during the COVID-19 pandemic. Photo: Dang Tuyet / Tuoi Tre

Since July 19, along with 18 other provinces and cities in southern Vietnam, An Giang has been placed under Directive No. 16, a COVID-19 prevention measure that requires people to remain home except for buying necessities, such as medicine and food.

Before the directive, various restrictions implemented to prevent the respiratory disease had left many people unemployed.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bui Xuan Thanh, a retired aircraft repairman, has earned a reputation as a wizard in Da Nang, Vietnam for his dexterity in building miniature fighter jets that are surprisingly true to life.

Since his retirement in 2015, 67-year-old Thanh has worked in a quiet neighborhood on Le Trong Tan Street, home to Da Nang’s largest concentration of households of those serving in the military and located next to air defense bases, where he can freely indulge in his lifelong passion: building miniature military aircraft.

Over the years, he has added thousands of such models to his unique repertoire, which many are eager to get their hands on.

His labor of love can allow him self-reliance and a good income to provide for his family even in his old age.

Thanh left his hometown in a northern locality for Da Nang nearly 40 years ago.

His working days typically begin at 9:30 am, with a telltale sign being the gentle purr of his grinding machine.

In his six-square-meter makeshift workshop crammed with materials right in his yard, Thanh intently gives the finishing touch to his models, key to tying his designs together.

“This is my third batch of orders by customers from Ho Chi Minh City so far this month,” he said.

“There are times when my clients are waiting patiently for me to finish the pieces,” he said with a model multi-role SU-30MK2 in his hand, adding he builds at least 10 items to meet high demand each month.

The senior man’s dexterity and commitment transcend to something special: real-life replicas of fighter jets of various types, ranging from high-performance jet trainer aircraft L-29, MIG-15, 17, 19 to multi-role fighter aircraft Su-MK2.

Imagination soars

Thanh graduated with flying colors from the air force’s aviation mechanics program back in 1973.

Two years later, he found himself working as a technology quality controller at Factory A39, based in Yen Bai Airport in the namesake northern province, before getting transferred to Factory A32 following its merger with the former unit.

He said despite being an airport ground staff, he was denied frequent access to the fleet of jets, which his unit took great pride in.

The jets’ designs have fascinated the young man for as long as he could remember, and to downsize it to a miniature using his ingenuity has been an idea constantly lurking at the back of his mind.

When the establishment he worked with relocated to Da Nang in 1980, he tried to make his debut mini-version of a MIG-21 jet with his hands and intended the piece as a gift to his father to flatter him and make him proud.

Unable to observe a physical aircraft, Thanh made a mental design before realizing the idea on paper in the form of drawings.

This was followed by stages in assembling parts in the most meticulous manner.

The product of his imagination ended up looking just like a grasshopper, though, with a clumsy combination of a MIG-21’s front and a MIG-17’s wings.

There was never a down moment, though scaling down the jets into a petite model was such a challenge which cost him heaps of time.

As regulations at his workshop eased during the late 1980s, Thanh would make his way to the final-phase workshop for a good look at the aircraft.

A long-time fan, the man found himself overwhelmed the first time he got up-close and personal with the military's flying machines while trying to gulp in as many of their details as possible before jotting them down at home and pondering over his miniature interpretation.

Appreciative of his passion, the factory director summoned him to his office and provided him with a catalog of fighter jets.

Bui Xuan Thanh’s all-aluminum combat jet models boast intricate, authentic minute details. Photo: B.D. / Tuoi Tre

The executive’s next move changed Thanh’s infatuation in a whole new direction.

When Thanh was working on his third aircraft model, his superior called him to his office again, and to his elation, the latter trusted him with a meticulously detailed scale drawing of the entire combat fleet the facility was in charge of.

“The drawing was just what I needed. I was exhilarated,” Thanh recalled, adding he kept telling himself to ensure its confidentiality.

With all the questions in his mind solved and high-precision scales in hand, the man excitedly got straight to work.

As a one-man team, Thanh did not mind spending his free time perfecting the most nominal details and putting together several components with great skill and precision.

As he continued to refine his products, Thanh was tasked with building three fighter jet models from jackfruit wood, with the items being put on display in the facility’s memorial center.

The former aircraft mechanic said that under his superiors’ command from 1985 to his retirement, a large part of his working hours was dedicated to his hobby and his painstakingly detailed scale models were intended as souvenirs to high-profile visitors to the facility, including state leaders such as late Party General Secretary Do Muoi and former National Assembly Chairman Nguyen Sinh Hung, as well as foreign delegations.

Prolific retiree

According to Thanh, with years of experience stacked up until his retirement, he now spends all his time scrutinizing old and modern combat aircraft and building his miniature versions to cater to his growing customer base.

All his products come down to a single material: aluminum.

The retiree orders refined aluminum sheets and has them prepared into hulks by a metalsmith.

He knows his job too well, completing all the technically demanding phases that eat up much of his time including tapering off impact resistant wings, positioning rocket pads, and putting antennas and radars in place before giving the pieces the finishing touch.

He said the work requires great patience and long-accumulated knowledge of the combat machines to build items rich in intricate, authentic miniature detail.

The technician-turned-craftsman can make 10 to 15 miniatures out of his hobby each month, or more than 100 each year.

The pieces, most of which are custom-made, weigh anywhere between one and a half and three kilograms each.

Building jet miniatures this way usually takes him days and each product can sell for VND3 million (US$130) to VND5 million ($217), earning him an annual income of VND150-200 million ($6,515- 8,687), a handsome sum for a man his age.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For 30 years, an aviculturist has helped to build and restore aviaries in the Mekong Delta provinces of Vietnam. From the first attempt at drawing birds over, he has turned bird raising into his lifetime career.

Birds of all kinds were roaming an area of the Vi Thang melaleuca forest in Vi Thuy District, Hau Giang Province.

Herons, darters, gallirallus, and many more were making loud noises as they flung themselves into the foods from the aviculturist – 62-year-old Le Danh Cuong.

Birds in the wild

One morning in the Vi Thang forest, the birds were crowding the place, sending a hustling aura over all those present.

Certain ‘strangers’ showed up, appearing as confident as the locals.

In response to the fish crumbs for breakfast, the birds seemed nervous and were keeping the bird raiser at arm’s length.

When they saw Cuong, however, they came down like ducks to water.

Some well-built members were quick to snatch the better bites, leaving the weak standing on the side.

Cuong was well aware and briskly scattered more food for ‘the miserable.'

“In the bird world, there are the strong and the weak, the villains and the bullied,” said Cuong.

“The newcomers often have a hard time getting a good bite, but soon they will mature and will even pick on the older members.

“If this is not seen to, the weak birds will get hungry and may leave due to frustration.”

The local birds made friends with others from faraway places during their regular trips.

It is interesting to see all these visitors coming home with the birds nesting in the Vi Thang forest.

The birds were so overwhelming their numbers that the indigenous people had to switch their types of trees, lest the birds may destroy all the melaleuca available.

Once they have established their territory, the birds act as king of the Vi Thang forest. However, they listen to Cuong.

The bird keeper sometimes saves their lives. He provides them with food, shelter, and healthcare.

For the last 30 years, the birds of the Mekong Delta in Vietnam have gotten so used to the image of the person who feeds and protects them.

They must be in debt to him as he gave them a home when they almost lost their places.

From soldier to professional aviculturist

Cuong was a soldier in the war against the Pol Pot regime in Cambodia and on another battlefield in the north of Vietnam afterward.

In peacetime, Cuong was assigned a post at Lam Vien 19-5, a small forest located in the heart of Ca Mau City on the southern tip of Vietnam.

It was this stopover that gave him the chance to connect with the birds.

At that time, Lam Vien 19-5 was managed by Le Thi Lieu, whose husband Pham Huu Liem was head of the department of forestry there.

They were both born and bred in wartime and have dreamed of a way to make their local culture and nature known to the younger generations as well as tourists.

They chose the bird enclosure as their point of focus as it signified the uniqueness of the place.

A bird cage in the middle of the town was built. Amid public doubt and pressure, Lieu and Liem managed to realize their passion.

It was a struggle, but Lieu had a supportive team, including her lead aviculturist Cuong, who made sure her efforts become the home to wild birds.

Part of their plan was to tame an initial group of birds, which will then be released back into the wilderness.

These first-generation members somehow ‘marketed’ their habitat and lured other wild birds over.

As the new birds found this place a comfortable zone with available food sources, they themselves called more over, creating a snowball effect.

Very soon a considerably large number of birds were making their nests.

Le Danh Cuong helps to restore the famous Bac Lieu bird enclosure in Bac Lieu Province, Vietnam. Photo: Tien Trinh / Tuoi Tre

Cuong burst out in tears when he first learned that wild birds were coming to his aviary.

This gave him confidence that their team can turn the forest nearby into a potential natural habitat.

Lieu sent Cuong on a field trip into the forest. There, he was studying the birds and guarding them against bird thieves.

More and more wild birds popped up, but Cuong considered all of them his family members.

He could get close to them without inflicting any sense of doubt or fright.

In return, he treated them like friends.

“You have to love them, then they’ll come to you,” he said.

As the time went by, Cuong got attached to the wild birds without realizing it.

He could even intuitively count the birds. He should know if a single one of them does not make it home on any random day.

Thanks to the bird population, Lam Vien 19-5 has attracted large influxes of tourists and news coverage.

Following the call

Pham Thanh Tri, former president of the People’s Committee of Ca Mau Province, recalled that the provincial high-rank officials made time to escort VIP guests around the bird sanctuary every time.

The authorities in Tien Giang Province contacted Tri and asked for expert help in establishing a bird shelter in the Tan Phuong melaleuca forest there.

“I thought that they really wanted to do it, so I sent Cuong to help them,” Tri said.

It was a mystery what Cuong did there, but not long afterward Tri got a thank-you phone call from the Tien Giang authorities, saying they had successfully put together an aviary full of wild species.

“It was great to hear that. I went there once. The birds were everywhere,” he said.

Cuong’s fame spread. He traveled here and there to build more aviaries.

He came to Bac Lieu City under Bac Lieu Province to restore an old enclosure.

From there, he came to Vinh Long Province to make an aviary inside a fruit plantation, at the request of the owner of the Vinh San tourist area in this province.

This time was a real challenge, but he followed the call and everywhere he went, the birds were after him.

Cuong was most pleased with the one he built in the Tan Lap Floating Village in Long An Province.

It was a naturally rich area with lots of birds. It could be called the bird capital.

Following that, he went on to work at a forest in Vi Thang at the request of a big corporation.

“Tri and other passionate bird lovers have appealed to the provincial leaders in paper. They have sought permission to restore three legendary bird enclosures, namely Cha La, Dam Doi and the Ca Mau City aviary,” he said.

“Tri said that they had got the green light.”

For three decades, Cuong has no idea whether the birds have been following him, or vice versa.

His life has been tied to the tireless wings.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two young fashion entrepreneurs in Hanoi are borrowing inspiration from Vietnamese folk art as they transform ordinary burlap into one-of-a-kind fashion statements.

Dao Thu Trang, 31, and Tran Quynh Anh, 29, founded local fashion brand ‘La La La’ in 2020 with a commitment to promote eco-friendly clothing with a strong connection to Vietnamese culture.

Born in Thai Binh Province, a land known for its widespread production of jute trees and burlap fabric, Quynh Anh has been familiar with the material all her life.

Still, it never occurred to her that the same material used to store crops in warehouses could be transformed into iconic fashion.

Quynh Anh’s preconceived notions of burlap quickly changed after she met Trang, a like-minded peer who inspired her to return to her roots and understand the unadulterated beauty of unprocessed burlap.

Together, Quynh Anh and Trang set out on a journey to transform unassuming burlap into chic, affordable clothing.

During the Lunar New Year season in 2020, Quynh Anh took notice the ubiquity of Dong Ho - a traditional method of Vietnamese painting that focuses on bright, festive color – in Hanoian households.

Believing that Dong Ho fit well with the fashion brand she envisioned, she began to incorporate folk painting- inspired embroidery into her products, an eccentricity unique to the 'La La La' brand that has been attracting major attention in the local market.

For each piece of clothing she designs, Quynh Anh relies on new-school embroidery techniques, given that traditional embroidery does not work well on burlap.

In particular, she focuses on curves, soft features of long chain stitches, and vividly-colored threads which provide juxtaposition the muted burlap textile.

Such unconventional designs make 'La La La' a particularly niche brand given that it can be difficult to match the brand’s clothing with typical styles.

The brand is mostly sought after by a small demographic of young, stylish urban woman who leads sustainable lifestyles, Quynh Anh explained.

“Fashion inexorably shifts over time, which can make an item du jour outdated by tomorrow.”

“Using burlap can lessen the negative environmental effects of discarded clothing given that burlap is biodegradable.”

Embroidered products by La La La. Photo: Ha Thanh / Tuoi Tre

Each bag a story

A graduate of Hanoi University of Architecture, Trang spent her first few years after university pursuing a career in sustainable development in France, Italy, Belgium, and Brazil.

While living in Europe, she noticed that eco-friendly products were becoming a major draw for consumers.

The “green product” marketing is maturing in Europe, but the retail ecosystem for these items in Vietnam is still in its infancy.

“Green consumption will increase here, one way or another. It’s the future,” Trang said.

“Despite the numerous challenges in store, I think there are needs for young people to step up and pioneer the movement.”

In La La La’s early days, Quynh Anh and Trang found themselves up against countless obstacles, particularly the weight of burlap and its difficulty to work with.

This challenge was overcome by softening the fabric and removing dust before beginning the tailoring process.

This step is just the beginning. To create a bag, each piece of burlap goes through a rigorous process.

First is the design phase, which requires the team to sample and test fabrics, design the embroidery, and plan out the colors. Only once a design has been settled on can the needlework begin.

With each design, Trang and Quynh Anh strive to tell a distinct story, be it a tale of a whale on the verge of extinction or scenes from Vietnamese folklore.

“We aspire to have each bag tell a story from areas where jute production is high, of Vietnamese cultural values, or tales from our childhoods.

"Our customers can easily spot patterns inspired by Dong Ho paintings, stories of Chi Pheo from writer Nam Cao’s writing, familiar folklore tales, and illustrations of various farm animals,” Trang said.

La La La’s bags sell for VND200,000-300,000 ($9-13) for pieces with small, simple embroidery, and range up to VND1-2 million ($44-87) for larger, more intricate designs.

The brand also has plans to diversify its catalogue by offering linen fabric sourced from Ha Giang, unlocking the potential for more idiosyncratic designs.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Doan Thi Hoa has spent more than a decade uplifting the disabled community through a center she has built in suburban Hanoi, teaching different trades and bringing smiles to children with special needs.

For the past 14 years, Hoa, in her late 50s, has strived hard to improve conditions of children with disabilities and give them a place where they can fit in.

People who come to Quynh Hoa Rolled Paper Cooperative, based in Huu Hoa Commune, Thanh Tri District in suburban Hanoi, can easily recognize her by the bright smile she always wears as she moves from one corner of the class to the other in order to attend to each of the students.

Hoa and her husband, Nguyen Huu Tan, have provided parental care and vocational training to some 500 physically challenged children, including those with severe impairments and others coming all the way from southern localities.

Just keep smiling

Hoa often goes by the adorable nickname U Hoa, with ‘U’ meaning ‘mother’ in northern dialects.

The middle-aged woman shared it is her smiles and carefree outlook that help her shut out daunting setbacks and keep her moving forward.

At the cooperative, which doubles as a free-admission vocational training center, Hoa is not only the teacher of a class with some of the most serious disabilities, but also a mother with boundless love and dedication.

From the center, many of her 500-plus students have matured and shined a light in their corner of the world. Many have also been able to have their own family, jobs, and been integrated into society.

Hoa herself has ‘matchmade’ 23 couples among the students.

The woman, who has just had an operation on one leg, shared her calling to teach vocational skills to children with special needs during a charity trip with the Hanoi Red Cross Society almost 15 years ago.

When the volunteers were handing out gifts to disadvantaged children at a nursing home, Hoa spotted one child who was not too excited about the presents.

What the child later told her sank into her heart.

“We’re really thankful for the gifts, but what disabled children like me really need is learning a trade to provide for ourselves later,” the child said.

Realizing what the underprivileged youngsters wished for, back from the trip, the woman was set on developing her calling into a disabled-forward initiative.

With her husband’s support, Hoa set up a workshop to provide free vocational training for the local disabled community right in her backyard.

Concerned about the amount of care they would have to put in to teach disabled children, Tan, her husband, initially objected to it.

Seeing how determined his wife was, he soon gave in and the construction of four rooms marked her wish fulfilled.

The couple soon found themselves busy taking care of 15 minors with special needs upon the opening of the center.

Their first batch of students consisted of several in the most severe conditions of intellectual and physical disabilities, including immobility, hearing impairments, and mental retardation.

At first many could not even perform their daily hygiene routines while some were confined to wheelchairs.

With time and Hoa’s patience and loving care, that has hugely improved.

Most of her students have greatly improved their condition, being able to care for themselves, do simple household chores, and exchange greetings with visitors despite their speech and intellectual impairments.

“It’s my calling. I’m willing to give without asking for anything in return,” Hoa shared.

“It’s really hard work, but I have to shrug off my exhaustion to be someone the children can rely on."

A cause to pursue

Hoa started out with 10 sewing machines and successfully passed on sewing skills to students with minor disabilities.

But the task proved overwhelming to those with severe impairments, who could not operate the devices.

Instead, Hoa taught them the craft of making votive banknotes and items, which was then practiced in the neighborhood.

Several local teachers, in tune with Hoa’s benevolence, offered her a hand.

However, Hoa’s initiative was not without challenges.

As many of the students at the center forget what they learn almost immediately, it took Hoa a great deal of time to teach them things that seem simple to able-bodied people, let alone trades.

Starting 2009, Hoa let her students give it a try with paper rolling, the craft which turned out a perfect fit for students with different defects.

“They put their innocent thoughts into the paintings, postcards, and other handicraft items which they make with their own hands,” Hoa shared excitedly.

The children’s works delight visitors to the center who buy them as souvenirs and even make it to tourist complexes and the Old Quarter in downtown Hanoi.

Behind each handicraft item is a different life story.

Hai, 24, who has mental disability and speech impairment, says that art and life go together when he is working on the items, especially those that take more care and dexterity.

“Mother [Hoa] teaches us how to roll paper and other stuff,” Hai said.

“She is so kind-hearted. She really cares for me,” he added with a clear effort to articulate his words.

For Nguyen Lan Phuong, a 31-year-old woman with a mobility disability which can cause her to fall, it has been a long, difficult road to be where she is now.

Paper rolling is not the only craft taught at Hoa’s center.

Hoa added her students also know how to craft rattan items, with some learning office computer skills to get themselves ready for work at local businesses.

The ongoing outbreak of the coronavirus has added to Hoa’s concerns, as she temporarily cannot sell the students’ works to tourist complexes or the Old Quarter.

The woman, however, is positive the things that weigh on her mind will soon pass, as she always receives offers of aid from donors.

“It’s her lifelong calling, so I must be her companion," Tan said, adding they really miss their students whenever they return home for public holidays.

“It’s my greatest blessing to educate the kids and see how far they have gone,” Hoa said with her signature smile.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A cancer patient, the Vietnamese teacher Le Hoang Ngan launched the project We Can with the aim of helping others who are in the same boat.

Ngan, 32, has been forced to stop giving lectures these days to get treatment for her lung cancer.

Despite such an arduous situation, what Ngan has done becomes a source of energy for surrounding cancer patients.

Feeling pain personally

Ngan got an awful shock in 2019 when she received a diagnosis of stage 4 lung cancer. She was a teacher working at a high school in the central city of Da Nang at that time.

Ngan and her family struggled to overcome the most difficult period. The woman has learned to live with the disease and consider it as a part of her life now.

During the days of being treated at the oncology department of Da Nang Hospital, Ngan met with many cancer patients, with whom she could talk about various things.

“I found out cancer patients never think negatively or shed tears in front of others, they often laugh to suppress the pain and disease,” recalled Ngan.

“In contrast, many healthy people think that cancer patients want to be consoled, which turns out to be counterproductive."

But as a cancer patient herself, Ngan knows they still need more warm-hearted and subtle attention. Many cancer patients must deal with the physical and emotional effects of their problem for years afterward.

She envisioned an organization that could offer cancer patients what they are genuinely in need. And project We Can was officially started by Ngan in April 2020.

Ngan initiated the project with the smallest, simplest, and most practical things. She and some volunteers opened a class, Drawing Green Dreams, for pediatric cancer patients.

She talks about psychology and emotion while providing them with knowledge and mental support as well.

We Can has fueled cancer patients with energy, confidence, and hope during the past year thanks to meaningful activities conducted by Ngan and many volunteers.

Le Hoang Ngan speaks at an event of We Can in a supplied photo.

Learning to love themselves

As a woman in Vietnam, Ngan understands the importance of appearance to anyone, especially a female cancer patient who is in a course of treatment, which has often left negative side effects on her look.

Ngan holds a series of activities named We Shine in the hope of making female patients like her feel better and confident about themselves despite the treatment’s effects.

Taking part in the We Shine, female cancer patients who are treated by chemotherapy have a chance to learn to love themselves. They are showing the way to have a better look.

They receive the support of skin care products made from natural materials and get pieces of advice from make-up professionals. They can meet and exchange with other cancer patients, who share with them an enthusiastic love for life.

The initiative of We Shine, which has been held both in Da Nang City and Ho Chi Minh City, has attracted many patients to partake.

“The program [We Shine] has left a strong impression on me,” said Le Thi Kim, a cancer patient.

“I hope that other patients have opportunities to participate like me.

"As cancer patients, we all want to live, to be loved, to make ourselves as beautiful as others do; then to be more confident and live more positively."

Apart from helping the patients, We Can also has activities that are meant to support their children, who have suffered many difficulties because of their mothers' condition.

The gala We Sing is one of those activities meant to raise funds to help the poor patients’ children.

Along with cancer patients, both doctors and nurses in Da Nang Hospital sang many positive songs to inspire bright energy.

All the money raised from the gala was sent to a fund helping cancer patients.

The fund will help maintain activities that support the patients and contribute to a scholarship program providing aid for their offspring.

Talking about what she has done to help cancer patients, Nga rarely mentions obstacles despite running into a lot during the first days of running the We Can project.

“I know that there are always difficulties and challenges in life," she said.

"But we had better not focus on them.

"We should instead try to figure out more appropriate solutions."

People pose at an event of the We Shine initiative launched by We Can in a supplied photo.

Stopping treatment, starting again

During the last days of June, Ngan was in her sixth cycle of chemotherapy. Despite her weak body struggling with the side effects of the treatment, Ngan never forgot her responsibility to We Can.

As soon as she regained her senses, Ngan grabbed her mobile phone, checked information, exchanged with other members of We Can about their scholarship grant to help keep children’s dreams alive.

Forgetting about her painful condition, she coordinates everything online actively and smoothly.

We Can is in the final stage of accepting potential applications for the scholarship. They will review, verify, and choose the children who need to be helped out of their dire situations.

The project intends to give about 20 scholarships annually to children whose parents died from cancer or those whose parents are suffering from the final stage of cancer while their families are in poverty.

With a value of VND12 million (US$523) each, the scholarship will be invaluable help to these unfortunate children.

“I would like to promise to try my best to assure that We Can develop sustainably," Ngan told Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper.

"That means there are a growing number of cancer patients and their children would be supported to fight off the challenges and to move toward a better future."

Le Hoang Ngan in a supplied photo

The scholarship fund to keep children’s dreams alive has called for help from not only donors but also cancer patients. Nguyen Thi Thanh, 35, a cancer patient, decided to sell fruits on Facebook while she is taking treatment to contribute a small part to the scholarship fund. Thanh knew about We Can for the first time when she was treated at the oncology department of Da Nang Hospital. She spared an amount of VND1 million ($44) from the profit of selling fruits online to the scholarship fund.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Gone are the days when flowers were to be admired for a few days then end up in the trash bin. From the experience she gained during years of working as a domestic help in Thailand, Le Thi Viet has put her entire heart into her flower embalming business in Vietnam and elevated it to the greatest height.

At 63, Viet is determined flower embalming is the work she will do for the rest of her life in north-central Thanh Hoa Province.

With her dexterity, the woman has meticulously embalmed blossoms so they can stay fresh for a long time to be used as art.

Viet has spent the past ten years or so perfecting her craft, learning from nothing but her own trial and error.

In her home nestled in Trung Thanh Commune, Nong Cong District, the woman now runs a workshop where she and her staff craft and sell their ‘eternal’ flowers.

To embalm flowers, the leaves, stems, and petals are soaked separately for many hours in chemicals before being heated. After being processed, the blossoms can retain their brilliant colors for 15-20 years.

Artistically arranged in crystal-clear boxes or vases, the ‘eternal’ flowers make great gifts and are gaining in popularity.

Though flower embalming has been in vogue in other countries for years, the craft was an uncharted territory that beckoned to Viet when she first learned of it back in the early 2000s.

Dream blossoms to reality

In 2001, Viet left her poor neighborhood for Thailand, where she found day labor to relieve her family debts after their farming business failed.

She started out as a factory worker before working as domestic help and babysitter for Thai couples in Phuket.

Viet’s decision to make a foray into the flower embalming industry came during the time she provided services for a young businesswoman and her husband.

It was a chance encounter, she recalled.

Finding herself with little to do when the toddlers she nursed started kindergarten, she suggested the young Thai woman who employed her to find some alternative work so they could work on it together to kill time.

The Thai, who also ran a business of her own, came across the art of flower embalming in the media.

As Viet and her employer were both newbies to the trade, which originates in Japan and had yet to gain a foothold in Thailand back then, it took her a while to get good at preserving blossoms.

She first experimented with roses, but kept failing as the petals got rotten or did not turn the correct hue.

It took them countless attempts to preserve the flowers before the duo were finally successful.

The next challenge was arranging the processed flowers in glass vases, Viet recalled, adding each time she had to figure out what made her fail so that she would not make the same mistake again.

“We put our heads together over how to keep petals fresh for years and turn the items into something clients could not keep their eyes off,” she said.

With the flowers properly preserved and arranged, Viet was ready to craft them into artworks that would wow Thai enthusiasts.

The Vietnamese woman added that as an entrepreneur herself, her employer could easily find outlets for the novel products across Thailand.

As the business began to grow, Viet’s employer hired around 10 female workers, all of whom are Vietnamese, as Viet insisted, to meet surging demand.

Despite her employer’s insistence that she stay to take care of her children and the thriving flower embalming workshop, Viet decided to return to her home country as her five-year stay in Thailand came to an end.

Before she did so, she made sure the craft was passed on to the right person who was willing to make it an even greater success.

Viet has made several visits to her former employer afterward to consult her whenever trouble arises.

Being her own boss

In 2005, Viet returned to her hometown in Thanh Hoa Province, ready to put the ins and outs of the newly-acquired craft into full blossom.

Le Thi Viet (center) has passed on her flower embalming skills and provided jobs for local residents in Thanh Hoa Province, Vietnam. Photo: Tam Le / Tuoi Tre

After paying off her family’s debts, the woman staked a substantial part of her savings launching a start-up in flower embalming with support from her husband, a chance not many are willing to take at the age of 50.

Viet used thousands of petals from her own garden for her first embalmment efforts.

The hardest part though is not preserving the flowers. It is much more difficult to procure the needed preserving ingredients and crystal-clear vases to store the flowers, so she had to import them from Thailand and elsewhere.

As roses from her hometown have small-sized petals, she had to source supplies from Hanoi and later Da Lat City in the Central Highlands, known as the country’s ‘flower city.’

Embalming flowers is also a time- and energy-consuming process.

The meticulous steps range from choosing high-quality flowers, putting them into a box which contains a special kind of sand and covering the box for seven days, to artistically placing the flowers in glass vases, Viet explained.

According to this seasoned craftswoman, the lid to the glass vases, which are tailored for a perfect fit, must be put on immediately and sealed off tightly with clean glue to keep the inside vacuum.

She felt the pressure with the price of her products, however.

All the efforts she and her husband put in and imported materials pushed the prices beyond the reach of most average residents in her hometown.

Her workshop, with five staff members, primarily procures items priced at several hundred dong to a few million dong (VND1 million = US$43) apiece.

All the customers noticed was the price tag and dismissed her finest products as overpriced.

The senior woman persevered in her chosen path, as “only by hard work can we overcome the obstacles.”

Her first batch of products finally made it to customers in 2008 and sales have been steadily on the rise on Women’s Days and Lunar New Year holidays.

Viet’s workshop has now achieved enough success that she is able to support herself and provides jobs for some locals.

“I’ve been with Viet for five years now. The workload is much lighter and the job earns me more compared to that of a footwear factory worker,” said Le Thi Hue, one of Viet’s fellow villagers, who added she earns VND150,000 ($6.5) for an eight-hour working day at the workshop.

Through years of diligence and creativity, the enterprising woman has extended her reach to outlets in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City and other provinces.

Orders come in from across the nation, with some willing to go for any price for their order of 100 embalmed roses crafted into a heart shape.

Some even asked Viet to embalm lotuses, a task which poses a new challenge.

Though she has tried her hands at roses, orchids and daisies only, Viet is confident she will succeed in preserving lotuses.

For the future, Viet, who previously worked as a grassroots agriculture officer in her youth, plans to expand production and pass on the baton to young people.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After a month of social distancing to deal with the fourth COVID-19 outbreak put many residents of Ho Chi Minh City out of work, some are scraping by without an income while job market prospects remain tenuous.

Cooped up with the trapped summer heat inside a 15-square-meter rented room in Tan Phu District of Ho Chi Minh City, 28-year-old Dang Thi Ly just got off a phone call with her two sons in her hometown northern Hai Duong Province.

She let out a deep sigh, obsessed with how to pay her kids' tuition.

Not many options seem to be left for Ly, as she lost her job at a garment factory in early June, when social distancing measures were reintroduced in Ho Chi Minh City to combat an upsurge of new COVID-19 cases.

Ly and her husband Le Van Khanh just moved to Ho Chi Minh City for work in April. After landing a job at a factory in Go Vap District, she only got to work there for two months before the facility was put on lockdown following the detection of a coronavirus case.

“As the orders were terminated, the company had to lay off personnel, so I lost my job in early June,” she recalled.

With VND6 million (US$262) of salary in hand, she had to impart half of the amount to pay her sons’ tuition, which left her with only VND3 million ($131) for rent, food, and savings in the upcoming days.

Meanwhile, her husband Khanh has managed to keep his job at Tan Thuan Export Processing Zone in District 7, but as his firm spaces out workers on the premises to ensure social distancing, he had no choice but to work less hours with a rotating schedule.

Khanh is looking to moonlight as a ride-hailing driver at night, which Ly is not fond of as she thinks her husband works hard enough.

With a shrunken budget, the couple must cut all expenses to the bone.

“I bought a box of ramen noodles and live off it these days," she said.

"I only afford meat and fish for my husband every few days, as he needs protein to be able to work.

“I have to keep the cost for books and uniforms for my kids in mind, as they are about to enter a new school year.”

Ly said she will look for a new job once the epidemic wanes, as no one seems to be hiring these days.

Her situation is not by any means an anecdotal case: around 230,000 informal workers in Ho Chi Minh City have suffered from income cutbacks or job losses due to the pandemic, according to statistics from the Ho Chi Minh City Department for Labor, War Invalids, and Social Affairs.

The story is the same at Nguyen Thanh Hai’s household from Binh Thanh District, for they are scrambling to make a living during this health crisis.

A worker in the hospitality industry, Hai has been put out of work multiple times in the past year as the pandemic placed the whole sector in shambles, forcing hotels to close en masse.

He then had to switch to work as a driver for ride-hailing apps and food delivery services to eke out a living, as the job is one of the few that seem to stay lucrative during the social distancing period.

“The job is taxing, but I can’t quit as I still have two months of rent, food expenses, plus schooling costs for my little brother, and more to pay,” Hai said before leaving promptly for a new order that the app just picked up for him.

Sitting in a rented room on Tan Ky Tan Quy Street in Binh Tan District, Tran Van Bay and his wife are yearning for the situation to return to normal.

“I wait tables for a diner, but it has been closed for months, leaving me with no income,“ Bay’s wife revealed.

“We now depend on Bay’s job at a nail manufacturing workshop, but it only pays him VND4 million [$175] a month. How can a family of three, plus our dependent parents, live off that?”

Bay is looking for more jobs to cover the family’s bills, but the prospect seems bleak.

“Picking up gigs at the moment seems harder than picking up money on the street," he lamented.

"No one seems to hire these days.”

A lottery ticket seller receives a food package from a benefactor in Ho Chi Minh City. Photo: Dieu Qui / Tuoi Tre

Street vendors’ blues

As public parks have been shut down and foot traffic on the streets has also drastically shriveled, the livelihoods of street vendors are in jeopardy.

Nguyen Thi Phan, 39, a street vendor from Hanoi who peddles near Tam Vu Street in Binh Thanh District, said she suffers more during this outbreak compared to the previous.

“In normal times, I can make hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese dong [VND100,000 = $4.3] selling food and drinks to strollers in the park from 5:00 pm to 12:00 am,” she said.

“For now, there are more sellers than buyers, which makes the business much less lucrative.”

Phan’s husband, who is a street peddler, has stayed home for over a month due to poor sales, turning her the sole breadwinner of the family.

She now has to cover the expenses, including rent, groceries, money owed to suppliers, and a sum to support her three children back at home, all by herself.

Also facing difficulties is a fruit stall on the side of Tran Van Giau Street in Binh Tan District -- the source of Ly Thi Ha and her husband’s daily income.

Once turning enough profit for the family, the stall is no longer selling well as the nearby Pouyuen factory -- where most of its customers come from -- was shuttered following the detection of a COVID-19 cluster.

Ha cannot switch to selling in local markets as they were closed pursuant to the social distancing mandate.

“I can only push the cart to the streets and hope for the best," Ha said.

"It’s better than lying flat at home.”

The family of two now has to cap their food spending at VND50,000 ($2) per day.

Nevertheless, they are still expected to send money back to Ha’s parents, who are looking after their child in southern Kien Giang Province.

“I have sold my only gold ring to make it through this month,” Ha professed.

“I don’t know if I can pull through when the situation drags out any longer.”

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Despite fresh water supplies from water plants, people in Hoi An Ancient Town still cherish the habit of drinking from an ancient well. The well water sellers, therefore, have made a living for decades.

In Hoi An Ancient Town – a popular tourist destination in central Vietnam's Quang Nam Province – selling well water is a recognized occupation and many people have pursued this job.

The only source – the Ba Le ancient well – has a special appeal to local people.

It has provided a clean water supply for household consumption and culinary practices.

The well has been around and never dried since the 10th century.

Selling water from a well

The streets of Hoi An Ancient Town are unusually quiet due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

But the silence was disrupted by the sound of walking feet coming from a ragged old man who was carrying water along the lines of vintage houses.

“Who wants some Ba Le well water?” he cried.

A wooden window on Nguyen Thai Hoc Street creaked open. A female voice came out, “I want some.”

Nguyen Thi Thu Trang, the buyer, said that for decades, her family have used this water source for cooking, especially for preparing local specialty dishes like cao lau and mi Quang, both of which are noodle courses.

Despite the prevalence of clean fresh water from water plants, Hoi An residents cannot part with the Ba Le well.

According to Trang, her two major ‘contractors’ for the well water are Nguyen Quoc, who lives in the old town, and Huynh Ngoc Noi, who resides across the river in Commune 3, Duy Vinh Ward, Duy Xuyen District, Quang Nam Province.

Four decades of hard work

At around 8:00 am, the 10-square-meter area of the Ba Le ancient well was occupied by a single man – Noi – on a shabby bicycle with two large plastic baskets hanging on the backseat.

He parked his bicycle right next to the well and quickly cleaned up the space around there, which was filled with leaves and dirt, using a tiny broom he picked from a nearby corner.

This 54-year-old water transporter has remained loyal to this job for 41 years, serving only the people in the old town.

Noi considers the well as his livelihood for life. For decades, he has not had a single day off.

The man was adopted by a woman who lives across the Thu Bon River when he was a child.

His foster mother used to be a well water seller, and Noi dabbled his feet in at age 13.

He has been on the job ever since.

Hoi An Ancient Town is tiny. The farthest anyone can get within its scope is under two kilometers. Therefore, Noi knows every single person here and he himself is rather well known.

From his jacket pocket, he revealed a list of the restaurants and households that he frequents each day.

For decades, these have been his stopovers. He knows like the back of his hand all the family members of these places, but has to keep a written record in case money disputes arise.

Most of the time, Noi gets paid right on the dot, but many household owners cannot pay in cash upon delivery, so their payments are made at the end of the month.

To get the water up from the well, he uses a bucket attached to a long string placed over the well, which is around 10 meters deep.

The clean and fresh water goes straight through a fabric sieve at the tip of the two water cans on his bicycle.

Once the cans have been filled to capacity, he embarks on this delivery trips.

His decades of hard work transporting water has kept his family fed.

Although the manual labor is tough and the old man might physically snap along the way, the remuneration is minimal in comparison.

For every 40 liters of water, which is the volume of one can, Noi gets VND5,000 (US$0.22). For every turn, he makes VND10,000 ($0.44) from delivering two full cans of water.

During this pandemic, this job has helped his family so much.

Noi believes that selling well water this way is still much less physically demanding than being a construction worker or a xe om driver.

Besides the two water cans, Noi’s bicycle is another essential tool.

Huynh Ngoc Noi transports two cans of well water to his customers in Hoi An, Quang Nam Province, Vietnam on a daily basis. Photo: B.D. / Tuoi Tre

It was bought when he was 27 years old. Before that, he had been walking with the cans of water balanced from a peg on his shoulders.

With enough money, he purchased an old made-in-France bicycle and has stuck to it ever since.

The bicycle is half his age.

“It is too old. It shrieks with every pedaling. It breaks down all the time. But whatever is broken, I will fix it,” Noi said.

“Now there is only the frame left, but it’s not really very sturdy.

"There are cracks here and there.

"I’ve had them repaired a few times.

“I take it to the repair shop whenever there’s a new crack somewhere, and I apply some paint on it to prevent rust.”

Following in his father’s footsteps

In 2014, the Vietnam Record Association recognized the longest-living well water seller in Vietnam, Nguyen Duong, who passed away in 2019 at the age of 90.

This man was on the job from 1975 to 2018.

After his father died, Nguyen Quoc followed in his footsteps and kept this service alive.

Quoc has 15 families and restaurants as his customers.

The job takes him around half a morning and earns him roughly VND100,000 ($4.36).

Quoc spends the rest of the day at home while his wife goes to work.

Their children have become financially independent, so the money they make is basically enough.

According to him, tourism in Hoi An before COVID-19 struck was in blossom, so his service was quite in demand.

For days he pulled out all the stops and earned a few hundred thousand dong (around $10-20).

Due to the pandemic, however, only about 10 households are using his service on a daily basis.

The buyers sometimes offer him a small tip as they empathize with his difficult life.

As the earnings from this work are too low, there are only a few well water sellers left, some of whom are temporary workers.

Certain sellers have even upgraded their capacity with a large container attached on their motorbike in order to serve ‘bigger’ customers.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Phan Minh Quy, a physically disabled resident from Ninh Binh Province, Vietnam, is uplifting his local community by providing jobs and skills training for those with special needs.

Quy has dedicated much of his lift to helping people with disabilities improve their quality of life through employment and social integration.

In addition to serving as the deputy director of the province’s Vocational Training, Job Development, and Support Center for the Disabled, the 31-yar-old social entrepreneur also runs a textile factory where he provides employment for 12 disabled employees.

First steps

As a baby, Quy came down with a fever that left him with partial paralysis and the inability to walk. As a result, the first nine years of his life were spent crawling.

His parents visited dozens of major hospitals trying to find him help, but their search was in vain.

Because of his disability, he did not start school until her turned nine.

Shortly after, his parents found an experienced doctor who was able to perform a surgery that enabled him to regain some of his mobility.

At the age of 10, he took his first steps.

“When I first learned how to walk, I was so shaky that I’d fall over from the slightest touch,” Quy recalled.

“I often suffered leg contractures and had to put a sack of sand beneath my legs to stretch them.”

Part of Quy’s routine to keep his legs working included regular therapy and weight lifting.

Quy dropped out of school after finishing the ninth grade and soon began looking for work in order to provide for himself.

At 19 years old, with just VND500,000 (US$22) to his name, he left his hometown in Ninh Binh Province for Nam Dinh Province, approximately 32 kilometers away, to work in industrial processing zones but was consistently denied work due to his pronounced limp.

Eventually, he landed a job as a painter at a decorative wood workshop.

It did not take long before Quy realized that working as a day laborer did not provide a stable income.

He returned to his hometown where he learned how to sew at a textile vocation workshop for physically challenged people.

What Quy found most challenging about the learning process was using his feeble feet to operate the pedal sewing machine.

It took him six months to master the machine and make his first shirt – a keepsake he still holds on to.

Eager to find a decent-paying job, the young man again found himself struggling in a job market that felt prejudiced against people like him.

Despite his skills, his applications were all turned down due to his disability.

“My parents would tell me to stay home. They said I couldn’t become somebody,” he shared.

“My parents can provide for me while they are still around, but what about after they’re gone?

"I knew I needed to give it my all and stand on my own feet to protect my future.”

Luck finally smiled on him when he landed a job at a Korean garment enterprise.

After working at the company for two years, Quy found a job at an even larger business where he was able to prove his capacity and gain experience in the textile industry.

A man on a mission

According to Quy, even in 2021, the job market is staked against disabled people.

“How can such a man be good at his work?” and “How on earth could we employ such a man?” are just a few of the comments he has faced.

Hoping to change the narrative, Quy is determined to help his community earn fair treatment in a job market that often works against it.

Quy got his chance to make a difference when a friend offered to help him launch a garment workshop where he could provide training and employment for those with special needs.

With an initial investment of VND800 million ($34,700) he scraped up from his own and his family’s savings, Quy put his workshop into operation last October, well aware the outbreaks of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic within the country in 2020 could badly hurt his business.

“Looking back at what I’ve been through, I’m set on providing training and stable jobs to people with disabilities,” he said.

The workers at Quy’s workshop, both disabled and able-bodied, earn VND4.5-7 million ($195- 303) each month.

Among them is Mai, a hearing- and speaking-impaired 20-year-old, who cannot read or write and has never ventured out of her neighborhood.

After just a few months, she was able to transform from a shy girl to a skilled worker who can churn out products with ease.

Since its launch in October 2020, during a year which saw many textile and garment enterprises make large numbers of workers redundant to cope with the COVID-19 impacts, Quy’s business has found itself a group of loyal customers and a steady flow of orders from now until the year’s end.

Looking at what he has been achieving so far, he modestly said there is room for improvement.

For his future plans, the young man hopes to work with more members of the physically challenged community to help them achieve self-empowerment.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In Vietnam, it is extremely rare for a woman to choose to become a mechanic, let alone a mechanic working on an ocean liner, so Hua Nguyen Hoai Thuong’s story catches everyone’s attention.

“Men usually go with each other on ocean voyages, while Thuong is working alone at sea,” Thuong recited old folk poetry to describe her work as a mechanic on an ocean liner traveling around the world.

“When I was a child, I had a boat powered by an AAA battery that was made by my brother.

"He and I often played with the boat in the afternoon in a river behind our house, where I began dreaming of becoming a mechanic in the future."

The only female ship mechanic

Thuong, 23, is currently working for Truong Phat Loc Shipping JSC based in Ho Chi Minh City. She is the only woman who works on the company’s ocean trips.

“There have not been many female ship mechanics, only two so far,” general director Le Minh Dung said, adding that one of them is working on an international liner.

Having a special love for ships during her childhood, Thuong found out she was really interested in the engine room on huge vessels when she studied at the Ho Chi Minh City University of Transport.

Despite understanding that ocean liner voyages can last many months or even a year, she was determined to become a seafarer.

“I feel like being challenged in the engine room operating a ship," said the young female technician.

"I dream of traveling around the world while taking the job as well.”

The woman has taken the duty as a mechanic on a ship for less than a year. Thuong is working on an international voyage these days to transport goods for her company’s business partners.

Every day, she has a morning meeting that usually lasts 30 minutes with other co-workers. The chief engineer will control the meeting while the second engineer will point out the duties for each crew member during the day.

After discussing potential obstacles relating to the duties as well as finding solutions to them, each sailor will try to finish their own work.

Thuong will never forget the happiness of working as an official mechanic on the first day on the ship.

“I have served my internship many times before having a chance to work officially in the position,” shared Thuong.

“I have to learn how to use support tools, how to control the technical equipment in the engine room, and how to fix a problem when it occurs."

Despite taking a lot of training classes before working on a ship, Thuong felt unavoidably nervous.

Thanks to working directly with technical systems and equipment, the young mechanic feels more confident with the passing of time.

“I remember how extremely happy I felt when I could operate the waste burning system on the ship for the first time.

"It was beyond all words."

Hua Nguyen Hoai Thuong operates an oven to burn garbage on the ship. Photo: Thy Hue / Tuoi Tre

'It is not arduous work'

Working as a mechanic to Thuong is not a tough duty. In contrast, she feels so proud of herself to live day by day with her passion for contributing to the ship’s safety in voyages.

“I really cannot remember how many enjoyable moments that I have had while working on the ship," Thuong said.

"I am asked to do tasks suitable to my strength and always to be instructed by older co-workers.

“Because of my young age, I am considered as a little sister on the ship by everybody.

"I always get the love from them."

There is a popular myth that scares many women from choosing a career as a sailor. They are told that working on a vessel can cause infertility.

Like many other women, Thuong knows about this before deciding to become a seafarer.

“From my experience, I think that we can be affected badly by the work when we don’t comply with established guidelines,” she said.

“For example, we may fail to wear personal protective suits when exposed to chemicals or any equipment on board.

"You will not run into any health problems if you meet all safety standards."

As Thuong’s current instructor, chief mechanic Pham Ngoc Anh gave incredibly positive feedback about his subordinate.

“Thuong has put a lot of effort into the work," said Anh.

"She is quick in both gaining knowledge and putting it into practice at work.

“She is friendly with everyone and she is working as well as other peer male co-workers."

Thuong intends to study more to become a senior engineer in the future.

She will try her best to achieve this goal, which will be a crucial step that would keep her career growing.

According to Le Minh Dung, female mechanics have difficulty getting a certificate of technical capability from the Vietnamese marine administration despite the job being recognized by the 2019 Labor Code.

Currently, Thuong works as a staff with certificates of basic training issued by the Ho Chi Minh City University of Transport in lifesaving, fire extinguishing, first aid, and safety situations.

She will be able to get an official position on board only when she has a certificate of technical capability.

That is why Thuong has not been added to the list of on-duty staff on the ship.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nguyen No, a 36-year-old engineer in Nghia Hanh District, central coastal province of Quang Ngai, has embarked on an intellectual adventure with bigger dreams of creating machines and tools which offer local farmers helping hands.

Countryside living has a huge draw, yet not many people have high-paid jobs in cities to pour their heart and soul into developing new gadgets for farmers.

Humble product

“Doing it for my passion” is No’s response to people’s question of why he gave up his job at an international firm after a decade. The decision was a huge shock to No’s colleagues, friends and family. Only his wife supported him wholeheartedly.

“I told her that grilling rice paper – Quang Ngai Province’s renowned speciality – was hard work so I would build a rice paper grilling machine.

I had worked on the project for a long time, mostly after office hours,” said No.

“If you earned no money, I could still support the family,” his wife said, which became the motivation for him to pursue the development of a new gadget.

No researched alternatives for coal and went to South Korea to buy infrared emitters.

A controller was also developed to help users adjust temperature easily. That was how he created the 4M multifunctional griller.

“I started working on it in 2014 and completed it in 2017. In that year, I quit my job to bring the machine to every rice paper making household, asking them to use it and give comments,” he recalled.

“It was hard.”

No said he chose to start with a rice paper griller as he was unable to research something too big and complicated. He wanted to create daily tools and gadgets that make people’s lives much easier.

“When I was a child, I was amazed by a double-edged plowshare that my neighbor developed which helped farmers turn up the earth of paddy fields much quicker. The rice paper griller shares the same mission to reduce cost, time and labor expenses as well as replace coal with an eco-friendly alternative,” he said.

His machine has a remarkable productivity of grilling 200 rice paper sheets in an hour at VND10,000 (US$0.43).

Meanwhile, with the same amount of rice paper, two workers have to grill continuously in four hours, not to mention the coal cost of VND60,000 ($2.61).

The significant advantage of his grillers brought orders from all over Vietnam. Behind a simple product is a long journey of trials and errors.

Bigger plans

According to No, it is getting easier for young people to start up their own businesses and bring products from rural areas to bigger markets.

However, without efforts to improve, products will soon fail to satisfy users’ demands and get replaced by better ones.

“To me, the strongest rival is the one remaining in the dark as I do not know how good they are or when they will release products that directly compete with mine,” said No.

“I always remind my workers to never stop creating. By stopping thinking how we can do better, we kill our business from inside,” he added.

From a humble rice paper griller, No’s company now offers nine other commercial products including food dryer, meat griller and rice paper cutting machine.

He also has his own team of seven young people. Their monthly salaries range from VND7 to VND15 million ($304 to 652) – sufficient to cover their countryside lives and turn ideas into products.

No envisions his business in the next ten years. He said he never wished to win a lottery, just always wanted to see an idea spark.

Wealth is not No’s goal but products that can help a lot of people. No’s creations had received several national-level awards for their high applicability and good quality.

He is now working on a new project whose details have yet to be revealed.

“Universal and eco-friendly” – that was how No described the product he is nurturing.

“I have ten years for an invention of my life. If I cannot make it come true, it will be a failure,” he said.

“As when I gave up on my job at the former company, my life goals changed. I stopped trying to make as much money as possible, instead, I devoted myself to creating new products,” he said.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@She is known as a 'steel rose' of Vietnam’s southern seas. Breaking down the long-held belief that women bring bad luck for voyages, she commands an all-men fishing crew.

She is Nguyen Thi Phuong, 50, from Tan An Commune, Ngoc Hien District, located in the southernmost Vietnamese province of Ca Mau.

Amidst indistinguishable voices blending in a walkie-talkie of a fishing boat bobbing on the sea, a woman’s voice cut through. She asked whether they could catch any big fish and need any help.

Fishermen told her about the boat’s conditions as well as the updated market prices of fish and squids.

“It is big sister Phuong. For this trip, she heads to Hon Khoai Island. She cares for us very much. There are not many fisherwomen like her,” said a helmsman.

Rach Goc is one of Ca Mau Province’s three biggest estuaries. From the center of Ngoc Hien, water flows through mangrove forests to the southern part of the East Vietnam Sea, bringing fishing crews from Binh Dinh, Phu Yen, Ben Tre, and Kien Giang to the country’s richest fishing ground.

For every tide, there are hundreds of ships going in and out Rach Goc Estuary to sell seafood and prepare for the next trip.

Hua Minh Quang, head of Tan An Commune Women’s Union, said the local sea was home to fierce women. Among all, Nguyen Thi Phuong is the most respected, not only because she embraces credibility but also dares to sail a ship.

After the devastating storm Linda in 1997, many ships never returned. The rest were severely damaged. The southern fishing grounds witnessed a fall in the number of fishing boats.

At the time, Phuong rowed a wooden boat through mangrove forests to buy shrimps and fish from farms to retail at the district market. After her husband’s death, Phuong became the family’s breadwinner.

The small business earned little profit while the competition among fish traders was fierce. In 2007, Phuong withdrew and opened her own kiosk at the market. Her suppliers were mostly off-shore fishing crews.

She was favored by them for being generous and kind. Thanks to good word of mouth, more and more fishing crews started to save their best catches to sell to Phuong.

However, due to the distance and sluggish traffic, seafood delivered from Rach Goc Estuary turned bad when it reached wholesale markets and restaurants.

In 2017, when a section of Ho Chi Minh Highway connecting Ca Mau Province’s Nam Can District to Dat Mui Commune across Rach Goc was opened, the market for Rach Goc seafood was unlocked.

“I have to buy seafood right after the catch, preserving and delivering it right away to consumers for the highest possible prices,” recalled Phuong.

She asked for advice from veteran fishermen to build her own boat in order to procure seafood offshore and provide fuel for fishing ships.

She finally acquired a ship equipped with all necessary equipment for a voyage of hundreds of nautical miles. However, who would ride it was another question.

Phuong needed someone who knew the sea well enough to avoid entering neighboring countries’ seas. The daily pay of VND500,000 (US$22) was not enough to attract a professional helmsman.

She decided to operate the ship by herself as a result.

Nguyen Thi Phuong waves at a fisherman. She is loved by her fellows. Photo: Huynh Lam / Tuoi Tre

A 'steel rose'

Fishermen believe that letting women board their ships before departure will bring bad luck.

In Phuong’s case, she is the commander, knowing stormy days are real challenges for even professional helmsmen who call the seas their homes.

Following her are seven men.

Together they sail to waters around the islands of Con Dao, Bai Can, Nam Du or Phu Quoc, no matter how the weather is, following good catches.

“My first trips were arduous," she said.

"I could buy nothing then.

"However, I refused to buy seafood from illegal fishing boats.

"Border guard and seafood resource protecting forces showed me which fishermen I could rely on.

“That helped a lot. I could buy fresh, legally caught, and well preserved seafood.

"They, conversely, had enough fuel and food for long-day trips without returning to the shore.”

As Phuong got used to the sea, her companions started leaving.

They prefer working on fishing boats to share profits to receiving fixed wages from her.

With fewer crew members, she still can manage a 30-ton ship, riding dozens of nautical miles to receive and deliver fresh catches to the shore.

Phuong said she feels most worried when the night falls.

“It is dangerous," she said.

"Only me and the angry sea, how can I overcome it?

"There is a fight within me to become a stronger human being and to dare to conquer storms and waves.

“In fishing grounds, there are all men.

"I have to be always on my game."

After graduating from college, Phuong’s two daughters returned to Rach Goc District to assist her business.

“They motivate me, making me feel safe whenever I go offshore,” she said.

Phuong is now one of the most well-known seafood traders in Vietnam's southern fishing grounds.

A decade of sailing a ship makes Phuong a stronger woman, more than ever.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bui Thi Nhat Le is one of just a few Vietnamese female boxing referees to earn one-star certification from the International Boxing Association (AIBA), and her story is one of dedication and perseverance.

Le, 27, was a professional boxer for several years before embarking on a career in pharmacology. But even after hanging up her boxing gloves, she could not stay away from the sport.

It did not take long before she found herself back in the ring, but not as a fighter, as a referee.

Le is not very big, but she still manages to stand out amidst the blood, sweat, and tears in the ring.

Social media was ablaze when viewers tuned into the live stream of Vietnam’s first amateur mixed martial arts (MMA) tournament last December and spotted her officiating boxing, kickboxing, and Muay Thai matches throughout the night.

It might come as no surprise that she was the only female referee officiating that evening.

“Despite being a friendly competition, the event hosted a few fights between top-notch martial artists from across the country. There was a lot of pressure on us referees,” Le shared.

“I was constantly on the move, trying to keep pace with the fighters. I was so nervous about making a bad call that I even did my best not to blink.”

A new career

In a former life, Le was a boxer, kickboxer, and Muay Thai fighter, carving out a career for herself a professional boxer for a team representing Quang Ngai Province.

Despite her hard work, she never quite broke away from the pack. Her best tournament finish during her career medal was a single silver medal.

Eventually, Le decided that a different career would be her best bet at building a secure future for herself and she decided to hang up her gloves and began a career as a pharmacist working for a hospital in Ho Chi Minh City.

But she did not last long in her new career. The call of the ring was too tempting to ignore.

She soon quit her job and, from 2015 to 2018, enrolled in referee courses. Upon graduation, she began officiating at the Vietnam Boxing Federation (VBF) and eventually beat out nearly 60 of her colleagues to earn a spot amongst Vietnam’s 40 national boxing referees.

In late 2018, she earned a one-star referee certification from AIBA – one of very few Vietnamese women to achieve such an accomplishment.

Bui Thi Nhat Le (center) officiates a match at the Open International Boxing Tournament, also known as the 2019 Victory 8. Photo: Hoang Tung / Tuoi Tre

As an AIBA referee, Le started at the bottom, first spending three years working as a commentator, time referee, and judge, before being promoted to a main ring referee.

“[Working] outside the ring allowed me to learn and gain enough experience for my current job [as a ring referee],” she said.

Strenuous, stressful job

Vuong Trong Nghia, one of Le’s male colleagues and an AIBA three-star referee, shared that females are few and far between in the sport.

“You don’t come by female fighters every day, and female referees are even rarer,” he said.

“It’s impossible to stick to this job unless you have passion and perseverance. As referees, we get our fair share of negative reactions and criticism.”

A common difficulty for boxing referees is facing protest from losing athletes and their coaches who feel they have been cheated out of a win by poor calls.

When accusations of favoring and bias get tossed around, it takes physically and mentally strong referees to deal with it.

Fortunately, Le is up to the task.

“There was one match where as soon as the referee blew the whistle, the losing side rushed to the referees and judges. They threw the referees’ desk and threatened to penalize us for what they called ‘unfair decisions’,” she recalled.

After such situations, the team of referees who officiated the match typically hold a working session with their supervisors to review recordings each call.

“We [referees] still have to deal with criticism even after inspectors announce the final decision,” Le explained.

Le also noted the difficulty in catching fighters purposely violating rules and attempting to hide their actions from the refs.

“A rule-violating strike into an opponent’s genitals can immediately turn the tables. Offending boxers tend to make use of referees’ ‘blind spot’ or a three-second break as a way of trying to get us to make inappropriate decisions,” she explained.

According to Nguyen Van Hien, VBF’s deputy general, Vietnam currently has a shortage of boxing referees.

As stipulated by AIBA, a referee must rest for two matches following each match they officiate.

In Vietnam, that is sometimes not possible.

“At several boxing tournaments, referees have had to officiate several consecutive matches,” he added.

Hien also pointed to VBF’s current inability to adopt incentive policies for boxing referees compared to their counterparts in other sports areas.

Another hurdle, Hien said, is that AIBA-recognized referees have their certificates revoked if they remain professionally inactive for four years.

To strike a balance between earning a living and fulfilling her dream of being on the ring, Le also works as an amateur boxing instructor and a retail and wholesale rice seller.

“I’m quite impressed with Le’s performance. Take the Victory 8 Tournament in 2019 for example. She judged the match confidently amid overwhelming commotion and lighting effects,” said Nguyen Van Hien, VBF’s deputy general referee. “Le is also very enthusiastic, well qualified, and decisive.” Hien also noted Le’s work at a Ho Chi Minh City Young Boxing Tournament in 2020, sharing that she made the difficult decision to send an athlete out of the ring after he and his coach hit her.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Born in a village in the central Da Nang City, Nguyen Khac Ly’s success in the hair industry is an inspiration for his neighbors and friends.

But while many people look at Ly and simply see an entrepreneur, those who know him well understand the difficulties he faced during his rise to the top.

From apprentice to afficionado

After finishing high school, Ly found himself at a dead end. His grades were not good enough for college and he simply did not have the money or know-how to start his own business.

As a result, he found himself eking out a living by collecting and selling acacia bark.

At home, his family began pressuring him to learn a trade.

“The only two feasible options my son had to earn decent money were barbering or sculpting,” said Nguyen Thi Nga, Ly’s mother.

“My son isn’t very big, so we didn’t want him to do anything too physically demanding.”

At the end of 2014, Ly found a barbershop in Da Nang that was willing to take him on as an apprentice, but he soon became frustrated by the unpredictable earnings and dated hairstyles.

He decided to go his own way.

“I searched the internet for trending hair styles and taught myself more about Western barber styles,” he said.

“No one in Vietnam was doing that. I knew if I mastered the [western] techniques, I could make a name for myself.”

Soon, Ly was spending all his time cutting wigs using YouTube as his teacher.

“I thought he was in love,” his mother said, “but it turned out he was just watching haircut videos in the dark.”

The road to success

Ly eventually graduated from wigs to real people, using his friends and the kids in his village as ‘guinea pigs’ to try out new techniques.

Before long, he opened his own barbershop in the middle of his village and began showcasing his work on Western-style barber social media groups.

In 2015, his work soon caught the eye of a local fashion expert who encouraged him to sign up for a two-year vocational training program in Hanoi.

After that, it was time for Ly to set out on his own.

“I had just VND5 million [US$217] at the time, but I took a risk and invested VND200 million [$8,688] in a new shop,” he said.

“I was able to earn about VND180 million [$7,820] by offering training to applicants I found on hairstyle internet forums.

“I used that money to rent a place on Nguyen Khac Can Street. Six months later, the training program ended and I had my first team of barbers.”

As time went on, Ly’s reputation grew and grew. He soon caught the attention of social media users in other countries and was invited overseas to showcase hair styles on television talk shows.

He was also chosen as a technician and trainer for an American hair trimmer and asked to travel around the world presenting barbering techniques.

During this time, he expanded his barbershop franchise to Da Nang and began accumulating thousands of followers on Facebook.

To date, he has successfully trained 350 people and hosted thousands at his various training sessions and workshops.

Serving celebrities

Ly has had dozens of celebrities sit in his chair.

Notably, the Vietnam’s National Football Team had him visit their hotel to give haircuts ahead of their World Cup 2022 qualifying matches.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In 2015, Thao was able to sell enough handmade accessories like bracelets and various pieces of jewelry to cover her tuition instead of asking her parents for it
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From the outside, it may seem that Ho Chi Minh City is a gridlock of two-wheeled vehicles; however, logical designing and cultural respect have created one of the better traffic systems in the world
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From the outside, it may seem that Ho Chi Minh City is a gridlock of two-wheeled vehicles; however, logical designing and cultural respect have created one of the better traffic systems in the world
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The ITU Virtual Digital World 2020, an event co-organized by Vietnam’s Ministry of Information and Communications and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), kicked off on Tuesday evening.

Themed ‘Building A Digital World. Together,’ the three-day online event brings together more than 50 ITU member countries.

The technological foundation used during the event was developed by Vietnam's military-run Viettel telecom group.

In his opening remarks, Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister Vu Duc Dam said the Vietnamese government has paid attention to telecommunication infrastructure development and considered IT one of the top priorities.

Digital transformation has been regarded as a crucial solution for helping the country develop more rapidly and sustainably, Dam added.

The deputy PM reiterated the Vietnamese government’s commitments to supporting and coordinating with the ITU and its member countries in building a digital world for peace, cooperation, and prosperity.

Minister of Information and Communications Nguyen Manh Hung said Vietnam’s digital infrastructure is now ready for a digital-based economy and society.

Delegates attend the ITU Virtual Digital World 2020 in Hanoi on October 20, 2020. Photo: Le Son / Tuoi Tre

Vietnamese technologies not only deal with domestic but also global issues, the minister said, adding that the country is striving to make technology a driver of development and global cooperation.

ITU Secretary General Houlin Zhao said Vietnam is an important partner in many markets in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean region, which has made the nation become a bright example in IT development to many other developing countries.

ITU is a United Nations specialized agency for information and communication technologies.

The first ITU telecom event was held in 1971. Since its 40th anniversary in 2011, the event has been held on an annual basis in a different location worldwide.

The 2020 edition is named ITU Digital World and takes place online from October 20 to 22.

The ITU Digital World 2021 will be back in its usual form in Hanoi in October next year.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A golf tournament aimed at supporting Vietnamese start-ups first organized by Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper last year is set to return for the second edition this September.

‘Golf Tournament for Start-up 2020’ is meant to support start-ups in the beginning period of their business by helping to connect young entrepreneurs with seasoned and successful business people.

During the tourney, which will be launched on September 18, the organizers will also present awards to the most excellent entrepreneurs of the start-up community.

Excited to participate

Many entrepreneurs, who are experienced golfers, are excited to take part in this year's competition. In their opinion, the tournament will give them a chance to both play golf and help the upcoming generation of business people.

“I appreciate Tuoi Tre for holding such a golf competition to promote start-ups and help experienced entrepreneurs have another approach to supporting them,” said Le Hai Binh, founder and chairman of the IT services company Mat Bao Group, who is also a golfer taking part in the tournament.

“The competition will provide young entrepreneurs with opportunities to meet with their potential investors among the golfers who participate in the tournament."

The competitors interviewed by Tuoi Tre applauded the paper's idea to create ‘a playground’ for start-up owners.

Meeting with other entrepreneurs on the golf course is certain to bring a different vibe than traditional environments like offices or working space, and may help generate stronger bonds between the participants, they said.

Overcoming COVID-19

Start-ups have been hit particularly hard by the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

Golf Tournament for Start-up 2020 was also rescheduled to begin in September instead of April, when it was held last year, because of the pandemic.

Against the backdrop of the global health crisis, many entrepreneurs consider the tournament an occasion for them to support young entrepreneurs in getting over the adversities of the pandemic, especially since it is currently under control in Vietnam.

“The current situation is different from last year’s. The pandemic has presented start-ups with difficulty in accessing funds as almost all companies are impacted by the coronavirus,” Binh remarked.

“Of course [potential investors] must fight for the survival of their own companies first before considering investing in others."

According to Binh, in 'the new normal,' customers are likely to spend less so start-ups in the fields of services, travel, and food would be considerably impacted.

“Despite that, I am not quite pessimistic because there are always opportunities in challenging situations,” Binh said.

The chairman of Mat Bao Group believes that during the pandemic, entrepreneurs who can flexibly adapt to the new situation will emerge victorious and even achieve new breakthroughs.

“Tuoi Tre’s golf tournament for start-ups will offer them the opportunity to do so,” Binh said.

Lawyer Nguyen Thi Thanh Nha, legal director of the investment firm Openasia Group, said her experience as a shareholder in a few start-ups when she was younger helps her understand the advantages that start-ups have, such as youth, ambition, and knowledge.

But she also acknowledges the rigors they must face on the way to success such as networking, calling for suitable investors, and developing relationships with other start-ups.

“Participating in the [golf tournament] will help them partly solve these problems and build more new business relationships,” said Nha, who has played golf for 12 years.

“Business opportunities may come to them unexpectedly during this tournament, who knows?”

A golfer watches his golf ball after hitting it on a golf course in Vietnam. Photo: Quang Dinh / Tuoi Tre

Honoring 25 excellent start-ups

With the aim of promoting and empowering the start-up community both in Ho Chi Minh City and the rest of Vietnam, Tuoi Tre and partners jointly present the Golf Tournament for Start-up 2020.

The tourney will also mark the 75th anniversary of Vietnam’s National Day (September 2), the 89th founding anniversary of the Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union (March 26), and the 45th anniversary of the founding of Tuoi Tre (September 2).

Dozens of inspiring start-up stories have been published in Tuoi Tre in various formats since July in the lead-up to the tournament.

The opening gala is scheduled to take place on September 18 at the Long Thanh Golf Club in Dong Nai Province, 35 kilometers from Ho Chi Minh City.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For students from poor families, education is the best way to help themselves and their families get out of their plight and lift their communities out of poverty. Ironically, after all the effort of studying in difficulty throughout 12 years from elementary to high school, these students even with high academic records to enter college are unable to live their dreams because of their family’s financial situations. They simply cannot afford tuition fees and other expenses of higher education.

The “Give a Helping Hand to Needy New College Students” scholarship program of Tuoi Tre Newspaper has made great strides in helping these poor students. This program gave the first scholarship in Quang Tri Province in 2003. It has gradually spread to other provinces and now it covers the whole country.

Over 17 years, this scholarship program has helped more than 19,000 new college students who otherwise would not be able to afford higher education. Last year, there were more than 1,200 new college students from all over the country receiving scholarships.

Each poor student is given a standard scholarship of VND10 million (US$430). Very poor students are granted special scholarships worth VND15 million (US$645) each.

This year due to the adverse economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, there will be more poor new college students in need of help, although the donation could be less than last year.

We would like to appeal for new and current donors to “Give a Helping Hand to Needy New College Students” so that at least 1,000 poor students around the country, among them 80 from Thua Thien-Hue Province, could receive scholarships this academic year.

Please send your donation to Bao Tuoi Tre, bank account: 113000006100 (for VND) at VietinBank, Branch 3, HCM City; or bank account: 0071370195845 (for USD) or 0071140373054 (for EUR) at Vietcombank, HCM City Branch, Swift Code: BFTVVNVX007; for “Give a Helping Hand to Needy New College Students” Scholarship Program.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A charity initiative administered 700 care packages on the weekend to workers affected by the coronavirus pandemic in Binh Tan District, as well as Lao and Cambodian students in the Pre-University College of Ho Chi Minh City.

The initiative was undertaken by Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper, supermarket chain Saigon Co.op, and e-commerce platform Shopee, with support from the Ho Chi Minh City chapter of the Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union.

The organizers prepared essentials, including rice, cooking oil, and fish sauce, and divided them into thousands of gift packages, each of which was priced at VND145,000 (US$6.3) on Shopee.

The packages were delivered on Saturday directly to the beneficiaries, including 500 workers who are struggling financially in Binh Tan District, 200 Lao and Cambodian students and those of Vietnam's ethnic minorities at the Pre-University College in District 5.

Among the recipients was Tran Ngoc Sang, a manufacturing worker in Binh Tan District who hails from Soc Trang Province in the Mekong Delta.

“I feel blessed to receive these essential items, which will help ease the burden on my family during social distancing,” said the sole breadwinner for the family of seven.

Other demographics, including youths in locked-down areas of Hoc Mon District, as well as unofficial workers in Cat Lai Ward of Thu Duc City, also received the care packages of the initiative.

After the first run on Saturday and Sunday, the organizers plan to hand another 2,500 packages to struggling people in cordoned-off areas in Ho Chi Minh City on July 22 and 25.

They are currently accepting donations on Shopee and ShopeePay.

In June and early July, many working-class residents in Ho Chi Minh City suffered from lay-offs or reduced income as the southern metropolis emerged as Vietnam’s coronavirus epicenter, with its caseload rising in the thousands daily.

The alarming situation has prompted authorities to put the city under a tightened social distancing mandate that forbids public gatherings of over two, bans non-essential businesses and services, and requires people to stay home, effectively cutting off the livelihoods of many unofficial workers.

Representatives from Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper hands care packages over to struggling workers in Binh Tan District, Ho Chi Minh City, July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Vuong My Phuong, a resident in Binh Tan District, Ho Chi Minh City receives a gift ticket on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Struggling workers in Binh Tan District, Ho Chi Minh City keep a safe distance while waiting to pick up their care packages on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Tran Ngoc Sang, a furloughed manufacturing worker and breadwinner of his family in Binh Tan District, Ho Chi Minh City, receives care packages on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

A student at Pre-University College in District 5, Ho Chi Minh City receives care packages on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Khammoungkhoun Khampasong (front), a student at Pre-University College in District 5, Ho Chi Minh City, holds a care package on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Students at Pre-University College in District 5, Ho Chi Minh City receive care packages on July 17, 2021. Photo: Ngoc Phuong / Tuoi Tre

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In his ongoing sketch project, Ho Chi Minh City-based artist Le Sa Long strives to portray the small acts of generosity among residents, a virtue that has once again been highlighted during the tough time of social distancing in the southern city.

An established painter in the domestic art scene who has multiple solo exhibitions and awards under his belt, Long picked up urban sketching as a habit in mid-May.

He wandered the city which he has called home for over 30 years for live sketches for a few weeks, until it began to be put under social distancing measures on May 31 and later a citywide ban on non-essential travels on June 15.

Cooped up at home under this hibernation phase, Long decided to create a new series of sketches inspired by heartwarming photos of Saigonese that he spotted on social media and in newspapers.

He has so far portrayed 40 vignettes on paper and is planning to create more.

Artist Le Sa Long completes a sketch in his studio in Ho Chi Minh City. Photo: Phuong Nam / Tuoi Tre

“These images of Saigonese residents helping each other out during hard times touched my soul," he said.

"I was inspired to translate these moments and put them under a new light through the language of art.”

A standout in his collection is the vignette of a five-year-old wearing PPE overalls, standing by herself, waving goodbye to the camera before boarding an ambulance to enter quarantine.

Another sketch pays tribute to pop singer Ha Anh Tuan, who donated 25 metric tons of rice to help the struggling citizens.

Other optimistic news stories, including no-cost grocery stores for the needy, community fridges, and charity efforts benefiting pandemic-struck people, are also portrayed.

The sketches have earned Long showers of praises after they were posted on his social media account.

Many individuals have even asked to buy his pieces online, despite not having seen them in person, Long revealed.

He plans to auction several slice-of-life works to raise funds for charity causes for underprivileged people in the city, while portrait pieces of Ha Anh Tuan or frontline doctors will be gifted to the respective subjects as a tribute.

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts a five-year-old in PPE overalls waving goodbye before boarding an ambulance to enter quarantine in Vietnam.

A portrait sketch of singer Ha Anh Tuan by artist Le Sa Long

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts a no-cost grocery store distributing complimentary items to people in need in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts Ngo Duc Ke Street in Ho Chi Minh City during social distancing days.

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts a lottery seller in Ho Chi Minh City.

A sketch by Le Sa Long depicts a Ho Chi Minh City resident and her dog.

A sketch by Le Sa Long shows a lottery seller receiving a box of instant ramen from a woman.

A sketch by Le Sa Long captures Con Rua Lake in Ho Chi Minh City during social distancing days.

A sketch by Le Sa Long shows Nhieu Loc Canal in Ho Chi Minh City during social distancing days.

A solo exhibition features caricatures of famous figures in face masks in Vietnam.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As Vietnam amps up its social distancing mandate to battle the fourth wave of coronavirus transmission, home-bound consumers in the country are frequenting digital shopping channels, including delivery apps, social media, and e-commerce platforms, in order to get their groceries.

Due to several social distancing periods intermittently introduced throughout past year, consumers in Vietnam have gradually moved away from panic buying and have become more accustomed to online shopping for food and other necessities.

In demand

The footfall at a grocery store on Tran Nao Street in Ho Chi Minh City’s Thu Duc City has been sparse lately.

Nevertheless, store staffers still work hard to fill orders for delivery drivers, each of whom stops in front of the shop for just a few minutes to pick up bags of groceries for customers.

According to the store’s manager, online and phone orders have tripled since social distancing guideline were reinstated in Ho Chi Minh City on May 31.

Other retailers across the city have also reported an upswing in online orders, mostly for food and other necessities, since early May when the first cases of community infection in Vietnam were detected after weeks without local transmission.

In fact, grocery delivery has been such a boon that several local stores have to suspend their order systems to process a backlog of deliveries.

Tung, a tech-based delivery worker, said the majority of the orders he delivers are placed in the morning, meaning he only needs to work half a day to pay his bills.

“Customers have mostly been ordering spices, bread, veggies, and meat instead of instant noodle like they did during the first lockdown one year ago.”

To handle the soaring demand, all staffers at the retail chain Saigon Co.op have been mobilized to process online orders, a company representative said.

“Our customer care hotlines have been repurposed to take orders and transfer them to the Co.op supermarket closest to the customer’s address. We’ve also shifted the focus to our mobile application for the sale of fresh groceries and essential items.”

Saigon Co.op competitor VinMart has also launched several tech-based shopping options, including apps, websites, hotlines, and shops on various e-commerce platforms.

Through many of these portals, they are able to offer four-hour delivery and cashless payments in order to decrease the risk of virus transmission.

According to a VinMart representative, the company has received twice as many orders from Ho Chi Minh City during the current social distancing compared to its typical figures.

Echoing other retailers, Aeon Vietnam saw online sales in May rise four to six-fold compared to April.

Aeon’s sales continued their upward trajectory during the last week of May, with soaring figures across all channels, including their e-commerce site AeonEshop, shopping application Aeon App, and delivery apps such as Grab and Now.

The growth in demand has also benefited grocery sections on e-commerce platforms such as Lazada and Tiki.

Lazada reported a whopping ten-fold boost in fresh and frozen grocery sales on their system, while Tiki is expanding its inventory by 50 percent in all product categories to meet the swelling demand.

A delivery worker sends packages for a customer in Ho Chi Minh City. Photo: Q.Dinh / Tuoi Tre

Protection galore

The social distancing mandate has not only boosted grocery sales, but also driven demand for the online purchase of home appliances and tech products.

Electronics retailer Dien May Xanh and its sister chain mobile retailer The Gioi Di Dong have witnessed online sales triple during the current social distancing period.

Mobile chain Di Dong Viet also reported that its online customer base has risen 45 percent, with sales across Facebook and YouTube rising by 40 percent.

Meanwhile, delivery orders for mobile retailer Shopdunk increased by 50 percent.

Many retailers have announced a free shipping policy for areas with virus outbreaks, including Ho Chi Minh City, to persuade customers to make purchases from home.

To ensure safety during the pandemic, delivery workers from each company are ordered to limit their travel area and avoid direct contact with sales clerks.

They are also required to uphold stringent measures, including body temperature checks before each shift, social distancing, face mask wearing and hand sanitizing.

Delivery drivers for The Gioi Di Dong and Dien May Xanh have even been told to divide themselves into two team and rotate shifts in order to reduce transmission risks.

Additionally, they must ensure social distancing during deliveries, including when customers are signing for packages.

Delivery company J&T went a step further by adding a label declaring the delivery workers’ health status on packages and thoroughly sanitizing each package before each delivery.

Even with such precautions in place, many delivery services are declining orders from grave outbreak areas around the city, including Go Vap District, particularly considering it has been cordoned off by authorities.

Delivery workers sit in safe distancing while waiting to collect orders for their customers at a supermarket in Ho Chi Minh City. Photo: K.L. / Tuoi Tre

Delivery workers at risk

In the past few weeks, many customers have complained about mass cancellations of air conditioner orders on e-commerce platforms.

Responding to customers, a seller explained that delivery workers and installation technicians are deemed at high risk of infection and have been put to isolation after entering customers’ houses.

In light of the looming risks, many online sellers have shut down their at-home installation service for furniture and home appliances to ensure safety for their delivery workers.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vietnamese teenagers face a serious imbalance in their consumption of time for studies, relaxing, and recreational activities.

A recent survey of 400 students aged from 13 to 19 in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City has illustrated an ‘immense gap’ in the lives of urban teenagers and highlighted worrying problems about their conceptions, attitudes, and behavior.

The teenagers in the survey spent the most time within the four walls of classrooms, with little left for sports or community-related activities.

Besides the time at school, 92 percent of students said they have ‘extra time’ for studies at the homes of teachers for two or three subjects, including mathematics and English.

Alarming numbers

According to the survey, conducted by TITA Research, a Vietnamese market research and consulting company, urban teenagers spend 10.5 hours a day on studies at school, home, and even at the homes of teachers.

They have only four hours a day for entertainment, but this is mainly devoted to television and the Internet, where they play games and chat through email and social networks.

In summer, where there is no school, they spend more time in bed and increase their time with TV and computers to six hours a day.

Teens admitted that they use computers to play games more than for studies. Mobile phones are also used to play games.

Though sports are vital to the physical and mental growth of teenagers, very little time is devoted to these activities.

Seventy percent of the students in the survey replied that they take part in no physical activities on a school day. Especially troubling is the fact that 80 percent of female students said they do not play sports at school.

During summer, only 43 percent of students said they are engaged in sports, a number that falls to just 29 percent for girls.

However, most of the teenagers have good academic results. In the 2013-14 school year, 85 percent of them were ranked ‘good’ or ‘rather good’ – compared to A levels in the U.S.

One notable fact is that students get better grades if they spend more time studying at their teachers’ homes.

As a result, 20 percent of the surveyed students have a negative attitude toward their teachers, as they blame them for saving lessons for ‘extra time’ at home, instead of teaching them in the classroom.

Lack of career orientation

Regardless of their diligence in their studies, 46 percent of teens said they do not know what type of career path they want to pursue.

It seems that many students consider their studies a duty, instead of a motivation to possess knowledge.

Phan Quang Thinh, the head of the survey, admitted that parents and teachers should focus on “helping students build a correct manner toward their studies for possessing knowledge.

“Besides, parents and teachers need to support teenagers in discovering a career they may be interested in,” Thinh added.

In fact, parents spend less than two hours a day talking with their children. Most of this time is spent at the dining table or watching television.

Sadly, most of these interactions between parents and children are uncomfortable for teens, because they are often reprimanded for their social lives.

Consequently, 30 percent of teens blame their parents for disregarding their needs and desires. Forty percent said they are often intimidated by their parents, and 50 percent admitted that they are shy about telling private stories to their parents. When they are told to do something against their will, 33 percent of the teens hesitate to follow orders, while the remainder tells their friends or listens to music to forget it.

Tran Dai Loi, deputy principal of Thai Binh Middle and High School in Ho Chi Minh City, agreed that many parents do not know how to be parents. “They spend no time on their children but often blame them for problems and prevent them from taking part in social activities since they worry about them becoming spoiled,” he added.

The survey found that the common age of puberty is 12 for girls and 13 for boys, but half of them have no knowledge of sex and gender.

Specially, 15 percent of teens in the survey said they have boyfriends or girlfriends, but nearly half hide this fact from their parents.

A section of teens also has an open attitude toward sex, as 14 percent of them believe that having sex between the ages of 15 and 18 is possible, and 15 percent of teens say they are willing to have sex with their boyfriend or girlfriend.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The use of substances like crystal meth, ketamine, weed, and others often leaves abusers with an aroused state. Therefore, bar girls that serve a drug party are willing to provide the next service – having sex with their customers for a great pay in return.

In the dark world of playboys, drug abusers call service girls who join their spree ‘flying girls,’ with ‘fly’ referring to the feeling of getting high on crystal meth.

For ‘flying girls’ who are sexually available to customers, they are called with a new slang term, ‘fly-and-boom’ girls, which means giving both the ‘flying’ and sex services.

If ‘flying girls’ can earn about VND4-5 million (US$173-216) for a drug party, those providing sex service may pocket a much bigger number.

They even accept group sex, regardless of the high risk of sexually transmitted diseases.

“All of the chicks here look so much older than their real age,” according to Ngan ‘Ca Mau,’ a retired ‘flying girl.’

“It’s the cost of the crazy sex nights.”

Drug and sex

Linh ‘Miu,’ a 21-year-old girl from Bac Lieu Province in the Mekong Delta, was a popular bar girl amongst drug users in Ho Chi Minh City.

She boasted a mystical beauty, a model-like body, and a knack for crazy drug use.

With a V-lined face, big round eyes, a high nose, and a slender body, Linh was the brightest star of the bar.

Not any random customer could get her service.

Once, a rich man came to her restaurant in the Saigon South neighborhood in District 7, Ho Chi Minh City. He could not make a choice as none of the girls available were appealing to him.

The manager soon showed him Linh’s picture, and the man immediately made up his mind.

When the girl rejected his offer as she was busy with a bigger fish to fry, the man’s pride urged him to place down an extravagant offer.

“VND30 million [$1,300]. Get in the car and come here right now if you agree.”

Linh could not say no. But that was only in her past.

Now, her old friends can hardly recognize Linh without makeup, who has become a shabby old woman.

After just a few years of sinking in drug and sex parties, she has plunged to a tragedy with a bad look and poor health conditions.

Linh once had to take several plastic surgeries to help revitalize her vibrance and youth.

A group of drug users sit down with their drinks and drugs in Ho Chi Minh City. Photo: Tung Nguyen / Tuoi Tre

In recent years, many other ‘flying girls’ have also got to earn tens of millions of Vietnamese dong a night when rich men feel like splashing their money to prove themselves.

One of the dark sides of using drugs is that it causes abusers to experience a feeling of utmost snobbery. They are willing to spend their very last banknote.

“Do these ‘flying girls’ get rich?” Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper’s undercover reporter asked Truyen, a ‘flying girl’ manager.

“Rich? Yes, they get lots of money, but they get broke fast, too. They are not wise enough to keep the money,” she replied.

Astronomical medical expenses are the costs of wild nights of using drugs and having sex with customers.

While one can earn quite a lot a night, they will just spend it all on their hospital fees the next days.

“But they can’t serve customers every day. For a night of dancing, getting high on drugs, and having wild sex, it takes a girl several days to a week to recover,” Truyen said.

The dearest price is whopping damage to their appearance. Taking drugs and staying up all night make their skin and breasts ugly, not to mention an impact on mental capability.

Their skin becomes pale and ruffled over time, while their breasts will be reduced in size very quickly.

Therefore, ‘flying girls’ have to go through costly plastic surgeries to maintain their beauty, the most important thing for them to earn a living.

Their money, certainly, will not stay.

Bar girl managers

To work in this business, bar girls have to obey their managers. The girls might earn big, but a large amount of money has to go to their ‘mamas,’ a slang word panders.

According to Mai Thuy, not all are allowed to become ‘boom-and-fly girls.’ The girls have to ‘show their respect’ for the managers if they want a stable ‘workplace.’

They do so by bringing their managers big ‘gifts’ every Tet holiday, public holiday, and birthday bash.

For Truyen, a tacit birthday rule is that each bar girl gives her VND10 million dong ($432) in cash on this occasion.

Going empty-handed after years of working in this business, many ‘flying girls’ suffer such great health damage that some have died from drug abuse.

A girl named Thao recently fell from a third floor after serving a drug party and having sex with clients for three days in a row.

Many others have gone through the same fate.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A once famished boy from the Mekong Delta province of Dong Thap has defied all odds to become a university professor with a doctorate in mathematics.

At the age of 31, Dr. Le Trung Hieu, a professor at Dong Thap University in the namesake province, has already had five of his studies published in internationally-recognized scientific journals, and twice received national awards for the most outstanding scientific research in Vietnam.

Speaking with Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper about Hieu, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Nguyen Van De, rector of Dong Thap University, said, “He’s in every way a singular student.”

Going to school with an empty stomach

In a curious coincidence, Hieu was born and raised in Truong Xuan Commune, Thap Muoi District in Dong Thap, a place famous for its lotus, the flower that represents dignity and perseverance in overcoming difficult circumstances.

Hieu’s father left for another woman when his mother was pregnant with him, and it was not until Hieu was four or five years old that he met his father for the first and last time on a trip to his father’s hometown.

Not surprisingly the young man’s memories of his father are vague compared to the vivid images he recalls of his mother, Huynh Thi Phu.

“My family was impoverished. Mom single-handedly raised me and my older brother, while looking after our blind grandmother at the same time. She could barely put food on the table for all of us despite working day and night. However, despite all that, it angered her every time we considered dropping out of school,” Hieu recounted.

Hieu’s eyes turn red at the mention of his mother Phu. He said he could never forget how she had once climbed up tamarind trees at midnight to pick the fruit to sell at the market the next morning.

On one occasion Phu narrowly escaped death after she even fell face-down from a tree, resulting in her front teeth sinking deep into her jaws.

“She would raise a sounder of swine all year to earn extra money from selling piglets. On nights when the pigs delivered offspring, she would stay up all night. I once came home to the sight of a creditor yelling abuse at her. I knew, even though mom never mentioned it in front of us, that we were in huge debt,” Hieu said.

Despite all the hardship, Phu forbade her sons from ever considering dropping out of school, as she knew education was the only way for them to lead better lives than her own.

“There were times when we ran out of rice. Hieu went to school with an empty stomach but didn’t say a word. He went to the fields after school and brought home some cassavas for us to eat,” Phu recalled.

Duck herding in summer

“When he was in sixth grade, Hieu went without my permission to a local duck breeder and asked to herd the ducks during the summer for money. His ‘salary’ for herding 1,000 ducks in three months was 20 bushels [540 kilograms] of rice,” Phu said.

It was no easy task for an 11-year-old to herd a flock of 1,000 ducks, and Hieu was often told off by the paddle field owners when his ducks got out of control and ate their grain.

After three consecutive summers of doing the job, Hieu was able to provide his family with enough rice to last for years.

Hieu always carried a pocket English dictionary with him, a gift from his brother, so he could learn a few words whenever he had free time on his hands.

Hieu said he had not known how to pronounce the words, but by looking at them over and over, he had gradually memorized their meanings.

“Back-to-school days were terrifying for me personally, as my hair was always burnt out after spending the summer under the sun, and my hands were blackened. It was pretty embarrassing,” Hieu recalled.

Against all the odds, Hieu became a math genius who always topped his class in the subject and was one of the most outstanding math students in provincial contests.

Dr. Le Trung Hieu (L) during a lesson at Dong Thap University in Dong Thap Province. Photo: Tuoi Tre

A happy ending

After graduating from high school, Hieu applied for pedagogical studies at university, a discipline free of tuition fees in Vietnam, knowing that his mother would not be able to afford his higher education otherwise.

On being accepted by two universities, Hieu opted for Dong Thap University, the less prestigious of the two, simply because it was closer to his home so he could visit his sick grandmother more often.

“My grandmother was already very weak, and it would have cost us more to study farther away from home. Grandma died when I was in my freshman year,” Hieu confessed.

To provide for his own education, Hieu worked part-time as a stevedore, waiter, and private tutor throughout his years at university.

Hieu’s mother said he would visit home every week, crossing 50 kilometers on a bicycle after midnight because his schedule was always so full.

“He would listen to some English music or materials on the way to not waste any time. It was always before dawn that he arrived home and it always filled me with tears to open the door and see him drenched in sweat,” Phu said.

Hieu finished his doctorate degree in two years and four months, and is now teaching math at Dong Thap University.

Hieu received national awards in 2013 and 2015 for his two mathematic works.

Five of his published works completed during his doctorate fellowship at the University of Science, Vietnam National University-Ho Chi Minh City, have been verified by the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI), the United States, and one by the Mathematic Review (MR).

According to Prof. Tran Van Nhung at Vietnam National University-Hanoi, the ISI standard is a widely acknowledged evaluation system when it comes to the scientific value of researchers.

Hieu's doctorate thesis was considered excellent by the reviewers’ council.

Now with a family of his own, Hieu is enjoying his well-deserved happiness with his wife Nguyen Thi Bich Thuan, his classmate in university who shared a similar story.

“Thuan caught my attention when I noticed that she always wore the same worn-out shoes to class. An excellent student herself, Thuan was also offered a job at our university after graduation. Our daughter is two years old now,” Hieu said.

Dr. Le Trung Hieu, his wife Nguyen Thi Bich Thuan, and their daughter on the day Hieu received his doctorate degree. Photo: By courtesy of Le Trung Hieu

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Male sex workers in Vietnamese brothels usually don’t ‘receive’ guests who are strange or have no recommendation from a certain acquaintance, as the service is banned here.

Part 1: A look inside male brothelsPart 2: Who are the clients of male brothels?Part 3: ‘Occupational hazards’ of male prostitutesPart 4: Peer education a safety net for sex workers

So, the opportunity to visit these brothels is quite limited due to security measures, especially after police arrested two male prostitutes in a hotel in Ho Chi Minh City last month in one of the first such cases publicly announced by local media.

Luckily, Tuoi Tre journalists were allowed to visit a few such businesses - meant to satisfy the needs of both women and gays – thanks to the assistance of ‘social peers’ who are officers of State programs intended to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases that have close connections with the brothel owners.

In return Tuoi Tre pledged to protect their identity.

Districts 3, 8, Phu Nhuan, Tan Binh, and Tan Phu have brothels with male sex workers.

They have many regular clients who are mostly single, divorced women and even elderly women. Normal price ranges from VND200,000 – 500,000 (US$10 – 25) per session, though as much as US$100 was charged once.

A number of African men have also come to the city to work as prostitutes in parks such as Le Thi Rieng in District 1, Hoa Binh in District 5, and Gia Dinh in Phu Nhuan District.

All of the brothels are disguised as barber shops, spa and massage parlors, or make-up shops. The places are ‘decorated’ with a couple of swiveling and collapsible chairs in the front hall, but these are rarely used as guests enter and walk straight to rooms in the back.

Each brothel has rooms for at least ten male prostitutes as well as rooms to ‘receive guests’. A reception room has minimal facilities, such as a pillow, a mattress, a light, towels, a shelf to store gel tubes and condoms, and a fan.

At a brothel deep down an alley off Truong Chinh Street in Tan Binh, the owner agreed to allow Tuoi Tre to have a brief look inside his facility. During the visit, six to seven men were sleeping on the floor, while others played cards on the first floor, where they queue up for guests’ selection.

After a man is selected, he follows his guest to the upper floor, which is divided into many small rooms of around six square meters in size. The rooms are in two categories - one with an air conditioner and the other with a fan.

At another brothel down an alley on Vo Van Tan Street in District 3, men begin their work day by 3:00pm. The sex workers there have strong bodies and attractive faces. The location is a three storey house rented for VND8 million ($385) a month. Numerous men were either watching TV or playing cards.

A woman around the age of 30, the owner, blamed one of the men for failing to alert her in advance before taking guests to her room. At the time she was lying with a sleeping man.

However, she was later happy to explain many aspects of her brothel. Pointing at a room with a locked door, she said there was a guest inside.

She admitted she has around 16 men serving only gays. “They receive guests in other rooms, and may also have guests in my room if the others are occupied,” she told Tuoi Tre.

She pointed at a man sleeping on a mattress and said he had had a guest late the previous night.

Male sex workers are waiting for clients in a brothel in Ho Chi Minh City (Photo: Tuoi Tre)

During the conversation, the door to one room opened Soon after the guest left, a waiter boy entered to pick up towels and throw them in a bin. Elsewhere, a well dressed, tall man who looked like a State official was about to enter a room.

“He is a familiar guest, coming here every week,” the owner said.

A young guy followed the guest into a bathroom. A few minutes later, they both left for their room, with only a long towel wrapped around their bodies, with trousers and shirts in hands.

The door was then locked and the light turned off.

Male prostitution in Vietnam has been on the increase in recent years, and it has not been dealt with effectively. Only a few cases have been discovered by local authorities.

Donn Collby, a researcher with the AIDS program of Harvard University, estimated that Ho Chi Minh City has over 10,000 male sex workers, and 8,500 others in Hanoi.

“They are exposed to high risk of the infection of sexually transmitted diseases,” he said.

A survey shows that 65 percent of male prostitutes in Vietnam are high school graduates and 19 percent have university diplomas.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In late 2017, when podcasts were just beginning to cement a foothold in the daily media rotation for consumers around the world, Michael Tatarski and his team at Saigoneer were dipping their toe into the format — one of the first English-language attempts at podcasting to a Vietnam-based audience.

Saigoneer, an online publication which covers life in Ho Chi Minh City and Vietnam at large, was founded in 2012, primarily as a means of keeping Saigon’s English-speaking residents updated on the city’s events, cultural happenings, and popular street food haunts.

The obvious evolutionary move for the online publication was to launch a podcast. With so much competition to capture readers’ attention with new, unique content, Tatarski and his team, at the very least, had to “give it a shot and see what'll happen.”

Now, two years later, it is obvious that "shot” proved to be nothing short of a slam dunk.

“We have tons of readers in Vietnam, but a lot of our readers live overseas, so that's where I assumed we would find our initial listeners,” he told Tuoi Tre News.

“Now I'm pleased to see that the majority of our listeners come from within Vietnam, so there’s an obvious appetite for podcasts in the local market.”

Potential for growth

The term ‘podcast’ was first coined by British Journalist Ben Hammersly in a 2004 column written for The Guardian in reference to recorded broadcast audio content meant to be downloaded and listened to on portable devices, such as an iPod.

A few months later, the New Oxford American Dictionary declared ‘podcast’ its Word of the Year.

Since then, it has been full steam ahead for the podcast boom, with giants such as Apple, Google, and Spotify muscling their way into the market with apps and features for users to stream and download new and archived episodes of their favorite podcasts.

As of April this year, there were more than one million podcast shows with a combined 30 million episodes globally, according to the Infinite Dial 2020 report by Edison Research.

Despite the global boom, the podcast scene in Vietnam remains modest, Tatarski said, remarking it is otherwise “fairly diverse in terms of what gets discussed."

“Given the huge popularity of podcasts in the U.S. and Europe, I'm sure it's only a matter of time before they grow here."

Vietnamese-language podcasts are listed among a sea of English shows on the Spotify Podcast Charts in this screen grab.

According to a report released in January by local PR agency EloQ Communications, awareness of podcasts is rising in Vietnam and the Southeast Asian country is a viable market for the format to thrive.

Waves, a startup which aims to develop “a podcast ecosystem for the Vietnamese,” is also optimistic that the market for audio-based content in Vietnam will grow, thanks to the rapid proliferation of smartphones and high Internet connectivity.

“There are some 50 million Vietnamese who consume digital content on social media for an average of 2.5 hours a day,” Sang Do, Waves' head of partnerships, told Tuoi Tre News.

“Most importantly, Vietnamese people have an established habit of listening to the radio and also spend a healthy amount of time on YouTube.”

A bright outlook

Several organizations involved in the industry share a common sentiment of a positive forecast for podcast growth in Vietnam.

“Podcasts will likely become a more popular medium for consuming aural content for those who travel by public transportation as the market begins to mature,” said Tran Binh, deputy head of the digital content division under the news and current affairs department of Voice of Vietnam (VOV) radio.

VietnamPlus, the official English-language online publication of the Vietnam News Agency, is convinced that the popularity of podcast platforms, smart speakers, and hi-tech audio systems for cars in Vietnam will result in a dramatic increase in podcast listeners throughout the country.

Joining podcast forums and online communities in Vietnam has opened the eyes of Nguyen Hoang Nhat, deputy editor-in-chief of VietnamPlus, to how big the number of podcast listeners is.

“Vietnamese who listen to such popular podcasts as BBC News and Ted Talk as a way to improve their English listening skills may also want to try out programs hosted in their mother tongue, but they simply don’t have access to the same massive selection that is available in English,” Nhat said, adding that “VietnamPlus podcasts are meant to narrow this gap.”

As much as these experts are upbeat about the potential of Vietnam’s podcasting industry, they do acknowledge that podcasts will not be a moneymaker anytime soon.

“I can't really see this medium turning into a moneymaker for individual shows here anytime soon,” said Tatarski.

“Potential advertisers [here], for example, aren't yet familiar with [podcasts].”

Similarly, Nhat explained that VietnamPlus podcasts are meant solely to “spread information,” rather than earn money.

“Once podcasts gain enough traction in Vietnam, we will start to think about monetization.”

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sugar dating, a mutually beneficial relationship where 'sugar daddies’ or ‘sugar mommas’ provide financial support for their 'sugar babies’ in exchange for romantic affection and possibly sex, has recently become a trend in Vietnamese society.

‘Sugaring’ relationships and the people who seek them out usually try to stay covert because of the public’s divisive response to the arrangement, with some even referring to it as mere pretense for prostitution.

Wife, mistress and sugar baby

A Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper undercover correspondent infiltrated a secret Facebook group, which boasts over 28,000 members, for people seeking a sugar dating arrangement.

The reporter then switched to a burner Facebook account, using sexually suggestive pictures from the Internet to pose as a junior-year college student in Ho Chi Minh City looking for a sugar daddy.

On paper, she offered the perfect package for a sugar baby: stunning looks, obedient, available to meet three times per week, and capable of keeping a secret.

Within less than an hour, the post yielded hundreds of reactions and a few dozen offers from aspiring sugar daddies in the group.

After a few flirty messages, Nguyen Duc Vinh — whose name has been changed for this article, a 44-year-old sugar daddy hopeful was down to meet in real life.

He claimed to be a husband, father as well as the director of a construction firm in Binh Tan District of Ho Chi Minh City.

During the first encounter at a coffee shop on Ung Van Khiem Street of Binh Thanh District, Vinh talked about his wife as a meek and caring person, but the flame between him and her seems to have died.

He was seeking companionship from a young woman to fill the gap that his mistress of ten years left behind.

The reason for their break-up was her forcing him to divorce his wife and marry her.

“I wish to find a secret lover whom I can talk to, but please don’t let yourself catch feelings, for I have yet to forget [the mistress], nor can I offer you a title [as a wife] in broad daylight,” Vinh confessed right after he poured his heart out about his former mistress.

“My wife is very docile. As long as you stay obedient and don’t force me to divorce her, you will be all set.”

Cutting a deal for affection

Vinh affirmed he is not the promiscuous kind of man, but he added that sex acts will be paid extra on top of the settled benefits.

During the first meeting, Vinh was extremely vigilant, scrutinizing the undercover reporter on whether she is a sex worker in disguise.

He insisted that his partner should be employed in a white-collar job or a student so he can help “support and mentor” her career-wise, or employ her if she is out of work, even suggesting the prospective sugar baby move near his company office to obtain care from him more easily.

Vinh offered a benefit package of VND15 million (US$645) per month starting after a probation period, where he would drive the partner-to-be to her school to confirm her identity. He also required his partner to take an HIV test at a facility of his choice.

Donning an exemplary corporate demeanor, Vinh handled all inquiries from the Tuoi Tre reporter with diplomatic finesse.

When asked about the possibility of him vanishing without any trace from the deal, he cited the credibility of his company and himself as a businessman.

Upon the staggering request of a high-end suite and a scooter after the first month together, he did not shy away, but instead floated them as feasible rewards for good times between the two.

The 44-year-old man shoved VND2 million ($86) of cash into the reporter’s hands as a guarantee of his credibility.

To seal the deal, Vinh said that he enjoyed his time with her and drew a comparison between her and his ex-mistress.

“If we work out well, you will have whatever you want, as long as you satisfy me,” he concluded.

A Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper reporter (left) disguised as a sugar baby hopeful is seen discussing relationship details with a sugar daddy candidate whom she got in contact from a Facebook group. Photo: Le Phan / Tuoi Tre

Sugar daddy as a mentor

The Tuoi Tre correspondent went on to meet another sugar daddy wannabe from the candidate list, which had expanded non-stop since the post in the Facebook group.

Tran Cong Hai — whose name has been changed, a 47-year-old from Binh Thanh District, said his casual outfit did not speak for the plush lifestyle that he can afford his partner.

Introducing himself as a cosmetics tradesman and homestay host in Ho Chi Minh City, Hai said he first joined the sugar dating Facebook group to promote his lodging facilities for sugar daddies to house their sugar babies, but later became part of the scene himself.

Prior to the undercover reporter, Hai had met up with two other sugar baby candidates but reached a deal with neither.

According to Hai, one was a hustler as she did not hesitate to suggest sex in their first encounter, while the other quoted VN20 million ($860) per month for her companionship, the amount being a dealbreaker for Hai.

Nevertheless, VND20 million per month is definitely within his pay range, he claimed.

As the conversation went, it was revealed that a case of erectile dysfunction greatly limited Hai’s sexual potency.

The tentative meetups would be in hotel rooms to shroud his affairs from his social network and would consist of casual dating for the most part.

Hai said he is only available to meet during the day, and his secret partner is not welcomed to actively ring him as his daughters might pick up the infidelity while using his phone.

He was caught cheating by his wife once, who threatened him until Hai promised to “never be unfaithful again.”

It turns out it was not an isolated case as he admitted to adopting a few sugar babies during his time in the group.

In these sugaring liaisons, Hai was willing to provide the babies with tuition money, career orientation, or even boyfriend advice. The sugar babies were allowed to have boyfriends outside of the sugaring affair with Hai.

Either party can call an end to the relationship the moment they want to, he proclaimed.

“I don’t give out many promises, but every single time you meet me, I won’t leave you disappointed by any means,” Hai assured.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bidding farewell to her dream jobs after more than ten years working in the banking and community welfare service sectors, Chau Ngoc Diu gambled her savings and efforts on developing her hometown’s hallmark palm nectar industry, which has struck a chord at home and abroad.

The 39-year-old woman, of Khmer ethnic minority in Tri Ton District in the Mekong Delta province of An Giang, feels deeply that she has to leverage her community’s long-standing trade of making palmyra palm (thnot, Borassus) sugar and help lift local farmers out of poverty.

“The mild sweetness of palm sugar from the good old days lingers in my mind till now,” Diu shared, adding the abuse of additives to cut processing time and boost volume has made the sugar much harder to come by in Vietnam.

It then occurred to her to produce palmyra nectar by capitalizing on the plants that grow in abundance in her hometown.

The daring woman stood her ground firmly as her family members and friends frowned on her plans to quit well-paid jobs for a risky business.

Diu founded Palmania JSC in June 2017 with an aim to develop traditional palmyra nectar production of Khmer ethnic people and turn a local specialty into an international standard product.

Now, her nectar is found in supermarkets and convenience stores all over Vietnam and possibly in other Asian countries and Europe in the time to come.

Diu’s granulated palmyra nectar, branded Palmania, is the world’s third of its kind to win a two-star accolade at Great Taste Awards 2020 held in the U.K..

At the competition, considered the world's largest and most trusted food and drink awards in the fine cuisine world, her product was put to the test with a panel of over 500 experts and earned the highly respected seals of approval.

Sweet success

Diu still remembers growing up beneath the shades of the palm trees and seeing members of her community make palm sugar in the traditional way.

Upset that the nutritious, pleasantly sweet products failed to make their way to supermarkets and convenience stores as they were marred by unattractive packaging and uncontrolled quality, the innovation-minded budding entrepreneur felt compelled to do something to help.

“I want to churn out items which bear our hallmarks and make nice, readily accessible gifts,” Diu shared.

With that in mind, she began experimenting with sugars.

Almost four years later and one trial after another, the woman finally caught on to her work: she was cooking up a wholly natural, pure, and healthier sweetener.

Though her first steps were met with immediate failures, she finally came up in 2017 with Palmania, a pure, unrefined, and tasty palmyra nectar that sets itself apart from its rivals.

According to Diu, Palmania is the combination of ‘pal,' which means palm tree in the Khmer dialect and ‘mania,' or passion.

“Our brand name tells everything. We want our health products to reach far beyond our impoverished neighborhood,” Diu revealed, adding she is really personal about the items she makes.

The nectar is free of preservatives and additives and rich in healthy minerals as the nectar components are not removed.

“With a low content of sugar and being alkaloid, our products are considered a nutrient-rich, healthful sweetener,” Diu noted, adding she believes it is something her clientele appreciates.

The entrepreneur added her workers stick to a stringent production process, including extracting the nectar in the wee hours to keep it from going sour and using sen (mukulungu) wood to minimize fermentation of palm flower juices within eight hours.

No chemicals or additives are used in any phases to retain natural flavor and ensure perfect safety for consumer health.

This supplied photo shows chips of sen (mukulungu) wood, used to minimize fermentation of palmyra flower juices in the traditional sugar production method.

No regrets

Developing nectar from the abundant supply of palmyra trees in her hometown seemed a natural move, but getting her business off the ground was not easy.

Before quitting her job as the department head at a community welfare organization, the daring woman, who had also worked for 10 years in the banking sector, spent two years monitoring her nectar business remotely from Ho Chi Minh City, where she was working her day job.

With her gaze fixed on developing the healthy products and seeing that the items were becoming popular, Diu quit her job in the southern metropolis altogether in 2019 and focused solely on her business.

After meticulously weighing the pros and cons of such a career move, she bravely entered the business world, ready for the challenges it would bring.

“I was at a crossroads then, but if I didn’t leave my day job, I wouldn’t be able to keep an eye on the production phases and wouldn’t have time for new products,” Diu recalled.

“It’s worth it as for how far I’ve gone."

A major hurdle, Diu shared, is talking local farmers into doing away with their low-tech, unclean production.

To encourage the farming households, the entrepreneur provided them with tools and offered high prices for their finished products.

“The challenge is getting local farmers to see the benefits of clean production,” Diu said, adding it took one whole year to perfect the procedures including ingredient procurement, transport, and processing.

Among the households is Nguyen Van Luom, from Tinh Bien District in the same province, who owns around 50 palm trees aged 25 years and above.

His daily routines now are sterilizing, collecting, and processing nectar in compliance with Diu’s standards.

“It is really tough producing sugar in the method formulated by Diu. I have to steer clear from additives in all phases,” Luom said.

“I also have to refrain from using cleansers and granulated sugar, so it takes much longer to get the nectar.”

Luom said he was on the verge of giving up after some time but has stuck to the method since thanks to Diu’s encouragement and the much higher prices she offered compared to current market rates.

Another disadvantage, according to Diu, is that hers is a process that could prove difficult to scale.

The costs are high too, something Diu said is unavoidable, as one cannot provide healthy treats without additional costs.

Going the traditional way, it takes only four to five hours to get 100 kilograms of sugar as a finished product.

With Diu’s method, an eight-hour production yields only 20-30 kilograms.

“My products boast a really different taste and high nutritional value while retaining the very essence of nectar,” she proudly said.

Diu’s currently two main product lines, soft palmyra nectar and granulated palmyra nectar, have hit shelves at supermarkets and convenience stores across the country.

She is working to export her fine quality products to Japan and Europe, hoping to meet the benchmarks of these choosy markets.

These days, Diu is translating readings from foreign sources to make modifications to her machinery and production procedures.

Regarding her future plans, she said she will work hard to come up with new product lines from palmyra nectar.

National recognition Chau Ngoc Diu’s products have won numerous prizes at provincial and national competitions. In 2020, her soft palmyra nectar was recognized with four-star OCOP (One Commune One Product) by the An Giang People’s Committee to encourage entrepreneurs’ efforts in tapping into local specialties. Her two mainstay better-for-you products both received Tri Ton District’s recognition conferred on agricultural products the same year. The enterprising woman has also pocketed numerous prizes at business idea and startup competitions across the Mekong Delta.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@James Chor Hang Chow, a Canadian businessman who was wrongfully imprisoned for over two and a half years in Vietnam, passed away before reclaiming his confiscated property and successfully petitioning for compensation. But despite his death, his lawyers are still looking to the government to make things right.

After being cleared of his conviction, Chow spent nearly two decades petitioning various Vietnamese judicial bodies to restore his seized properties, including money Khanh Hoa authorities appropriated through the sale of his ship, the Duong Thuy 1.

Upon his release from prison, Chow found himself in limbo. He had little money and no family in Vietnam, but was unable to return to Canada as he was still embroiled in a legal battle to reclaim his property and protest for a payout.

The two decades he spent attempting to recuperate his losses was financed by several of his friends and acquaintances in Ho Chi Minh City.

Repeated mistreatment

Court documents highlight several times Chow was mistreated during legal proceedings. One such instance occurred in his case against Khanh Hoa Transport Service Co. (KHTS).

KHTS filed a lawsuit with the Vietnam International Arbitration Center against Chow in late 1991, during which arbitrators declared that Chow would be responsible for a US$213,000 payout to KHTS.

Unsatisfied with the judgment, Chow filed an appeal but unable to attend the hearing as he was charged with and arrested for “abuse of trust to appropriate Socialist property” in August 1992.

His company’s ship, the Duong Thuy 1, was subsequently transferred to KHTS while the Canadian awaited his hearing, despite the fact that no official verdict had been made.

The People’s Court of Ho Chi Minh City officially sentenced Chow to two years, six months, and five days in prison on February 18, 1995. As he had served the term in detention, he was released upon the ruling.

In light of this decision, KHTS promptly claimed full ownership of the Duong Thuy I, just four days before an appeal hearing for the case was meant to begin.

Though that appeal ended with Chow’s acquittal, it was just the beginning of a new journey for him, one that would have him spend the next two decades of his life unsuccessfully seeking the return of his lost property and would end in his death.

Chow’s first step was to file for the return of the Duong Thuy I, but his request was complicated by the fact that KHTS had been dissolved by Khanh Hoa’s provincial leaders in July 1996 and the cargo liner had been sold for VND595 million ($25,700).

In March 1997, Chow wrote a letter to the People’s Court of Ho Chi Minh City to request restoration of his properties, including $7,960 and the Duong Thuy I.

The request had then brought to Ho Chi Minh City’s Department of Civil Judgment Enforcement but was stalled in 1997 because of KHTS's disbandment.

Where’s the money?

According to the judgment enforcement agency, the People’s Committee of Khanh Hoa Province is responsible for Chow’s payout now that KHTS has been dissolved.

The Ho Chi Minh City Department of Civil Judgment Enforcement stated in an official dispatch on September 18, 1997 that the sale of Duong Thuy I by KHTS, though authorized by the People’s Committee of Khanh Hoa, was unlawful as an official judgment had not been made in the case.

This means the People’s Committee of Khanh Hoa is required to transfer the VND595 million made from the sale of the Duong Thuy I to Chow.

The committee, on the other hand, says that Chow’s unfulfilled payment to the now-defunct KHTS serves as grounds for withholding the money.

On May 14, 1998, the judgment enforcement agency leveraged a coercive judgment enforcement against the People’s Committee of Khanh Hoa by requiring VND595 million from the provincial budget be transferred to the agency.

Khanh Hoa’s State Treasury, nevertheless, refused to adhere to the decision and withheld the transfer.

To this date, there has been no further progress made in the restoration of Chow’s assets.

Suffering unjustly till death

Chow was kept in a state of limbo for over 20 years, completely unsure of whether or not he would ever be offered his payout from the Khanh Hoa People’s Committee, compensation for his wrongful imprisonment, or merely an apology.

After his conviction was quashed, Chow set his sights on reclaiming his seized properties, unaware of the compensation he deserved in accordance with Vietnamese law.

The first-instance judgment, a requisite document for the Canadian man to claim the compensation, was not provided to him in the trial.

In 2007, Chow was instructed by a pro bono lawyer to write a request soliciting the first-instance judgment from the Ho Chi Minh City People’s Court, which turned out to be successful.

He then filed an application to claim a VND27.4 billion ($1.18 million) payout for his unjust suffering, which comprises his mental suffering and material damage inflicted by the wrongful imprisonment, as well as its impact on his business, his loss of income and job, and other damages.

He never heard back from the court.

Shortly after, he fell ill and was unable to continue petitioning judicial agencies for his compensation. His worsening condition also obstructed his work with his lawyer to reclaim his assets and payout.

Chow’s long-time friend and business partner recently introduced him to lawyer Phan Trung Hoai, who wrote to the People’s Court asking for affirmation on the Canadian’s unjust sentence and the whereabouts of his payout. The court never responded.

In the end, Chow was unable to outlive their radio silence and he passed away on June 30, 2020 without receiving a dime of his due compensation.

In conversation with Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper, lawyer Phan Trung Hoai divulged that the court has yet to offer an official response to Chow’s payout request, leaving him unable to quantitate the damage inflicted.

Hoai said he is still waiting for information from the court before he makes his next moves.

“James had passed away, but his next of kin live in Canada and Hong Kong. Hence, the compensation process shall not be halted but rather continue in favor of his heirs," the lawyer said.

“Chow’s relatives are not able to come to Vietnam due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but after the inheritance procedure is completed, they will be able to authorize a lawyer to continue the process."

Vietnamese lawyer Phan Trung Hoai, the pro bono lawyer representing Canadian man James Chow, is seen in a provided photo.

A pro bono lawyer

“James was introduced to me after his discharge from prison. He was seeking legal assistance to reclaim his seized properties. After reading the appeal judgment, I agreed to represent him,” Hoai recounted.

“I became the focal point of correspondence with the authority, keeping tabs on all responding documents throughout the years. I continued to do it even during a period when James and I lost contact."

Hoai and Chow met again after several years, during which time the Canadian man once again asked for help.

When Chow landed in the hospital, Hoai, alongside Long – Chow’s long-time friend – helped with the Canadian man’s hospital bills as well as the VND30 million ($1,300) fine for his expired visa before renewing it.

“James came to our country to do business but was entangled in the legal fiasco to the point of bankruptcy, so I helped him to the best of my ability,” Hoai said.

“Back when he was healthy, James sent me a message saying that he would reimburse me once he got his properties back. He repeatedly asked to involve me in a reward contract, but I saw that he was too anguished already, so I turned him down."

Some of Canadian James Chow's hospital bills. Photo: H.D. / Tuoi Tre

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two Vietnamese students in Finland showing an interest in both fashion and environmental issues have found unlikely success with their special ‘coffee sneakers’ made from recycled coffee grounds and plastic waste.

Tran Bao Khanh, 27, and Chu Hoang Son, 23, were recently named in the Social Entrepreneurs category of the 2020 Forbes 30 Under 30 Europe list, which highlights “the young visionary leaders brashly reinventing business and society.”

The duo was celebrated for their Rens Original, a company that produces sneakers from used coffee grounds and plastic waste.

Khanh and Son were listed among other young entrepreneurs in Europe, including 17-year-old Swedish environmentalist Greta Thunberg, in the category, which honors “leveraging business smarts to save the world.”

“What do you do with your discarded coffee beans? This Vietnam-born duo is recycling them by turning discarded grounds into fresh kicks,” Forbes introduced the duo.

“The Helsinki-based company has sold their sneakers to individuals in over 100 countries,” it added.

A screenshot shows Rens Original's profile in the Social Entrepreneurs category of the 2020 Forbes 30 Under 30 Europe list.

The young Vietnamese men’s crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter last year attracted over 5,000 backers who pledged more than US$550,000 of a $19,000 goal in just two months to help bring their project to life.

‘Sustainable sneakers’

According to discounted prices for pre-orders shown on Rens Original’s website, the company’s nine sneaker designs fetch the same price at $99.

The shoes are advertised to be 100 percent water-proof, odor-free, and sustainable.

A screenshot shows a sneaker design on Rens Original's website.

It all began in the summer of 2017 with a chance encounter in a coffee shop between the two sneakerheads.

One of them had a background in sustainable manufacturing while the other had worked with fashion-heavyweights at Germany-based e-commerce company Zalando, Rens Original said on its website.

The two’s conversation quickly turned into a discussion on fashion and its impact on the environment before an idea struck them: they wanted to make “a [pair of] sustainable sneaker[s] that sneaker enthusiasts actually want to wear.”

“We believe that sneaker enthusiasts deserve eco-friendly fashion that doesn’t slouch on features or style,” the company expressed.

After their first trial with cotton sneakers, which were “quickly abandoned” because the sneakers were “not sustainable enough,” the two ended up discovering a high-tensile thread can be pulled from used coffee grounds.

In a recent interview with Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper, Khanh called what he and his teammate are doing a combination of their passion for sneakers and the desire to do something for the environment.

“As the fashion industry has left some negative impacts on the environment, we were looking for a product which is both environment-friendly and trendy,” Son added.

Tran Bao Khanh (L) and Chu Hoang Son are seen with their coffee-based sneakers in this supplied photo.

Son also said he and Khanh drew experience for their job from their past positions at shoe manufacturing companies.

“We tested a variety of materials and spent six months on testing organic cotton, but the material did not work,” Son recalled. “Then we found our luck with used coffee grounds.”

“We started mixing coffee grounds with recycled plastics to a certain ratio, eventually producing polyester threads which are capable of making shoes,” Son described the process.

“It took us a year to produce our very first pair of shoes, which we used to start a crowdfunding campaign.”

According to Khanh, the first sample pair of shoes won over some investors who pinned high hopes on the product and wanted to make investments.

“We almost ran out of budget for three times but always met investors who saw our potential and funded us,” he said.

The 27-year-old believed everything in life happens for a reason.

“I think it’s because we’ve always worked hard after graduation, so we were able to build up connections and impress investors,” he explained.

“That’s why they were willing to invest in the beginning.”

The co-founder shared that his company has recently received capital from investors in the U.S., Germany, and Malaysia, right before the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic broke out in Europe.

According to Khanh, Rens Original is running “steadily” with most products being manufactured at Chinese factories before being stored in Hong Kong for export to North America, Europe, and Australia.

During the first year of selling their products in 2019, Khanh and Son shipped around 6,000 pairs of sneakers globally.

“According to some surveys, customers love our product because it features both fashion and environment values,” Khanh said.

“We are also working on some improvements to our future products.”

A promo photo on Rens Original's website

Son, the other founder, proudly said his company currently employs 14 talented staff members who are immigrants from China, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Nepal, and more.

In the interview with Tuoi Tre, the duo recalled their path of becoming entrepreneurs in Finland for two people with Vietnamese backgrounds.

“I came to study economics at the end of 2011 while Son chose information technology in 2014,” Khanh said.

“To be honest, during our time in school, we only wanted to achieve good scores and then find a stable job, and did not dare to dream any further because we thought we did not have an edge over local students,” he admitted.

“Until one day, I realized that Vietnamese students do have advantages of our own. For example, I understand the Asian and Vietnamese markets.

“Since then, I have started to think about my strengths and weaknesses to figure out my path in life."

Oskari Tempakka, CEO of Finland’s Venture Capital Fund Wave Ventures, called Khanh and Son “students from a faraway country who have left an inspiring story in Finland.”

“Khanh and Son have been through a long journey. Their idea and products are highly appreciated by investors including us,” Tempakka commented.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An increasing number of young locals, mostly good-looking girls, vie for attention and earn money by posing for and sharing nude photos, but not a few have borne tremendous consequences over this insidious practice.

In today’s modern world, girls who yearn for good income without hard work or adequate education, or crave attention and admiration from their peers for their stunning curves do not hesitate to strip off and pose for nude photos, either professionally as nude models or just to keep up with the fad.

Such titillating photos are rife on social networks, posted either by their owners on purpose or by their ill-meaning friends or photographers.

Fed up with conventional outdoor or studio bridal shoots, a number of couples also choose to add specials to their big event and celebrate their love with nude bridal photos.

They are usually not aware of, or are heedless of, the associated risks and psychological and reputation damage until it is too late.

Such nude photos taken by young, attractive girls are rife on Facebook these days.

Potential risks, irreversible damage

Local photographer Nguyen Bao Quan talked to Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper about several imminent risks in association with nude photo taking.

“The risks range from the photographers’ sexual harassment, raping of their models or clients, or their posting their victims’ nude photos with their faces distinctly exposed on forums and social networks. Such malicious photographers can also use the photos to gain fame, extort money from their victims, or coerce them into having sex with them,” Quan noted.

He showed sympathy for the amateurish models who take nude photos mostly to keep up with the Joneses or “capture women’s prime-time sensuality.”

Ha G., 25, who lives in Ho Chi Minh City’s District Tan Phu, remained regretful as she told Tuoi Tre her experience in nude photo taking.

“When I was 18, I was tempted by my friends into posing nude behind my boyfriend’s back. Later, when my friends turned against me, they purposely leaked my nude photos,” she recalled.

Her boyfriend broke up with her shortly after he stumbled upon the photos, accusing her of possible adultery, judging the girl on her eagerness to shed off clothes in front of an all-male photo shoot team.

Meanwhile, Trinh, a university student, told local newswire Vietnamnet how she was relentlessly pestered by phone calls from unknown men, who cracked suggestive jokes and offered to pay her for sex.

Trying in vain to stall such calls, she had to switch to another sim card.

Trinh later came across her nude photos, which she had taken before, on a porn website offering call-girl services with her cellphone number posted next to them.

Likewise, though nude bridal photos stand out from myriad conventional ones and accentuate the brides’ attractive physique and the couples’ intimate moments, owning such a collection usually does not guarantee an auspicious beginning to their marriage, and sometimes even boomerangs on the owners themselves.

Mothers-in-law in Vietnam in particular, and in Asia in general, typically expect their daughters-in-law to be virtuous and thus frown on this emerging trend.

VietnamNet reported that Thanh and Vinh, her husband-to-be, spent quite a large sum and a few days posing nude for their bridal photo collection.

To the couple’s dismay, as soon as the groom’s mother stumbled upon the nude collection, she compelled them to get rid of all the photos; otherwise, their wedding would be annulled.

Thanh sadly said that there was a noted change in her mother-in-law’s attitude, which slid from loving care to almost contempt.

In recent years, local media have also reported on numerous cases in which girls, including those as young as 12, had their nude photos purposefully exposed on social networks by malicious ex-boyfriends, acquaintances or photographers.

Following the exposure, most of the victims, particularly underaged girls, were in for contemptuous, spiteful criticisms from netizens and others, which dealt themselves and their families a devastating blow.

As a 12-year-old girl in Hanoi was on the verge of succumbing to the mounting pressure from her leakage of nude photos, her family posted apologies on social networks and pleaded with netizens to leave her alone, VietnamNet said.

An artistically nude photo taken by seasoned Vietnamese nude photographer Thai Phien

Weigh up the pros and cons of such shots

Culture researchers, lawyers and psychologists have thus cautioned young people to think twice about taking nude photos, no matter how trustworthy their partners, friends or photographers may be.

“The rampantly carnal photos have strayed away from righteous nude photographers’ artistic intentions. Though these photos are no longer blasted as heavily as in the past, when people were considerably less receptive to items of sexual content, the exposure of such photos can still dealt a crushing blow to young Vietnamese and their families,” Dr. Nguyen Nha, a veteran culture researcher and historian told Tuoi Tre.

Likewise, Dr. Tran Minh Huong, of Ho Chi Minh City-based Van Hien University, noted that the fine line between artistically and unartistically nude photos tends to blur.

“I think ‘yem’ [a Vietnamese bodice which has a front part and strings in the back and is used primarily as an undergarment] can do perfectly well and is a more culturally appropriate option when it comes to accentuating women’s bodily attractiveness,” Huong stressed in an interview with Tuoi Tre.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nguyen Van Bang is among many who came to Hanoi some years ago to earn a living as xe om (motorbike taxi) drivers and provide for their loved ones back home.

But exorbitant overheads in recent times have left them fearing for their job as never before.

Facing relentless competition from ride-hailing firms, traditional motorbike taxi drivers have grappled to maintain their customer base as the apps have been local residents’ first choice for transportation over recent years.

Many conventional motorbike taxi drivers have had an even particularly harder time securing customers and found it increasingly difficult to make a livable wage in recent months due to exorbitant fees and expenses.

Their rivals, tech-based motorbike taxi drivers, however, have not fared much better, with many working extra hard and with extended hours to boost the family income.

For the past several months, they have found themselves fixated on the apps for signals of new rides and scooting along the tree-lined boulevards and winding alleys of the city for up to 15 hours each day from the usual 10.

Shaky finance is a grim reality that now casts its shadow on traditional and tech-based drivers alike.

The tech-based drivers’ presence can be felt immediately in urban areas throughout Hanoi, where public landscapes are filled with motorbike riders in brightly-colored uniforms that represent the brand they are working for.

As observed by Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper reporters, however, a few drivers were spotted these days along the sidewalks on Tay Son Street, Dong Da District, one of the capital city’s driver hotspots.

Nguyen Van Bang, one of the few ride-hailing drivers spotted on site, already had his share of a shrinking customer base and fiercer competition as a new wave of motorbike cabbies have moved onto the scene, higher tax rates, and greater stress with the job he has taken for four years.

“I waited here for hours with no new ride requests,” he said over a drained glass of iced tea while still fixing his eyes on his smartphone.

By 4:30 pm that day, the cabbie, who left his hometown and now lives in a studio in Thanh Tri District in Hanoi, managed to secure only two rides as he started late.

He earned a total of VND51,781 (US$2.2) after deducting an operational fee of VND18,818 ($0.8) for the platform owner.

Bang shared when he first joined a few years ago, the job provided him with a good earning thanks to a steadier stream of customers and lower app-use fees and tax rates imposed by the ride-hailing firm.

“I had the app on for only eight to 10 hours each day and treated myself to one day off each week then, and didn’t have to wait this long for new gigs to pop up,” he said.

Nguyen Van Bang, in the uniform of multi-service platform Grab, expresses concerns about his livelihood as a motorbike taxi driver operating in Hanoi, Vietnam. Photo: Tam Le / Tuoi Tre

Bang is by no means an isolated case.

Nguyen Van Manh, from the north-central province of Nghe An, approximately 330 kilometers from Hanoi, was lying on top of his motorbike while waiting for a new ride-hailing gig.

Two years ago, he quit his teaching job due to meager pay before switching to app-based motorbike driving.

According to Manh, things took a turn for the worse with intermittent novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreaks in Vietnam that began in March.

As the hour-long wait ended up fruitless, he even scooted around with an eye for passengers.

For his latest ride, out of the VND13,000 ($0.6) he received from the passenger, the fare accounted for VND12,000 ($0.5), with the platform fee being VND1,000 ($0.04) and app-use fee and tax rate VND3,273 ($0.1).

His daily bills include around VND100,000 ($4.3) for food and another VND70,000 ($3) for gas.

Manh said he would go home empty-handed on days when he has a flat tire or falls prey to nail droppers.

Other overheads include regular lubricant change and maintenance that may run up to VND2 million ($86) every six months, and a couple of million dong (VND1 million is around $43) in monthly studio rent.

“I managed to send my wife back home VND9-10 million [$389-432] each month some years ago, but can now scrape up only VND5-7 million [$216-302] a month at best,” Manh said with a sigh.

The man talked about how his day-to-day routine is very different now from the past, currently working up to around 15 hours a day, from 8:00 am to 11:00 pm instead of the usual 12-hour workdays.

Around 10:00 pm the same day, Le Xuan Quan, hailing from the north-central province of Thanh Hoa, was spotted waiting patiently for new app-based gigs.

He quit his job at an electronic firm over few orders before starting to work as a driver for a tech-based ride-hailing company more than two years ago to provide for his wife and young children at home.

Quan thinks one important factor is the company’s support for its partners’ welfare.

“Faced with relentless competition, we drivers deserve support from the company,” he said, adding he has turned off the app for two days to voice his protest against the recent hike in fees and tax rates.

Nguyen Minh Hang, Quan’s wife, shared she quit her sewing job to stay home and look after their baby, relying entirely on her husband’s pay to cover grocery bills, tuition, and milk for their two kids.

The concerns were also shared by Quan’s colleagues in Ho Chi Minh City, who said they have no choice but to work harder to offset the extra costs.

Tuan, who insists on going by his first name only, said that in contrast to public opinion, tech-based motorbike taxi drivers are earning money at the cost of their health.

“Honestly speaking, we don’t make any profits or even suffer losses for certain gigs given traffic congestion and vehicle damage,” he revealed.

‘Lonely,' independent xe om – conventional motorbike taxi drivers – are even in more serious financial troubles over fierce competition with their tech-based counterparts for customers.

“There are often in disputes and confrontations. We’re in trouble and they’re also struggling,” said Tran Van Chi, a xe om driver who usually waits for passengers on a section of Truong Chinh Street near An Suong Intersection in District 12, Ho Chi Minh City.

The 56-year-old wistfully recounted the well-paid rides during his 20-year long career as an independent xe om driver.

“There’re days when we find no customers, many of us are plunged into debts,” Chi shared.

“Tech-based cabbies, mostly made up of young go-getters, can exert themselves to the limit, while old traditional drivers like us are just trying to get by without any hope of changing jobs.”

Damage-prone bikes Both traditional and tech-based drivers complain their bikes, which vary from VND25 million ($1,081) to VND40 million ($1,729) apiece for new purchases, get run-down quickly. As passengers tend to ride with drivers whose bikes boast a moderately classy look, riders must make sure their bikes – their ‘fishing rod’ – are kept in good condition. While an average bike’s lifespan can reach 10 to 15 years, bikes used for ferrying passengers put on a dilapidated look after only three or four years in use. “Many xe om drivers cannot even afford a new bike. It’s like we are grilling ourselves with our own fat,” Tran Van Chi noted. Constant exposure to weather and arduous work also take a heavy toll on the drivers’ health. “We cabbies tend to get sick after taking up the job for three or four years. The most common ailments are those related to air pollution, including respiratory and eye diseases,” Nguyen Van Thao, a traditional xe om driver, sadly shared. “Road accidents? We keep reminding ourselves that we just had an extremely bad day.”

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Since returning to Vietnam after spending two years studying art therapy in New York under the prestigious Fulbright program, 32-year-old Nguyen Huong Linh has made it her mission to help Vietnam’s marginalized communities cope with trauma.

Linh, who completed her undergraduate studies at Korea National University of Arts in 2014, had long dreamt of connecting her passion for art with gender activism and art therapy.

Shortly after graduation, Linh began introducing the concepts of body awareness, gender equality, and reproductive health to children in Vietnam through a series of 12 books she authored and illustrated herself.

Her dream was lifted to new heights in 2017 when she was awarded a Fulbright scholarship to a Master’s program in art therapy at New York’s School of Visual Arts.

Upon returning to Vietnam, COVID-19 restrictions forced her to spend two weeks at a centralized quarantine facility in Hanoi before she could enter into the community.

Rather than spend those two weeks sitting idly, Linh launched MAI:tri - an online space which provides one-on-one therapy consultation and self-reflection through art.

Her first ‘customers’ were her roommates at the facility.

The positive responses she received from her roommates at the quarantine facility have motivated Linh to continue down the art therapy path, inspiring a blog and a series of videos on the topic.

For a time, Linh ran MAI:tri out of Ho Chi Minh City where she hosted therapy workshops for vulnerable demographics, including underprivileged teens, medical practitioners, and social activists who face mental health issues.

“I’ve been trying to re-adapt to Vietnamese culture and have spent a lot of time reflecting on what I learned during my time abroad. I’ve realized that the various presumptions and stigmas that surround mental therapy are a hindrance to the growth of the discipline in Vietnam,” Linh explained.

Linh is facing these presumptions and stigmas head-on.

She now runs MAI:tri out of Hoi An City in the central Quang Nam Province in order to broader her customer base both in the city and in nearby Da Nang City.

She also hosts clients from across Vietnam in online consultations, and prides herself on offering LGBT-friendly services.

When she’s not busy with MAI:tri, she’s focuses her attention on a charity which funds consultations for young women, cancer patients, and survivors of abuse.

In early 2021, after the COVID-19 pandemic and the historic flooding in Vietnam’s central province’s took massive physical and mental tolls on her fellow Vietnamese, Linh initiated a series of 20 free webinars that focused on holistic healing practices, including yoga, art therapy, movement therapy, creative writing, and breathwork, to over 3,200 participants.

According to Linh, continuous social distancing, a lack of human connections, and work/study burnout, has left many feeling dejected, dissociated, and hopeless.

Daily depressing COVID-19 updates have helped breed fear and discord in communities. Such negative feelings have taken negative tolls on the health of many.

“Finding a mental health therapist is as important as finding a doctor for our physical diseases,” said Linh.

According to Linh, the stigma around mental health in Vietnam is gradually easing, a phenomenon she sees as ‘uplifting’ for Vietnam’s public health outlook during such tumultuous times.

She strives to offer art as a self-care method which can help people observe their emotions in a more intuitive manner compared to the usual dialogue approach.

“With the help of Linh, I was able to awaken my inner therapist and compliment and guide myself through the traumatic childhood memories without fear or constraint,” a participant in Linh’s webinar said.

For the time being, Linh is working on a new series of workshops for Ho Chi Minh City residents who are struggling with long days spent inside amidst social distancing.

The event has gathered nearly VND55 million (US$2,400) which will be donated to the city’s needy through local charities.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The abrupt enforcement of a new movement declaration system at COVID-19 checkpoints in Ho Chi Minh City on Wednesday baffled the majority of commuters and clogged up traffic flow for hours.

The novel movement declaration requirement, devised by the Ministry of Public Security and considered part of the national population database, was simultaneously introduced at COVID-19 checkpoints in the city around 1:00 pm on Saturday.

This is meant to keep track of people's travels in case contact tracing is needed to stall coronavirus spread.

As witnessed by a Tuoi Tre (Youth) newspaper correspondent, all commuters passing these checkpoints would be pulled over and could only leave when they scanned a QR code on their phones, completed their movement declaration online, captured a new QR code, and presented it to checkpoint officers to see if it matched the database.

A police officer guides a motorbike rider on how to complete movement declaration in Ho Chi Minh City, August 14, 2021. Photo: M.H. / Tuoi Tre

A police officer guides a motorbike rider on how to complete movement declaration in Ho Chi Minh City, August 14, 2021. Photo: M.H. / Tuoi Tre

The steps were deemed rather complicated and time-consuming by the public due to a variety of reasons, including the reduced sensitivity of mobile phone cameras for QR scanning under broad daylight, or the lack of Internet connection at checkpoints.

Several officers were ill-prepared for their duties, as the batteries on their mobile devices died while they logged commuters’ information.

“Some senior citizens had their smartphones with them, but did not know how to declare the information on the apps and required officers' help,” an checkpoint officer explained.

“Some individuals took as long as 15 minutes to complete their declaration.”

The unoptimized process impeded traffic flow, causing lines of delayed vehicles to snake out as far as a few kilometers.

On Phan Dang Luu and Le Van Duyet Streets in Binh Thanh District, hundreds of motorbikes were seen struggling to inch toward the checkpoints, where officers were still strictly upholding the declaration protocol.

A police officer guides a motorbike rider on how to complete movement declaration in Ho Chi Minh City, August 14, 2021. Photo: M.H. / Tuoi Tre

An app-based delivery worker presents a QR code he got after completing movement declaration in Ho Chi Minh City, August 14, 2021. Photo: M.H. / Tuoi Tre

“Residents can scan the QR code and declare their information at home," said Senior Lieutenant Colonel Huynh Thi Thu Trang, a senior official at the Ho Chi Minh City Department of Public Security.

"They will receive another QR code, which they can save to their phone and use for the next three days.

“When passing the checkpoints, they only need to bring up the QR image so officers can instantly check their information, reducing processing time and avoiding congestion.”

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Peddlers in Ho Chi Minh City are mostly migrants from other provinces who, despite their low income, persist at work to fend for both themselves and their family members in their hometown.

“We are genuine workers," one old peddler said.

"We are happy to be making money ourselves.

“Thank you for being compassionate, but please don’t take pity on us.”

Uncle, nephew, and a wok of hazelnuts

Tran Van Loi and his nephew Ngo Dinh Phong get ready for their day of selling hazelnuts around town during the predawn hours.

Parking their motorbike by a tall tree along No. 31 Street in Binh Tan District, the two quickly ignited their mobile stove using wooden sticks, already dripping with sweat from the effort.

A Tuoi Tre (Youth) correspondent asked Loi why he did not light it at home so it was ready when he reached his spot.

With a click of the tongue, Loi explained how it was not possible.

“We share accommodations with lots of people in a tiny place on Provincial Highway No. 10. Although the landlord does not forbid us from lighting the fire [there], we are not taking any chance,” he said.

The uncle and nephew moved to Ho Chi Minh City from south-central Phu Yen Province more than ten years ago.

Though Loi is married and has two children back in his hometown, he decides to stay in the city for a living.

“There are four of us, and we can’t just do farming with merely 500 square meters of field,” he explained.

“My wife might be good at farm work and childcare, but that field can provide just enough for us to eat.”

Tran Van Loi roasts hazelnuts at his roadside stall in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. Photo: Manh Dung / Tuoi Tre

He further explained that the income for his whole family comes mainly from him peddling in Ho Chi Minh City.

For years now, the man and boy have never taken a single day off.

“We still go to work whether it rains or not,” he said.

“Selling just a little bit is better than lying flat down on the floor, watching lizards on the walls and earning nothing.”

“After all our expenditures, we can normally send home around VND4 million [US$172].

"But it’s only VND3 million [$130] if the weather’s bad.”

Their situation is worsened following the coronavirus pandemic and the government-mandated social distancing policy.

There are days when they go to work for over 24 hours at a stretch, but can only earn VND300,000-400,000 ($13-17) before subtracting the costs of purchasing hazelnuts, food, and gasoline for their bike.

But the uncle keeps his chin up, believing that there is always a better day to make up for a bad one.

“We will cover longer distances. We’ll save up even more. All bad things will come to an end,” Loi said.

Ngo Dinh Phong, Loi’s nephew, portions roasted hazelnuts into paper bags at their roadside stall in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. Photo: Manh Dung / Tuoi Tre

The elderly along the streets

From the observations of a Tuoi Tre correspondent, the majority of peddlers actively selling at night pubs along the streets in Ho Chi Minh City are women over 50 years of age.

They largely come from Phu Yen and neighboring Khanh Hoa Provinces, and are usually selling lottery tickets or plastic bags of snacks and beans.

“Last week there were still lots of kids selling around here, but they went back to their hometown for school already,” Hoang Thi Tu, a 70-year-old peddler lottery seller, said.

The beginning of September marks the start of an academic school year in Vietnam.

“If any child is still working here, he must come from a really poor family.”

She herself had been walking around for five hours from 5:00 pm, but could only sell around 30 tickets.

“Keep on working. Those tickets won’t be checked until late tomorrow afternoon,” said Dieu, another lottery peddler around the same age as Tu.

According to Tu, she needs at least VND3 million every month for accommodations and food.

“If we can’t sell over 200 tickets a day, then we’re doomed.”

She came to Ho Chi Minh City from Phu Yen Province, following the advice of her seniors.

“We elderly people will just sell lottery tickets. Those a bit younger often work at restaurants or become housemaids. But these days few people need our help,” she added.

Last year, she could still manage to send VND1-2 million ($43-86) a month to her family, but this year it is already too hard taking care of herself.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From the outside, it may seem that Ho Chi Minh City is a gridlock of two-wheeled vehicles; however, logical designing and cultural respect have created one of the better traffic systems in the world
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From the outside, it may seem that Ho Chi Minh City is a gridlock of two-wheeled vehicles; however, logical designing and cultural respect have created one of the better traffic systems in the world
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Originally from Son Tay, a small rural town outside Hanoi, Nguyen Ba Phuoc spent much of his childhood cooking with his family, but never imagined that he would one day become one of Vietnam’s top chefs of Japanese cuisine.

In 2016, Phuoc was awarded a full scholarship by Hokuto Bunka Academy in Hokkaido, Japan and became a student of its cooking faculty the same year.

One year later, he was honored as one of the ten most excellent residents living in the city of Muroran for his achievements in studying Japan's traditional cuisine and promoting Vietnamese cuisine there as well.

In 2020, Vietnamese Ambassador to Japan Vu Hong Nam presented a certificate of merit to Phuoc for his outstanding contribution to the Vietnamese community in Hokkaido.

Phuoc has also become a coordinator for the Traditional Japanese Culinary Research Association.

A 'wild child'

Phuoc was never an all-star student.

Even now, long after graduation many of his teachers still remember him as a "wild child who couldn’t sit still long enough to take in a lesson."

In fact, his scores were so low that he was not able to attend a public high school and was instead placed in a complementary education school – an outcome that shamed his parents.

During his formative years, Phuoc’s dream was to turn his reputation as a class clown into a full-time profession by following in the footsteps of his idols – locally famous comedians Xuan Bac and Tu Long.

“I always try my best to make people around me laugh and feel comfortable,” Phuoc said.

Phuoc’s dream of making it big as a comedian was shattered when he failed the entrance exam to the Hanoi Academy of Theater and Cinema and had to figure out what his next steps in life would be.

Around that time, his father offered him a piece of advice that would forever change his life.

“You’d better learn to cook,” his father suggested.

For years Phuoc had cooked for his family. Though he had always enjoyed feeding his mother and father, he never once thought about a career in the kitchen.

Still, with no other options in front of him, Phuoc left Son Tay and headed to Hanoi to enroll in culinary school.

A lesson in Japanese spirit

Phuoc’s first experience with Japanese food came during an internship where he worked as a server at a Japanese restaurant.

At the time, the Vietnamese capital city was home to just a few Japanese restaurants.

“Each day they asked me if I’d keep coming back for work,” Phuoc shared.

“Many servers who had worked there before me had left because of the owner’s strict rules.

"It was a culture for many, but not to me.”

According to Phuoc, it is his background as a rural villager that prepared him for restaurant life.

“As a farmer by nature, I am not afraid of hard work and unpleasant tasks, like cleaning floors and wiping grease,” he explained, adding that it made him more uncomfortable to do nothing than to do something difficult.

Between the two years he spent working at the restaurant and a Japanese cuisine exhibition held at the capital’s Nikko Hotel which showcased the beauty and thought put into each of Japan’s dishes, Phuoc grew a tremendous passion for Japanese food.

Following his new dream, Phuoc quit his job and enrolled in a Japanese class, hoping it would prepare him to travel to Japan and study the country’s cuisine.

Overcoming culture shock

Phuoc’s tenacity earned him a scholarship to study the culinary arts at the Hokuto Bunka Academy in Japan.

“I went to Hokkaido," Phuoc said.

"There weren’t many Vietnamese students there at the time and I was the only non-Japanese student in my class.”

Nguyen Ba Phuoc prepares dishes at the cooking school at the Hokuto Bunka Academy in 2017 in this supplied photo.

One of the biggest challenges for Phuoc was the language barrier.

Despite reaching a level of Japanese proving his ability to understand the language in daily situations, it was difficult for him to adjust to the local culture and bond with his classmates.

“The Japanese didn’t like to speak English and they were also hesitant to talk to foreigners," he recalled.

"This made it very difficult to engage with them at school."

Hoping to overcome the language and culture barriers he faced, Phuoc set about improving his Japanese language command and brushing up on the country’s culture, history, and institutions.

His hard work paid off two years later with a culinary degree in traditional Japanese cuisine – one of his school's most difficult subjects.

“In Japan, traditional food refers to cuisines that were served just one time only to the royals," said Phuoc.

"There are instances where no amount of money can buy a traditional dish.”

Slowly, that is changing.

Over the past few decades, Japan’s traditional restaurants have begun opening themselves to the general public, exposing the masses to food once reserved for royalty.

“When you go to a traditional Japanese cuisine restaurant, you not only enjoy dishes there but you also have the opportunity to enjoy a typical Japanese space inside the restaurant and the unique service experience offered by the staff," he said.

"The food is just about 40 percent of the experience.”

Nguyen Ba Phuoc prepares dishes before the Lunar New Year holiday in 2019 in Hanoi in this supplied photo.

Dreaming of a day of return

With such an outstanding academic record from culinary school, Phuoc was able to secure a job in Tokyo but was quickly laid off after the country was hit by COVID-19.

He then picked up a part-time job as a porter at a local market in order to afford rent while he continues his job hunt.

He did not have to wait long for a stroke of luck.

Within just a few weeks, a larger restaurant than the first offered him a job.

Now, after nearing his dream of conquering Japan’s traditional culinary scene, Phuoc has begun to set his sights on a new dream: returning to his homeland to help build Vietnam’s Japanese food ecosystem.

Though it will take several more years of experience before he is ready to return to Vietnam, the cook has already set the wheels in motion by using the Internet to begin creating a network of like-minded chefs who share his ideas.

He also holds online seminars for such individuals to exchange knowledge, skills, and experiences relating to traditional Japanese cuisine.

He has helped eight young people in the last three years gain the opportunity to travel to Japan.

“As long as they really love cooking, I will try my best to help anyone,” said Phuoc.

Nguyen Ba Phuoc with a dish of sweet and sour pork ribs in a photo taken in 2019

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nanocovax – one of Vietnam’s domestically developed vaccines for COVID-19 – has officially received volunteers for its human clinical trial phase. Meanwhile, three other candidates are each running their own race to come up with an approved COVID-19 vaccine for mass inoculation.

Developed by Vietnamese manufacturer Nanogen Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanocovax will be brought to human trials under the supervision of the Vietnam Military Medical University.

The vaccine roadmap

Just one year ago on December 3, the first case of novel coronavirus infection was detected in China. Named COVID-19, the disease stemming from the SARS-CoV-2 pathogen managed to spread across the world, causing the most contagious and precarious epidemic in the last 100 years.

In the face of a looming global crisis, governments and pharmaceutical companies from all over the world spared no time to kickstart the development of their own vaccine.

Four Vietnamese candidates also stepped into the game, including Nanogen, the state-owned Vaccine and Biological Production Company No. 1 (VABIOTECH), the Institute of Vaccines and Medical Biologicals (IVAC) and the Center for Research and Production of Vaccines and Biologicals (Polyvac).

At the time, these firms set humble goals, only looking to gain access to the latest technology and develop a manufacturing procedure.

In early May, the vaccine developers mobilized adequate resources, updated infrastructures and facilities to obtain a central-level priority status for their research of a COVID-19 vaccine.

However, the expert’s work even predated the authority approval: A group of VABIOTECH has sequestered themselves in the lab and commenced trials of a vaccine prototype on rats since March after returning from the United Kingdom.

Meanwhile in July, vaccine samples of the candidate IVAC were shipped to the United States for appraisal.

But for the moment, Nanogen has emerged as the front runner.

On December 10, the firm announced the search for volunteers to receive a vaccine shot for an experiment starting December 17.

Such achievements might look like the heroic feats of a select few, but the individual hurdles encountered during the process shows a team effort.

“It is obvious that no one would like to see a large number of COVID-19 cases, but the very fact that Vietnam does not see many transmissions greatly interfered with our pathology sampling process. We also don’t have access to labs with adequate space to implement tests on animals,” A Nanogen representative revealed.

“All other labs in the world are crammed with their own development of vaccines, while reports on phase one's clinical trial were also scarce,” he added.

The representative also cited a lack of solid regulation framework to guide the production and registration of a COVID-19 vaccine as a barrier against their efforts.

This is why Vietnam’s development progress of a vaccine fell behind other countries, he speculated.

During the past months, many dialogues have been made between the Ministry of Health and the manufacturers to complete pre-clinical evaluations and resolve existing issues while also maintaining scientific standards.

The ministry also asked the National Institute for Vaccines and Biologicals, the National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, and the Ho Chi Minh City Pasteur Institute, among others, to assist four manufacturers in appraising all lab reports, challenge trials, and most importantly detecting the safe dosage of vaccine on animals.

The efforts brought forth positive results.

In August, Nanogen announced their success in producing four types of antibodies using samples extracted from patients who naturally recovered from COVID-19.

Instead of creating just one, the researchers attempted to synthesize four types of antibodies into a sequence and deploy them for injections as well as spray vaccines, which can effectively “lock” multiple gateways that allow the virus to infiltrate our cells.

The researchers wrapped up the development phase and are in position to manufacture scFv and peg-scFv, fragments of antibodies that targets the S protein on the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

The researchers have already implemented strict pre-clinical tests on adaptive immune responses on lab rats and monkeys before sending the vaccine to the human trial phase.

“The tests proved the vaccine’s efficacy in triggering strong immune responses. Toxicity tests on rats, hamsters, rabbits and monkeys all demonstrated adequate safety from the vaccine,” said Nguyen Phuong Thuy, head of Nanogen’s Medical Department, one of the two first researchers to join the development of the Nanocovax.

The pharma company has also referenced clinical research from foreign institutes to devise a set of criteria for safety and efficacy of the vaccine based on ecological and epidemiological peculiarities of Vietnam.

The guidelines also laid the framework for phase two of clinical trial to be started immediately after the first phase is completed.

According to Hoang Hoa Son from the Administration of Science, Technology and Training under the Ministry of Health, there are at least 51 vaccine developers worldwide who are implementing human clinical trial of COVID-19 vaccine, with Vietnam’s Nanogen just named the 52nd.

IVAC and VABIOTECH are also anticipated to join the list with their own vaccine tests on human slated for February and March 2021 respectively.

“We’re holding high hopes,” said Nguyen Ngo Quang, deputy head of the Administration of Science, Technology and Training.

Researchers are seen during the development of Nanocovax at Nanogen Pharmaceutical Biotechnology. Photo: Duyen Phan / Tuoi Tre

Flu shots and spray vaccine

The first COVID-19 vaccine developer to gain authority approval to human tests in Vietnam, Nanogen expects their work to be Vietnam’s first to be launched to the market.

They claimed to prioritize domestic vaccine demand to assist the government in pushing back the epidemic.

“The price for the vaccine has yet to be set, but will try to ensure an accessible price for all Vietnamese residents,” Nanogen vowed.

While Nanogen and IVAC are working on intravenous forms of the vaccine, VABIOTECH is in development for a novel type of spray vaccine, where users will not have to get a painful injection.

According to Quang, all visions are tentative at the moment, but he highly appreciates the efforts of manufacturers in branching out, which help the communal progress of Vietnam to run almost parallel with global advances.

“According to the World Health Organization, epidemiological safety can be attained with only 20-40 percent of a populace vaccinated. In Vietnam, that would mean 20-40 million of residents to receive shots for the community to be safe,” Quang said.

As per the manufacturing scale announced by Vietnamese developers, Vietnam is capable of producing tens of millions of COVID-19 shots per year.

The enormous tally is by no means exaggerating as the country already has a developed vaccine manufacturing system since the 1960s, capable of producing 12 out of 14 doses required for the government-backed Expanded Program on Immunization.

With enough positive indications, Vietnamese can safely anticipate a homegrown COVID-19 vaccine to be launched on the market in 2021.

Like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter to get the latest news about Vietnam!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@