You finally got that call you have been waiting for – an interview for a job. At first, you will probably feel overjoyed, but as the interview gets closer, you are likely to get more and more nervous about the big day. Experts say that you only have 30 seconds to make a good first impression at a job interview. The key to a successful interview is to be prepared and stay professional at all times. To make sure you do your best, remember these ten tips:
Be prepared. Learn as much as you can about the company before the interview. Go to the business’s website and read it so you are aware of how things work there. Think of questions the interview might ask you and practice your answers with a friend. Know how to discuss both your strengths and your weaknesses because you will be asked about both!
Dress the part. If you walk in wearing jeans and a T-shirt, you are not likely to get the position. Wear clothing that is neat, clean and presentable. Most companies expect applicants to wear business clothes, such as a shirt and tie or a nice suit. Dressing well shows that you are serious about the job.
Be punctual. Arriving late to an interview can be deadly. No employers want to hire someone who is not responsible enough to come to work on time. Get to the interview 10-15 minutes early to help yourself relax before you step into the office.
Make eye contact. Look your interviewer in the eye when you greet him or her and keep eye contact throughout the entire interview. Keeping eye contact shows the other person that you are both honest and confident.
Be polite. Sit up straight when you are being interviewed, listen carefully to what the interviewer is saying, and avoid using slang or bad words. If you don’t understand a question, ask politely, “Could you please repeat that?” When you are polite, you appear more professional and more likely to get the job.
Don’t interrupt. Interrupting is considered rude. Let the interviewer finish what he or she is saying. If you have something important to say, try to remember it and wait for a moment of silence to speak up.
Find shared interest. Try to notice what the interviewer finds important. Listen for topics that you both know something about and discuss them. If you can’t think of anything, nod yes or agree with points that the interviewer makes.
Sell yourself. Don’t be afraid to talk about your accomplishments. Employers want to hire people who are successful and confident in their abilities. However, be careful not to exaggerate. Do not lie about past job responsibilities. You don’t want employers to ask your old boss about things you never did!
Ask questions. At the end of the interview, ask specific questions about the job or company, such as “What kind of work can I expect to be doing the first year?” or “Where do you see the company five years from now?” You want to show the employer that you have done your research and that you care about working there.
Interviewing is not easy, but it is easier when you know what to do and what to expect. If you stay honest and professional, you will get yourself one step closer to the job you want. Oh and one more thing: don’t forget to breathe!

Questions:
Learn as much as you can about the company before the interview.___True___False (True)
Most companies expect applicants to wear casual clothes to an interview.___True___False (False)
Get to the interview 30-40 minutes early so you can start the interview early.___True___False (False)
Keeping eye contact shows the interviewer that you are a good listener.___True___False (True)
It’s OK to lie a little bit about a past job in order to impress your interviewer.___True___False (False)
At the end of the interview, tell the interviewer a personal story.___True___False (False)


