The troubled Tokyo Olympics finished with a historically low TV audience over 17 days.

NBC averaged 15.5 million viewers according to Nielsen prime time telecast data, a record low for an Olympics on the network that has carried the Summer Games since 1988.

The Tokyo audience declined 42% from the 2016 Summer Games in Rio. Since 2016, competition for viewers has grown exponentially with the addition of new streaming platforms, which have cut into the numbers for many major TV events.

NBC drew a large online audience, with consumers streaming more than 6 billion minutes of coverage over the NBC Olympics app, its Peacock platform, and through its social media partners such as YouTube and TikTok.

Advertisement

NBC parent Comcast was counting on the Olympics to help boost Peacock, the streaming service the company launched last year.

The company provided a record 7,000 hours of coverage across TV and streaming platforms.

Despite the TV ratings drop-off, NBC Sports Group Chairman Pete Bevacqua said last week that the network was able to satisfy virtually all commitments made to advertisers who bought commercials. But using unsold inventory to provide free make goods to advertisers deprived NBC of the opportunity to sell the held back commercial time for additional revenue.

Faced with disappointing numbers, NBC was forced to tout the relative strength of the Tokyo Games, noting that viewership is in the range of “Sunday Night Football,” the most-watched program in prime time.

But the obstacles NBC faced in the Tokyo Games were apparent from the start. There was a yearlong postponement, and a threat of cancellation loomed as Japan continues to struggle with the COVID-19 pandemic.

Based on how sports ratings suffered in the U.S. when teams played in empty arenas and stadiums during 2020, the lack of fans in the stands in Tokyo could not have helped. Even under optimal circumstances, a 13-hour time zone difference makes it nearly impossible to avoid learning the results of events that happen while most of the U.S. is asleep.

NBC was also deprived of extended performances by several anticipated U.S. Olympic athletes.

Advertisement

Sha’Carri Richardson, a charismatic American sprinter, lost her spot on the team after testing positive for marijuana. American gymnast star Simone Biles opted out of most of her events to deal with mental health issues. Tennis phenom and Olympic torch-bearer Naomi Osaka was eliminated early after losing in straight sets in the third round to Czech player Markéta Vondroušová.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As we’ve discussed here at The Times throughout the Tokyo Olympics, NBC, which broadcasts the Summer and Winter Games in the U.S., faced many challenges beyond its control when it came to turning the biannual event into compelling viewing, especially this year. And at least some elements of the Olympic telecasts we’re nostalgic for, whether measured in ratings or “buzz,” are unlikely ever to return.

But that doesn’t mean there isn’t room for improvement, even within the constraints of the digital age. Though there have been readers of our Olympic TV coverage who’ve reached out to say we were being too hard on NBC, many others echoed our frustrations — and enumerated their own. So, with NBC locked in to televise the Olympics (at least) through 2032, The Times asked four staffers who’ve been watching the Tokyo Games on TV to answer a simple question: How would you fix the Olympics?

Here are their answers.

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Advertisement

Greg Braxton, senior writer: I’m a sucker for the Olympics, and my memories of years past popped into my head as I settled in to watch this year’s games — the thrill of watching Carl Lewis and Edwin Moses, the amazing collision between runner Mary Decker and the barefooted Zola Budd, the exciting triumph of Caitlyn Jenner. And don’t forget Lionel Richie performing an elaborate “All Night Long” at the closing ceremonies of the Los Angeles Games in 1984.

I don’t expect I will have the same warmth roll over me when I look back on this summer’s Games. True, the Simone Biles drama was unforgettable and enlightening. But I also know that I probably watched more young people skateboarding than I ever have, which raises the question: Why did I watch that, and why was that an Olympic event that got such heavy exposure in NBC’s prime-time programming block?

It’s fair to argue that it’s not apt to use this year’s Games as a standard for what’s good and what’s bad about Olympics coverage when many things went wrong or were out of control — the COVID-19 pandemic, athletic disappointments and shortfalls, horrible weather, the absence of energy from live fans, and more.

Television The Tokyo Olympics are turning into NBC’s worst nightmare The Times TV team discusses watching an often deflating, thoroughly chaotic Olympics — and why NBC’s approach to televising it is part of the problem.

But there is much room for improvement. This year’s coverage was used as a tool to promote a relatively new streaming service, Peacock. NBC showcased skateboarding and golf while sidelining the live coverage of the match where Naomi Osaka, arguably the greatest female athlete alive, was ousted from her home Games. By spreading itself over so many channels, viewers were constantly confused as they battled a maze to find out when and where to watch.

The other main area for improvement? Olympic coverage cannot act like the Games are taking place in a bubble. A cloud of racism came alongside the dramas of Biles and Osaka, but that fact was scarcely dealt with during the broadcasts. There were numerous opportunities to develop stories about the topics raised by the numerous controversies coming into the event, from marijuana use to rules governing apparel. . And at a moment when anti-Asian bias has reached a troubling pitch in the country, much could have been made of how the triumphs of gymnast Suni Lee might bring much-needed joy to counter the hatred. The Olympics are an international event with real-world connections and ramifications, and NBC should make more of an effort to underscore that truth.

U.S. gymnast Suni Lee competes in the women’s balance beam final at the Tokyo Olympics. (Robert Gauthier/Los Angeles Times)

Thuc Nhi Nguyen, staff writer: I still love the Olympics. I just hate the TV coverage of the Olympics.

Advertisement

The inspiring athletes and the heartwarming moments are all still there. In some respects, there are even more opportunities for those types of stories after the year we all had. But it’s just too freaking hard to find anything in NBC’s tangled mess of broadcast and streaming coverage.

NBC’s social media team could easily help by starting every morning with a post that includes a schedule of that day’s events, how to watch each one and their times (in U.S. time zones). Tweet a new one every morning, pin it at the top of the @NBCOlympics Twitter feed, and repeat the next day.

During the first days of the Games, I was eagerly tuning in every night for the prime-time show but became frustrated when I saw that major blocks of time were tape-delayed. Then I would scroll through the channel guide to find other sports. Then those competitions were also replays. At that point, I was out.

Advertisement

It really doesn’t have to be difficult: Put live events on TV. Don’t shun the U.S. men’s basketball team to the Peacock app at 9:40 p.m. PDT behind a paywall when there are four to five channels broadcasting Olympic coverage at the same time, including some that are showing replays. When the U.S. baseball team is playing in the Olympics for the first time since 2008 and facing an elimination game, it should be on TV. There shouldn’t be a replay of a 24-hour-old basketball game on my screen instead.

For popular sports like gymnastics that were contested at odd hours in the United States, maybe a highlight package on the prime-time show is sufficient as long as there are easily accessible replays in their full form on demand. At that point, the suspense of who won is gone because we’ve all gotten the push notifications and breaking news alerts. It’s about showing the best moments and performances.

USA’s Draymond Green grabs a rebound from Australia’s Chris Goulding in a semi-final game against Australia at the Tokyo Olympics. (Wally Skalij/Los Angeles Times)

Eric Sondheimer, columnist: Watching the Olympic Games on TV is like trying to figure out what to eat at a Las Vegas buffet. There are so many choices if you invest time in clicking one of the numerous NBC platforms that are streaming events. My focus has been watching NBC 4 Los Angeles or USA Network in the early evening during live broadcasts, and even then it’s been confusing at times trying to figure out exactly what sports will be shown on a given night.

Advertisement

The best part of the broadcasts has been seeing parents, friends and family members cheering from remote sites. No one will forget the scene of Alaska high school students cheering on swimmer Lydia Jacoby’s gold medal. That was real drama seeing her hometown react in real time.

NBC has struggled to find a unique summer sport to capture the attention of fans, as curling does for the Winter Games, though there have been occasional highlights of archery, canoeing and surfing. And as a born-and-raised Southern Californian, it was fun to see skateboarding get some attention.

Americans love track and field every four years, but let me say politely that NBC’s commentators, other than their No. 1 track commentator, Ato Boldon, have displayed surprisingly little knowledge of the sport. It’s as if they hired ex-athletes who might know about their individual event but nothing about other events.

Advertisement

Most concerning is a failure to adjust when news happens. On Monday night, one of the greatest Olympic races ever happened in the 400 hurdles: Norway’s Karsten Warholm, who set a world record, roared when he appeared on the track during introductions and literally shredded his jersey like a WWE wrestler at the end of the race. What a character he must be! It’s too bad we didn’t learn more about him. And unlike in swimming, where the competitors were immediately interviewed after winning gold, I waited and waited for one to come with Warholm. Finally, I turned the channel.

It’s not NBC’s fault if the predictions of who would win or advance to gold-medal competition didn’t come to pass, or the fact that some finals take place at 3 a.m. Pacific time because the competition is in Japan. But it is NBC’s responsibility to make tuning in easy and fun — and on that count it’s been hit and miss from my perspective.

Karsten Warholm of Team Norway reacts after winning the gold medal in the men’s 400m hurdles at the Tokyo Olympics. (David Ramos/Getty Images)

Tracy Brown, staff writer: For as much as I have mixed feelings about certain aspects of the Olympics, I do still have a soft spot for them and wish NBC didn’t make the viewing experience so infuriating. It’s like they think being vague about the details of what time each sport will be shown during the prime-time block will force people to stick with the program until the event they are waiting for is finally shown.

Advertisement

Audiences are not like this anymore. We are used to entertainment that we can access on-demand. So I’m more likely to stick with a program if I know exactly what I am counting down toward. Keeping it vague means frustration and churn — as in, giving up and watching something else.

I’ve mentioned this before, but oftentimes I turned to NBCOlympics.com to watch live events or full replays of events I was interested in because it was much easier to find them there. No flipping between channel guides required.

My suggestion to NBC would be to really recalibrate the approach of its main prime-time show to make it the one thing you need to see if you want to be on top of everything Olympics. Maybe this means showing big events live if the timing works out. But it also can mean taking advantage of a time difference to create a full show that isn’t reliant on playing up some nonexistent mystery around the results. Pull multi-cam footage to create compelling highlight packages with the best angles. Use the time delay to craft a solid script that can provide context about the significance of what happened that can be hard to include during live coverage. Find that heartfelt story to spotlight among the athletes that competed that day.

Making old news compelling is pretty impossible. So the best way forward is to use the news to make the most compelling show you can make.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bam Margera is suing Paramount Pictures, MTV Networks, Johnny Knoxville, Jeff Tremaine, Spike Jonze and others, alleging he was discriminated against and unfairly fired from “Jackass Forever” so that the studios and producers could steal the movie franchise, his attorneys said Monday.

Margera also wants an injunction against the film’s release. “Jackass Forever,” which is currently in postproduction, is scheduled to hit U.S. theaters Oct. 22.

The 41-year-old performer’s firing was reported by TMZ in February 2021, though according to the lawsuit, Paramount fired him in August 2020. In February, he posted videos in which he discussed previous suicidal ideation and slammed his “Jackass” cohorts for shutting him out of the stunts-focused movie.

Margera admitted to consuming wine and beer before making the videos, TMZ reported. A day later, he said he was getting help from a doctor specializing in bipolar disorder.

Advertisement

“Margera is not only the star of the television show and film franchise that has made Paramount and MTV hundreds of millions of dollars to date, but a co-writer and producer who came up with the vast majority of the franchise’s most memorable content,” the lawsuit says.

“Indeed, Jackass would have been impossible without Margera, as more than half of the persons featured on the franchise constitute his [original] CKY Crew, or his immediate family.”

‘Jackass 3D’: Jacks of all (asinine) trades ‘Jackass 3D’: Jacks of all (asinine) trades

The lawsuit alleges Knoxville, Tremaine and Jonze took advantage of Margera and inflicted emotional distress while he was in rehab in 2019, forcing him to sign a “Wellness Agreement” or be excluded from future “Jackass” projects, his primary source of income.

“The Wellness Agreement took its toll on Margera. For months, Margera was obligated to complete daily drug tests, multiple times per day, both scheduled and unscheduled, requests for which could come in at any hour of the day or night. Margera was subject to countless breathalyzer and urinalysis tests, which he submitted to and passed repeatedly for several months without objection or incident. However, in doing so, his ability to travel, work, and effectively live life were completely constricted,” the lawsuit says.

The filing says Margera also was forced to take a cocktail of psychoactive medications prescribed by a medical team from Paramount, the film’s distributor and one of its producers.

According to the lawsuit, the performer did not violate the agreement. “Rather, Defendants’ wrongful termination of Margera stems from the fact that one of the numerous drug tests Margera was forced to submit to demonstrated that he was taking prescription Adderall. Defendants knew full well that Margera had to take Adderall to treat his attention deficit disorder.”

Advertisement

Margera’s suit also accuses the defendants of fraud, saying, “Defendants at all times intended to employ Margera long enough that he would develop ideas for content, stunts and pranks featured in the movie, and then terminate him once those ideas were received, and refuse to pay him anything for his work.”

The lawsuit states that Margera is protected under the Americans With Disabilities Act due to his bipolar disorder and other conditions and alleges that the studio and others engaged in discriminatory practices against him.

In part, Margera is seeking damages, court costs, restitution for the defendants’ use of Margera’s intellectual property and an enjoinder preventing the release of “Jackass Forever.”

Reps for Tremaine, Knoxville and their company, Dickhouse Productions, did not respond immediately to a request for comment, nor did a representative for Paramount Pictures.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Annie Korzen is a judicious dropper of the F-bomb on her TikTok channel, which in less than four months has claimed more than 223,000 followers and 2.2 million likes.

The 82-year-old professional storyteller and television actress favors colorful language as much as colorful clothing, accessories, artwork, furniture and friends. Her personal flair and contrarian bent help explain her popularity on a social media platform that champions dancing babies and fashion tutorials, but her secret weapon, she says, is her 30-year-old bestie, Mackenzie Morrison, who serves as the producer, editor and music supervisor for her pithy videos.

Their friendship is a TikTok version of the HBO comedy “Hacks,” where a young writer helps an aging comedian freshen up her act while finding her authentic self in the peak-meta era.

Advertisement

“We were watching it while we were on the phone together. We were obsessed,” Morrison says while Korzen laughs beside her.

The pair sit side-by-side on Korzen’s back porch in the sprawling Park La Brea complex along Miracle Mile, discussing their TikTok strategy: what works, what doesn’t work and why.

The “why” part remains the most baffling for Korzen. Her videos aren’t meant to be comic, but they often have comic undertones. They are essentially small stories fortified with a subtle message that generally inspires or uplifts. Korzen’s fans take particular delight in Korzen’s knack for dragging. She can take a subject — Macy’s, for example, or Royal family fashion — and knock it down to size with ruthless efficiency.

Korzen doesn’t understand why a video about her postpartum depression, which she thought would resonate with people, did not get traction. TikTok, she says, is a mystery to her. Which makes sense, she adds, because she can barely take a selfie or send a text.

When she was looking for a way to expand her audience, she thought maybe she should try Instagram, but Morrison immediately put a stop to the idea.

“Instagram to me doesn’t exist anymore,” says Morrison, who is a writer and sells vintage fashion online. “When I see people looking at Instagram it shocks me, I don’t know how that app is still running. It feels archaic, and it’s depressing.”

TikTok, Morrison told Korzen, is a much more positive space — with less negativity and fewer trolls. Korzen’s first reaction: No way.

Advertisement

“I said, ‘You’re crazy.’ I knew enough about TikTok because my 7-year-old grandson is on it,” Korzen says. “I knew it was sexy young girls doing dance moves or showing you how to wear makeup. Why would anyone want to see me?”

The reasons, it turns out, are many and varied. Scan the comments on Korzen’s videos and you’ll see loads of praise. A sampling:

“I just fell madly in love with you!”

Advertisement

“Everyone needs you in their life.”

“Look, I am almost 40 years old, but if you are looking to adopt, I’m available.”

“QUEEN.”

“She’s the Fran Lebowitz replacement we all need.”

Advertisement

“You are my spirit animal.”

Lots of commentators call Korzen beautiful, and she says it makes her want to cry.

“This is not a message I have gotten in my life. Ever,” Korzen says. “If a casting call went out today and they want an ‘attractive older woman,’ I guarantee you, because I know the business, I would not be seen for it.”

“But Annie, you’re so beautiful,” Morrison says as Korzen waves a dismissive hand.

Advertisement

“I am not Hollywood’s idea of attractive, but that’s something I have been living with my whole professional life,” she continues. “And the idea that people are seeing beauty in me is amazing to me. It gives me hope that maybe young people today — maybe their perception is getting a little more open and accepting.”

TikTok’s global nature has drastically changed Korzen’s audience. As an actress, she has appeared on “Seinfeld,” “Why Women Kill” and “PEN15.” She performed a one-woman show for a five-month run at the Jewish storytelling company in Santa Monica, the Braid. She considers complaining an Olympic sport and is a chipper champion of unpopular opinions. She hates Disneyland and reserves particular antipathy for Frank Capra’s Christmas classic, “It’s a Wonderful Life.”

Before TikTok, Korzen thought she knew her fan base: “middle-aged or older college-educated people, mostly women, mostly Jews.” On TikTok, her followers represent all ages and a variety of races and ethnicities. At the Braid, she was happy if she sold out the theater’s 80 seats, but on TikTok she feels bad if a video racks up fewer than 10,000 views.

Advertisement

Because so many people are watching, and the age of social media is fraught with online misunderstandings, Morrison sometimes steers Korzen away from delicate topics.

“I’m just trying to make sure we don’t get canceled because people are really sensitive now,” she says.

Korzen is not shy about speaking her mind and although she doesn’t have a malicious bone in her body, she traffics in humor, which gets its oxygen from poking fun at one thing or another. Morrison does her best to make sure the jokes in question do not unintentionally cause offense.

One of Korzen’s videos shows her wearing Zulu jewelry, which she compares to wearing art. “Art is not Louis Vuitton, art is not a $100,000 stupid Birkin bag. That’s not art. Burberry. Is anything uglier than Burberry? Brown and beige plaid from England.”

Advertisement

“She dragged England’s entire culture in less than five seconds, lmaoooooo, PREACH,” cheered one commenter.

Some, though, chided Korzen for cultural appropriation. Korzen was heartened by a number of supportive comments from people who identified as Zulu and thanked her for appreciating their culture.

Korzen takes on issues of race and perception in a video about her grandson, who is Black. She says that when they walk down the street together, some people look at them like they don’t belong together. On the contrary, she says, they have everything in common, from music to humor. They are, she says with tears in her eyes, a match made in heaven.

Advertisement

@akorzen Let me tell you about the best, the brightest, and the most beautiful child ♬ original sound - Annie Korzen

Sex, however, is a no-go on TikTok. Korzen discovered this after a video featuring a story about her and her husband’s sex life had the sound taken down. (Korzen’s husband, Benni Korzen, co-produced the 1987 Danish film “Babette’s Feast,” which won the Oscar for best foreign-language film.)

“It was very sweet. The video is up, but the sound is off,” says Morrison. “I think sex is a weird thing on TikTok. “That’s why people use ‘seggs’ when they talk about sex, or they mouth it. You can’t really say, ‘Sex.’”

“We did put the one up about the vagina right?” asks Korzen.

Advertisement

“We did. I think you can say ‘vagina,’” Morrison says. “Sometimes things get flagged, sometimes not.”

Korzen learns as she goes. She has no desire to be a social media star or influencer, but she hopes the fun she and Morrison have on TikTok leads to other opportunities.

“My real fantasy?” she asks.

“I’d like to do what Andy Rooney did on ‘60 Minutes.’ I want to be on a TV show once a week for five minutes to just complain — or inspire. Hopefully inspire.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@At the Four Seasons Maui, guests can stay in a one-bedroom suite overlooking the golden sands of Wailea Beach for about $9,000 a night, take a private helicopter ride to an organic farm for $26,450, or drop $23,750 on a morning of whale-watching.

But in late October, the high-end resort hosted an experience that was truly priceless: the filming of HBO‘s “The White Lotus.” Amid a lethal COVID-19 surge and bitter presidential election, cast and crew lived in a luxurious bubble at the hotel, which had reopened to accommodate production on writer/director Mike White‘s dark satire. The six-episode series, which premiered in July, follows the guests and staff at the fictional White Lotus resort over the course of a particularly un-relaxing week of microaggressions, breakdowns, marital strife and death.

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Unlike other shows about the ultra-wealthy, though, “The White Lotus” is anything but lifestyle porn: It portrays a tropical retreat for the 1% as a simmering cauldron of class conflict, environmental despair and white privilege — somewhere to unravel rather than unwind.

Advertisement

“This sense of apocalyptic anxiety — sometimes I feel it the most when I’m on vacation,” said White in a recent phone interview. “You go to these places where you’re supposed to be escaping from all of the problems of the world, and you realize that you can’t really escape them. The sense of unease you feel is almost amplified in the places where you’re supposed to feel so relaxed.”

The seed for the series was planted last summer, when White, cooped up at home and pulling his hair out watching CNN, received a call from HBO.

Hampered by pandemic-related production delays on several of its shows, the network was in need of programming to fill its lineup. They wondered if White — who has a reputation for writing quickly — could come up with a COVID-friendly show, set in a single location, that could start filming as soon as possible.

The idea of a hands-off development process was especially appealing to White, who dislikes the protracted gestation period typical of the TV business. “Maybe I’ll just be able to go and do exactly the show I want to do,” he remembered thinking. White began writing in August, and by late October cameras were rolling. “They were basically first drafts,” he said of the scripts.

White had always wanted to do a show about a couple on a honeymoon coming to the sudden realization that they have wildly different values because “you just start to see people in different ways when you’re on vacation,” he said.

Sydney Sweeney and Brittany O’Grady in a scene from “The White Lotus.” (Mario Perez / HBO)

In “The White Lotus,” Shane (Jake Lacy), a nightmarishly entitled bro from a wealthy New York City society family, arrives in Hawaii with his beautiful bride, Rachel (Alexandra Daddario), a freelance writer from a modest background. When the hotel’s tightly wound manager, Armond (Murray Bartlett), mistakenly books them a room without a plunge pool, Shane — to Rachel’s chagrin — becomes singularly obsessed with getting into the coveted Pineapple Suite.

Advertisement

At the resort, they are joined by the Mossbacher family, led by mom Nicole (Connie Britton), a tech executive and “Lean In"-style corporate feminist. She’s crammed in a one-bedroom suite with her emasculated husband (Steve Zahn); their porn-addicted teenage son (Fred Hechinger); performatively woke daughter, Olivia (Sydney Sweeney); and Olivia’s best friend from college, Paula (Brittany O’Grady). Also staying at the White Lotus is Tanya (Jennifer Coolidge), a needy heiress who unloads her emotional baggage on compassionate spa manager Belinda (Natasha Rothwell).

White’s previous series, “Enlightened,” the critically beloved dramedy starring Laura Dern, explored one woman’s quixotic effort to make change within a soulless corporation. In contrast, “The White Lotus” is about “trying to get into the mind-set of the people who have money and the power,” White said, “and why they are so defensive right now.”

Creating a palpable sense of dread is the fact, revealed in the series’ opening scene, that someone at the resort will wind up dead by the week’s end.

Advertisement

“It’s such a trope at this point — the dead body at the top of the series,” said White, who is known for oddball critical darlings like “Year of the Dog” but also understands how to write mainstream fare like “School of Rock.”

“I don’t usually have dead bodies in my show,” he continued. “But I was like, ‘Give the people what they want: here’s your dead body!’ And I do think it helped stoke this sense of ‘What’s going to happen?’, so that there’s a little more blood in the mouth than a ‘California Suite,’” the Neil Simon comedy set at a luxury hotel.

White has a personal connection to Hawaii dating back to childhood vacations with his family. He bought a home in Hanalei, in Kauai, after filming some of “Enlightened” there a decade ago, and has befriended members of the Hawaiian Sovereignty movement, which views the United States’ annexation of Hawaii in 1898 as illegal and advocates for self-determination rights similar to those granted to other Indigenous groups.

Over time, White has come to understand the complexities of a place where tech billionaires shop for vacation homes on sacred lands, seeing it not only as a place of wondrous natural beauty but also a microcosm for pressing global issues like income inequality, climate change and American imperialism.

Advertisement

“Hawaii is a very paradisiacal and idyllic place, but also the more time you spend there, the more you realize how complex the history is, and also how the history is a living thing — the colonial legacy is still a living issue, obviously,” he said. Yet tourism — along with the military — is an essential local industry, employing more than 200,000 people statewide and attracting 10 million visitors as of 2019, according to the Hawaii Tourism Authority.

“It’s not a simple paradise postcard,” he added. “But I think there are a lot of tourists who go there and aren’t aware of the issues.”

Mike White, writer-director of “The White Lotus,” pictured in Hawaii. (Jason Yokobosky)

These tensions come to the fore in “The White Lotus,” largely through Paula and her budding romance with Kai (Kekoa Kekumano), a staff member whose family claims hereditary rights to the land where the hotel stands. Paula goes on vacation “expecting to just have a good time and do drugs” while reading Judith Butler poolside, said O’Grady. But her perspective shifts over the course of her week as an elite interloper and seemingly the only person of color staying at the White Lotus.

Advertisement

“She walks this line where she can go on a nice vacation with her friend, but she is not one of them. She can sit at the table, but the world sees her differently,” said O’Grady.

Over long, excruciating meals, Paula bites her tongue as the Mossbachers complain about the supposed excesses of #MeToo and the indignity of having to prove their “anti-racist bona fides” — circumstances O’Grady, who is biracial, related to deeply. “I’ve been at so many dinner tables where people just say things and you’re like, ‘What?’” she said. “I’m Black, but a lot of people don’t see me as a Black woman. I have privilege going into spaces at times but then I’m still impacted by anti-Blackness.”

In the series’ fourth episode, “Recentering,” Paula becomes upset as she watches a bare-chested Kai perform a traditional dance for the hotel’s rich, white clientele — including the Mossbachers, who seem unfazed by the spectacle.

“She’s seeing how tourism has affected his life every day, and she doesn’t think that Olivia” — who jealously flirts with Kai — “was raised by people who are conscious of that,” said O’Grady.

Advertisement

White and a team of producers arrived in September to begin prep and received a standing ovation from the staff at the Four Seasons. Cast and crew were tested for COVID three times a week, and their movements were strictly limited.

Everything was filmed on location at the hotel, in guest suites transformed by production designer Laura Fox. White, who directed all episodes, filmed the resort from off-kilter angles to create a sense of unease rather than serenity. A hypnotic score by composer Cristobal Tapia de Veer adds to the atmosphere of impending doom.

The result is not exactly an advertisement for luxury tourism.

Advertisement

“They were happy for the business,” White said of the Four Seasons. “But the fact that this is now the visual for the hotel from hell probably escaped them to some degree.” (A representative for the Four Seasons Maui politely declined to comment on the show and its portrayal of the tourism industry.)

After several weeks of filming, outside guests began to trickle into the Four Seasons. Some were not pleased about sharing their vacation with a TV production, creating a situation in which the cast and crew were making a class satire while watching the real thing unfold between takes.

“It was fascinating to see some of the characters from the show” among the resort guests, said Bartlett. His character is one of the few white employees at the resort and is initially the poster child for the more dehumanizing aspects of the service industry. (White said he cast Bartlett because the actor was “so front-of-house,” and to American ears, his Australian accent “sounded posh.”)

When we first meet Armond, he is cheerfully lecturing a new employee — a native Hawaiian woman concealing her pregnancy for fear of losing her job — about suppressing her individuality in order to be a “pleasant interchangeable helper.”

Advertisement

White said he was trying to show how our identities “are defined and in some ways perverted by who has the money. People who are working are less able to be a self compared to the people who are paying the bills.”

But the Pineapple Suite snafu sends Armond, who is in recovery, hurtling off the wagon , and his obsequious veneer quickly gives way to years of pent-up resentment. “The more he tries to maintain his grip, the more it kind of slips away as these people become more and more obnoxious,” Bartlett said.

Natasha Rothwell and Murray Bartlett in a scene from “The White Lotus.” (Mario Perez / HBO)

Bartlett latched onto a relatable biographical detail that was ultimately cut from the series: Armond once aspired to be an actor. “We see a week of his world. Imagine working in that world for a couple of decades while having to manage your shattered dreams,” said Bartlett, who like many actors, has experience in the hospitality business.

Advertisement

The themes of “The White Lotus” also made everyone involved in the series acutely aware of how they treated the resort employees.

“They were really understaffed with COVID and as I was picking up the phone to call the front desk to say, ‘I put my laundry in three days ago, where is it?’ I was like, ‘Oh my God, what a d—!” Bartlett said. “We are all these characters at some point.”

White also felt conflicted: “You want to be this cool guest that doesn’t stand on ceremony, but it can often come off as condescending. As much as you want to break down those barriers that money and power can create, there’s always a reality to it. Sometimes you just can’t transcend those roles.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A month after she announced her departure from “The View,” Meghan McCain officially took her final bow Friday on the daytime talk show.

A couple of McCain’s loved ones appeared on the latest installment of “The View” to help bid farewell to the provocative conservative panelist, who has helmed the series opposite Whoopi Goldberg, Joy Behar, Sara Haines, Sunny Hostin and Ana Navarro for nearly four years.

In July, McCain declared her resignation from the ABC program, citing a desire to stay with her family in Washington, D.C., where she spent the majority of the COVID-19 pandemic. “The View” is taped in New York City.

“I have this really wonderful life here that I ultimately feel like I didn’t want to leave,” said McCain, who is married to conservative writer Ben Domenech, with whom she shares a baby girl, Liberty.

Advertisement

The 36-year-old daughter of late Republican Sen. John McCain and Cindy McCain has been a cohost of “The View” since 2017, when she took up the mantle of the series’ sole conservative pundit.

Since then, she has frequently sparred with her costars — especially longtime panelists Goldberg and Behar — over a wide range of hot-button topics. She has also drawn sharp public criticism for her many controversial stances, such as her support of former President Donald Trump’s widely condemned use of the term “China Virus” when referring to COVID-19.

(McCain later walked back and apologized for that particular position, acknowledging the degree to which Trump’s “racist rhetoric fueled” a surge in attacks on the Asian American community.)

In the spirit of heartfelt goodbyes, McCain’s last episode of “The View” was considerably less contentious than the rest of her tenure. Here’s a sampling of what transpired.

A sweet mother-daughter moment

Special guest Cindy McCain made her “View” debut Friday to pay tribute to her daughter and gush over her new granddaughter, who was born last fall .

“I’m so proud of Meghan,” Cindy McCain said. “What I look forward to ... is to be able to see more of her — and certainly see more of my granddaughter, Liberty.

“She’s done a wonderful job. I love her independence. Her dad would be so proud of her. I wish her the best in whatever endeavor she chooses to do, but I’m glad she chose a little bit of family over too much work right now. It’s important.”

Advertisement

The cohosts also discussed longtime Republican Cindy McCain’s move to cross party lines and endorse President Joe Biden over former President Donald Trump in the 2020 election. Her husband, John McCain, was also a key Republican detractor of Trump’s before his death in 2018.

Biden recently nominated Cindy McCain as an ambassador to the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization.

“I’m deeply honored the president ... thinks so highly of me to put me in this position,” she said when asked by Meghan McCain about the nomination.

Advertisement

Their conversation ended on a touching note, with Cindy McCain praising her daughter’s approach to motherhood as she transitions into her next chapter.

“When your dad passed away, Meghan, we all thought ... that was the end of the world,” she said. “And life goes on, and having grandchildren is part of life going on.

“I know your dad’s looking down on you and on Liberty and knows what a great mother you are. ... I think of him every day, and I’m just sorry he never got to meet Liberty, because he would just adore her.”

Paul Ryan makes a cameo

Former House Speaker Ryan chimed in remotely to salute his fellow Republican, who fan-girled and blushed upon seeing her “boyfriend” appear on screen.

Advertisement

“The show will not be as lively without you,” Ryan said. “You have stood up for your principles. You’ve spoken your mind, and you’ve passionately defended what you believe in.

“I have no doubt that your family is so proud of you. And I know, firsthand experience, that a lot of conservatives around the country are proud of you too. Congratulations on a great run.”

A sizzle reel of Meghan McCain’s hottest takes

Of course, the farewell episode wouldn’t have been complete without a backward-looking montage of some of Meghan McCain’s most controversial moments — including her explosive interviews with prominent critics of former President Donald Trump, as well as opinionated statements on abortion, gun control and other polarizing issues.

“I come here every day trying to show a different perspective,” Meghan McCain said in a series of throwback clips.

Advertisement

“Five women are hosting the most politically relevant show on TV. ... It shows that women are politically engaged in a way they have never been before.”

A flashback to John McCain’s ‘View’ visit

A more tender segment of the highlight reel revisited John McCain’s 2017 appearance on “The View,” made in honor of his daughter’s 33rd birthday.

During his visit, the former Arizona senator — who had recently been diagnosed with brain cancer — brought his daughter to tears with a framed photo of them on a hiking trail in Sedona.

Advertisement

Earlier in Friday’s show, Cindy McCain revealed that her husband was the one who urged their daughter to represent their family and the conservative perspective on “The View.”

“He was adamant because he thought it would be a good format for her,” Cindy McCain said. “We used to call her ‘John McCain in a dress’ when she was little, so we knew she could do it and we knew she had the ability to make waves or deal with controversy.

“He also wanted her to have an opportunity to really express herself and spread her wings.”

Advertisement

A final farewell

Before departing the Hot Topics table for good, Meghan McCain delivered a parting message to her cohosts and viewers:

“You women have been so incredible to work with,” she said. “This has been a really wild ride. ... It’s been honestly the best of times and the worst of times in all ways, on and off the show, and it’s been a really incredible, liberating experience.

“I will always cherish the time I spent with all of you, so thank you all from the bottom of my heart. And I hope that our executive producer ... can forgive me for making his blood pressure rise for the past four years as much as I probably have.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If you’ve watched a single episode of “The White Lotus,” the HBO limited series set at an exclusive Hawaiian resort, you most likely went to bed with its hypnotic theme music ringing in your ears, causing your palms to sweat and your heart to race, as you made a futile attempt to sleep.

Written by composer Cristobal Tapia de Veer, the score is key to the series’ atmosphere of almost suffocating dread. Fans of “The White Lotus,” a cutting satire of privilege and entitlement, have responded enthusiastically to his work on social media.

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

“My days and nights are entirely scored by the theme music from ‘The White Lotus,’” tweeted actor Sarah Paulson — presumably a reference to the score’s infectiousness.

Advertisement

Creator Mike White, who wrote and directed all six episodes of the series, said he wanted “music that makes you feel like there’s gonna be some kind of human sacrifice at some point.” The goal was a feeling of “tropical anxiety,” he said. “Cristobal nailed that — and then some.”

In a recent video chat from his home in Canada, Tapia de Veer recalled that in his initial conversations with White, he expressed a desire to do something different from the typical comedy soundtrack, something with a greater sense of mystery —an effect he described as “Hawaiian Hitchcock.”

His score features discordant flutes and steadily accelerating percussion layered with animalistic shrieks and heavy moaning.

Fred Hechinger and Steve Zahn in a scene from “The White Lotus.” (Mario Perez / HBO)

In the opening credits of “The White Lotus,” the music is paired with sinister images of rotting fruit and dying fish hidden in lush tropical wallpaper — visuals that reflect the show’s focus on the corrosive aspects of high-end tourism. Throughout the series, the score lends a constant thrum of tension to scenes of pretty people lounging underneath palm trees.

Before he created the most evocative earworm on HBO since the “Succession” theme song, Tapia de Veer, who is originally from Chile, studied classical percussion at a conservatory in Quebec. His band One Ton had a Canadian hit with the song “Supersex World” in the early 2000s, but after working as touring musician he pivoted into creating music for film and TV.

A breakthrough came when he wrote the eerie score for the British thriller series “Utopia,” which was remade by Amazon last year.

Advertisement

“That show became a sort of reference for lots of people in the production world,” he said. “Every project I’ve done since then, people call me because of that.” “Utopia” led to work on a number of other projects exploring similarly dark themes, including the techno-dystopian anthology “Black Mirror,” the artificial intelligence drama “Humans” and the Nazi revenge thriller “Hunters.” In 2018, he received an Emmy nomination for his work on another sci-fi series, “Philip K. Dick’s Electric Dreams.”

In contrast to these projects, “The White Lotus” — a post-colonial comedy of manners crossed with a murder mystery — “was kind of a vacation,” said Tapia de Veer, a genial, decidedly chill character with a voluminous beard and a bushy top knot. He responded immediately to White’s scripts and to the filmmaker’s hands-off sales pitch. “He was very easygoing,” Tapia de Veer said.

The process of creating the music was “very improvised,” he said. “I just started jamming on percussions and all this wild stuff. It just started feeling like a zoo, somehow, and I was completely into it. So it wasn’t calculated — you know, trying to laugh at these people and making them seem like monkeys. But somehow it became like that.”

Advertisement

Tapia de Veer used unusual methods to conjure the sounds of a sinister jungle, creating an eerie warbling by over-blowing into a flute. That was also him doing all the squawks and shrieks you hear. ”It’s aggressive but funny at the same time,” he said. “I had a big laugh the whole project. I was just screaming into flutes, doing completely ridiculous stuff like monkey sounds.”

He also used a South American instrument called a charango (similar to a ukulele); a dozen or so drums from different cultures (mostly handmade drums fashioned from wood and animal skin); a variety of natural shakers; and a bit of melancholy piano.

“The rest is just noise,” he added.

An image from HBO’s “The White Lotus.” (Mario Perez / HBO)

Advertisement

The goal was to make the music just menacing enough without overdoing it. Even though it’s revealed in the opening scene of the series that someone dies, “The White Lotus” has a relatively limited body count and is more about character than plot.

“I didn’t want people expecting things to happen: ‘OK, the music is very dark, so someone is going to get decapitated,’” he said. “A lot of shows are extreme now compared to what Mike did. So there is a risk of being too much and people expecting murders.”

Tapia de Veer found there was plenty of emotional depth to the story, and felt particular sympathy for Armond (Murray Bartlett), the uptight hotel manager who unravels in spectacular fashion.

“I can relate to his pain, dealing with privileged children and how a person like that can go crazy,” he said. “I guess some people might look at this and say, ‘I’m not interested in rich people’s problems’ or whatever, but there’s some really sad stuff there.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The party for the nation’s 44th president will go on, but only for family and close friends.

Former President Obama has scaled back his 60th-birthday bash, set for this weekend, because of the surge in coronavirus infections blamed on the Delta variant, his office said Wednesday.

Attendance is now limited to family and close friends. Published reports had said hundreds of celebrities, politicos and others were expected at Obama’s sprawling Martha’s Vineyard home.

“This outdoor event was planned months ago in accordance with all public health guidelines and with COVID safeguards in place,” Obama spokesperson Hannah Hankins said in a statement. “Due to the new spread of the Delta variant over the past week, the President and Mrs. Obama have decided to significantly scale back the event to include only family and close friends.

Advertisement

“President Obama is appreciative of others sending their birthday wishes from afar and looks forward to seeing people soon,” Hankins added.

The former two-term president turned 60 on Wednesday. His plans for a milestone birthday celebration were criticized after reports about the event were published this week.

Last week, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended that people — including those fully vaccinated against COVID-19 — resume wearing masks in public indoor spaces in areas with high rates of transmission to protect against the Delta variant. Some states and cities also have reinstated mask requirements as infections surge around the country.

The CDC website Wednesday listed the rate of transmission in Dukes County, Mass., which includes the island of Martha’s Vineyard, as “substantial.”

The Biden administration has blamed the latest surge on the approximately 90 million people who remain unvaccinated.

Obama’s defenders stressed that the birthday party was being held outdoors, guests were being asked to provide a negative coronavirus test result and that a COVID coordinator had been enlisted to ensure that the event followed all public health guidelines.

Advertisement

Both Obama and former First Lady Michelle Obama have been fully vaccinated against COVID-19 and have urged fellow Americans to get their shots and follow public health protocols.

“COVID-19 has gotten more contagious, so it’s more important than ever to get vaccinated,” the former president said last week in a tweet that included a link for people to find vaccination centers in their area. “Vaccines are safe, and the best way to protect yourself and your loved ones.”

President Biden, who was Obama’s vice president, did not plan to attend the party.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hollywood’s strict safety protocols are being tested as the COVID-19 Delta variant rips through Los Angeles.

Several TV and film productions have reported virus outbreaks and some have been forced to pause shoots, even as the industry grapples with new safety protocols. Fox’s “The Masked Singer,” CBS’ “S.W.A.T.” and the HBO Max movie “House Party” are among those listed as having active outbreaks with three or more confirmed COVID-19 cases, according to L.A. County

Fox’s popular singing show has 12 cases, the largest number among the listed productions at the Red Studios Hollywood set, although work wasn’t been halted. Insider first reported the outbreak.

“The safety of the entire cast and crew has been and will continue to be our number one priority,” Fox Entertainment said in an emailed statement. “We work closely with local and state officials and the unions to ensure we have the safest environment possible.”

Advertisement

“S.W.A.T” had five cases but the show didn’t need to pause production, while the movie “House Party” reported nine, including infections confirmed in pre-employment testing, a person with knowledge of the production said on condition of anonymity. The production has resumed after pausing for a few days. NBCUniversal’s post-production office has reported four cases.

Nonetheless, filming on location in Los Angeles has continued to rise. Last week, the number of shoot days rose to 620 from 566 the previous week, a 9.5 % increase, according to data from FilmLA, the nonprofit that organizes filming permits for the county. The volume of on-location production is beyond 2019 filming levels, when 587 shoot days were registered during the same period.

The outbreaks illustrate the effect the new Delta variant is having on one of the area’s most vital industries. The film business has largely been able to continue working since it restarted in June. The industry agreed that safety protocols on masking and testing have helped stem outbreaks on film sets. The latest infections have yet to reach the levels seen during the winter, when unions and health officials warned the industry to pause as so not to strain hospitals.

“Although there have been some clusters of positive tests on certain productions, the overall number of positive tests remains low and continues to support the conclusion that our safety protocols are working to protect both vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals working on SAG-AFTRA covered projects,” a SAG-AFTRA spokesperson said in an emailed statement. The union represents 160,000 performers, which are working unmasked on sets and considered therefore most at risk. “The renewed safety protocols expressly contemplated areas of greater COVID risk due to variants including the delta variant, and that is why the most stringent protocols remain in place in those areas, including the Los Angeles metro area.”

Last month, the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which includes Netflix, Walt Disney, Amazon and other studios, agreed to new safety protocols for filming during the pandemic. The agreement with the industry’s leading unions, including the Directors Guild of America, SAG-AFTRA and the Teamsters Hollywood local, allows vaccinations to be mandated among certain members of the cast and crew on a production-by-production basis. The new terms allow for a loosening of safety protocols on masking and testing that can be tightened up if infections rise beyond certain triggers.

As part of the new agreement, productions can mandate vaccinations in the so-called Zone A of productions, which is where actors are and considered the area at highest risk for transmission.

Advertisement

Some companies, such as Disney, have announced vaccination mandates. Netflix has told producers to require vaccinations on all its U.S. productions. However, for the studios that agreed to last month’s new protocols, workers can be exempt if they can provide verification that they have a disability or sincerely held religious beliefs that prevent them from being vaccinated.

The Writers Guild of America has also recommended its members get vaccinated before gathering to work on productions.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The music people adore when they’re young often crystallizes their identities and unlocks oceanic feelings. It’s easy to latch onto certain songs, become defensive about their brilliance and refuse to let go.

For many rock fans — white men especially — a mighty object of youthful adoration is Eric Clapton, the heavily decorated rock musician.

Clapton, who is 76, has been in the news this week — not for rock-goddery but his reckless anti-vax rhetoric. His dangerous stance on vaccines has forced yet another conversation about the importance of “separating the music from the man.”

Fans have started to argue again that Clapton was such a Michelangelo in music with songs such as “Layla,” “Cocaine” and “Wonderful Tonight” that his grave misconduct can never make them question his work.

Advertisement

Some seem further to have internalized the creed that “Clapton is God” — apparently without knowing that Clapton himself has suggested that the meme, which was spray-painted all over London in the mid-1960s, was invented by a Yardbirds promoter.

For these believers in Clapton’s divinity, you can criticize the man — and there is more than anti-vax politics to object to — but hands off the music.

This misses the point. In Clapton’s case, the music and the man are one and the same — arrogant performances of “iconoclasm” that appeal chiefly to young, self-doubting minds eager for outlaw heroes. The Clapton package hit the spot at a certain hormonal stage of life. But then you grow out of it, especially as both the music and persona curdle.

Throughout the pandemic, Clapton has joined in criticism of the COVID-19 lockdown, as if governments were just 1960s priggish parents grounding kids for smoking grass.

He played on an anti-lockdown track by fellow science-denier Van Morrison. Then he started citing nutjobs and YouTube videos as evidence of conspiracies around the pandemic.

But Clapton also chose to get vaccinated. (It’s almost as if he didn’t want to contract a deadly disease.)

After his second shot, he alleged that the vaccine left him with a 10-day flare-up of pain in his hands and feet, possibly —he implied — related to the peripheral neuropathy he suffers from. Neuropathy is the result of an injury to the nerves. It can be caused by alcoholism. Clapton has long admitted his alcoholic history.

On Wednesday, Clapton announced that he won’t play in venues that require audiences to show proof of vaccination. Clearly old Slowhand is willing to create superspreader events, secure in the knowledge the coronavirus is unlikely to infect him.

Advertisement

Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), who, like Clapton, is vaccinated, immediately tweeted his admiration: “Bravo, Eric Clapton. Artists should defend individual Liberty.”

Here we go. Vaccinated celebrity-types discouraging vaccination for the masses. Worse: making vaccine hesitancy seem heroic, a revolt against tyranny. For art. And just as the Delta variant delivers death around the world.

Nostalgia keeps Clapton the guitar hero from being dismissed as a public health hazard. He should have been pulled off his pedestal long ago.

Nearly from the start, Clapton revealed himself as racist, violent and now anti-science, and you can’t separate that from the “Clapton is God” package.

Advertisement

This is not to say that everyone who likes Clapton’s music shares his views. It’s to say that Clapton the delirious soloist has always been striking the same chords as Clapton the anti-vax preacher.

There are decades of vileness that have been overlooked or rationalized.

There was that time in 1968 that Clapton damned Jimi Hendrix in Rolling Stone, using a casual racist slur and citing vulgar racist nonsense as the source of Hendrix’s appeal as a sexual fetish object.

There was the time in 1976 that Clapton announced at a concert, again with racist slurs, that he wanted to “keep Britain white” and to deport all Black people.

Advertisement

And of course there’s the time in 1999 when Clapton told the London Sunday Times that fueled by drugs and alcohol he abused the model and photographer Pattie Boyd in the 1980s, when they were married. “I took sex with my wife by force and thought that was my entitlement,” he said.

Now Clapton, with his dangerous vaccine ideology, seems to be taking a life-or-death public health matter by force, and thinking it’s his entitlement.

In the Guardian in 2018, critic Neil Spencer praised Clapton’s music as “dazzling” and full of “caustic brilliance,” cautioning against putting too much stock in his “poor behaviour and assorted addictions.”

“One must trust the art, not the artist,” Spencer wrote.

Advertisement

Dazzling and brilliant are generic words of praise, and clearly in the ears of the beholder. But “caustic” means corrosive. If Clapton’s music is corrosive, certainly so are his actions and ideologies. They’re all of a piece.

With Clapton, it seems time to trust both the art and the artist — and both seem to be begging (on their knees) to enter retirement.

@page88
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The musical “Row” recounts how Tori Murden McClure became the first woman to row solo across the Atlantic. Because numerous scenes take place in the ocean, the world-premiere production is being staged at the Clark Art Institute’s reflecting pool, a picturesque Massachusetts setting that both evokes the story and meets the COVID-19 guidelines of Williamstown Theatre Festival’s outdoor season. The show, from composer-lyricist Dawn Landes and book writer Daniel Goldstein, “exposes you to the elements endured by an extraordinary woman undeterred by the odds,” its program reads.

Theater companies staging shows outdoors for the first time is one thing; doing so in nontraditional performance spaces is another. What took place at Williamstown is a case study for all theaters pushing ahead with productions in unconventional settings due to the ongoing pandemic. Aside from what the actors are doing on these pop-up stages, tech crews also are working amid heat and rain to make these productions possible.

Directed by Tyne Rafaeli, this unique production of “Row” required the installation of wooden platforms in a section of the three-tiered pool, which spans an acre and holds 2,000 gallons of collected storm water. The orchestral pit is split: One foley artist is positioned on this stage, with the rest of the musicians performing remotely from inside the museum. (They must be heard over the area’s population of frogs that croak loudly each evening.)

Additionally, the Berkshires has gotten a notable amount of rain this summer — an issue that the festival, usually held indoors, has not had to consider previously. (Audiences are advised that performances will go on amid light rain, and the festival suggests bringing a rain poncho because umbrellas cannot be opened during the performance.)

Advertisement

Electrical setups had to be redone in order to be weather-safe; entire days of tech were canceled by thunderstorms. During lighter drizzles, the sound crew pushed through each rehearsal’s two-hour setup and two-hour breakdown — a requirement of the museum.

“We’re talking about half a million dollars of audio equipment that you generally don’t want out in the rain,” said one member of the sound department who declined to be identified out of fear of retaliation by the festival. “But as long as there was no lightning, we were just expected to continue to work.”

Whenever rehearsals were paused for intermittent, heavier rain, the cast of actors working under Equity union rules stayed dry under tents or in the museum’s auditorium. But others weren’t so lucky.

“So where does the crew go if we’re holding for rain? And the answer I got was, ‘Yeah, we didn’t really think about it,’” recalled the team member, who sought shelter in the museum’s vestibule. “It was a lack of caring about the well-being of the crew, who are the people who actually make the shows happen.”

By July 14, the day of the first public performance, the cast and crew had yet to run through the entire show in tech. The rain was particularly notable that day, so the production manager announced that the tech session was being paused for 30 to 45 minutes, after which the bad weather was forecast to clear. The actors went inside, and the crew quickly covered the equipment and headed inside the museum to wait it out.

“At one point, I asked if I could run and change into some dry clothing, and was told no, because we had to wait around,” said sound crew member Mary Fator. “It’s like, hey, I’m asking for the bare minimum.”

Williamstown Theatre Festival artistic director Mandy Greenfield said of the sound crew, “Their well-being and their safety is of utmost importance to us.” (Walter McBride / Getty Images)

Advertisement

Minutes later, both sound department team members said, festival Artistic Director Mandy Greenfield approached crew members and said they were cleared to resume working. “The thunder was beyond the 5-mile radius so that they thought it was safe enough for us to go back to work, even though it was still pouring rain,” Fator recalled. “But they were getting stressed about time, so we got back to work.”

The rain started pouring even harder, and the crew — already working 13-hour days, earning a relatively low wage without overtime and paying for festival housing — hit a tipping point. With the full solidarity of the present creative team, the entire sound crew walked out.

Greenfield attempted to talk with team members as they left, the team member said, and then called a meeting with those who were still there. “She gave this whole speech where she broke down crying and said, ‘The crew, they’re just so tired. I made this mistake. And I really wish that we could come together as a group. We’re gonna have to cancel rehearsal and we’ll get through this,’” recalled the team member. “I could not tell you if it was genuine or not.”

The next morning, the sound crew met with Greenfield and the festival’s leadership team and secured modest increases in pay, safer working conditions and a more reasonable work schedule: an eight-hour turnaround between shifts and a 10-hour cap on the number of hours worked in a day.

Advertisement

The festival released an announcement that said the July 14 performance was canceled “as a result of continued inclement weather during the process leading up to the scheduled performance,” not as a result of a work stoppage.

“Row,” which was initially programmed for the festival’s 2020 season and is scheduled to run through Aug. 15, had its first public performance on July 16 but hasn’t played since because of rain. Still, Greenfield told The Times she is “incredibly grateful to the entire production team at the Williamstown Theatre Festival for speaking up and speaking out.

“The biblical proportions of rain which have plagued Williamstown this summer has made an already new outdoor season more profoundly challenging,” she added. “The production teams, the extraordinary people who make this work, were really vocal about what they needed, and we took immediate corrective actions so that we could keep everyone safe emotionally, physically. Their well-being and their safety is of utmost importance to us.”

Advertisement

Members of the sound department disagree.

“This is a Band-Aid on the bigger problem that is the way this festival treats its workers, and especially how it abuses the youngest and most vulnerable theater workers who are just entering the industry, and don’t know that they can and should stand up for themselves,” one team member said.

Fator added: “I was really just using this job to dip my toes back into the water after the pandemic, and I think they were relying on a lot of people to be doing the same.

“But young people are realizing that there’s strength in numbers. And I don’t think theaters are going to get away with exploiting college students or young professionals anymore.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I’ll never forget the feeling of pure joy I had attending my first country music concert in more than 15 months. It was the Gulf Coast Jam in Panama City Beach, Fla., in June, with more than 20,000 fans in attendance. It was the first time in a long time that I felt like we had returned to “normal life.”

That feeling of jubilation and relief stayed with me during the Fourth of July weekend when I visited Nashville and joined more than 350,000 people on Lower Broadway to celebrate the reopening of America.

I was so eager to make up for all those lost months that I attended seven live concerts in four states in the span of 30 days. For a few hours each night, it was as if time had been suspended, like the last 15 months didn’t happen. And then it occurred to me: For many of my fellow country music concertgoers, the pandemic wasn’t real. The prevailing sense I kept running into was that the COVID-19 restrictions — lockdowns, social distancing, masks — were all just government overreach. It was clear that folks in this demographic didn’t believe the precautions were necessary.

The facts speak for themselves. Recent data revealed three states: Florida, Texas and Missouri account for 40% of the new coronavirus cases in America. Southern states such as Alabama, Mississippi and Arkansas are among the least vaccinated in the country. And while it’s easy to argue about political affiliation and vaccine hesitancy, it’s more productive to look at cultural relationships.

Advertisement

Our collective goal has to be to get as many people vaccinated as possible. That is the only way we can fend off the spread of the Delta variant and maintain a return to normality in our lives. Already, we are seeing some mask requirements being reinstituted. This has set off an understandable feeling of anger and resentment toward the unvaccinated. But attacking them will not fix this problem.

That’s where country music comes in.

The country music industry — built on live music — was brought to a halt during the COVID-19 lockdown. The inability to tour and perform live affected thousands of people, including stage techs, bus drivers, caterers and musicians. Few industries have as much riding on getting life back to normal. That’s why this community should become the loudest promoter of vaccinations.

The people who go to these concerts — the people who cheer loudest for lyrics about “freedom,” “liberty” and “America” — don’t want to be told what to do by politicians or government officials. They just don’t trust them. They need to hear this message from people they idolize and believe.

This is a moment when country music can show leadership in saving this country from itself. At every live concert, screens in the amphitheaters could be used to play public service announcements, such as the ones the Academy of Country Music produced earlier this year featuring Darius Rucker, Eric Church and Ashley McBryde. In between acts, they could be playing video clips such as the one with Dolly Parton getting vaccinated and singing “Jolene” as “Vaccine.”

Headlining tours can reach tens of thousands of fans in dozens of cities nationwide with a pro-vaccine message. Arena parking lots could easily be used as mobile vaccination sites. Venues could offer vaccinated fans a free beer. Heck, promoters could offer vaccinated fans a free general admission ticket. Whatever the cost, it would be much less than having to absorb the burden of another shutdown. How would we feel if things closed again when we could have prevented that?

My love of country music came from experiencing it live. The passion, energy and authenticity of the songs, performers and stories moved me. I can’t tell you how many times I’ve heard songs that try to inspire feelings of patriotism and the American spirit. Well, at this moment, the most patriotic thing any of us could do is get the shot, and the most meaningful thing an artist can do is encourage their fans to do the same.

Kurt Bardella is a contributing writer to Opinion and the creator and publisher of the country music tip sheet The Morning Hangover. @KurtBardella
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the Shelf Until Proven Safe: The History and Future of Quarantine By Geoff Manaugh and Nicola Twilley

MCD: 416 pages, $28



If you buy books linked on our site, The Times may earn a commission from Bookshop.org, whose fees support independent bookstores.

“The Coming Quarantine” sounded like a good book title back when Geoff Manaugh and Nicola Twilley sold their idea to publishers. The journalists even had a dramatic opening: a pandemic simulation, Manaugh says, “looking at what might happen if a disease takes hold of the U.S.”

But, well, you know ... Their new book, retitled “Until Proven Safe: The History and Future of Quarantine,” still explores quarantine through the centuries. But while their initial research involved a mission to find someone who had experienced a quarantine (they found a physician from Doctors Without Borders), the authors wrote the bulk of the book during the lockdown, with abundant evidence close to hand.

The history lessons in “Until Proven Safe” help illuminate where things went wrong in 2020 and what needs to change before the next lockdown, which they say is definitely coming. Last year’s “shelter in place” mandates were attempts at large-scale quarantine but, according to one expert they quote, if America had introduced stringent lockdowns as a broad-based quarantine early on, it could have saved many lives. “We just didn’t have the grit for it in the United States,” the expert tells them. “It’s quite humbling.”

Advertisement

The term “quarantine” experienced mission creep in 2020, used for everything from closed-off hospital wards to healthy people working from home. Manaugh and Twilley define it more classically as what happens when someone has been exposed to illness but is not yet confirmed to have it — as opposed to isolation, which comes for the already infected. “Typhoid Mary came up all the time but she was isolated, not quarantined,” Manaugh says. Twilley adds that there are a lot of similarities in how we should handle both during a pandemic.

Books When we were quarantined Over the last three months, 17 writers provided diaries to the Times of their days in isolation, followed by weeks of protest. This is their story.

The couple, who spoke recently by video from Los Angeles, started thinking about the topic back in 2009 on a picnic in Australia, where they saw a spa and hotel repurposed from an old quarantine station. “Quarantines seemed like a practice from a different age, an obsolete technique,” says Manaugh. “But we quickly realized that was not the case. We chose that original title because we thought quarantine would become more common, not less common.”

The interview has been edited for length and clarity.

Geoff Manaugh, left and Nicola Twilley, co-authors of “Until Proven Safe: The History and Future of Quarantine.” (Gleb Kuznetsov | Jenny GG Photog/Farrar, Straus and Giroux)

Why were you sure there was going to be a need for a book about quarantine?

Manaugh: Humans are going into landscapes and encountering microbes and diseases they wouldn’t have previously encountered. They hop on a plane and bring them to Moscow or Los Angeles. We don’t have vaccines for those new diseases. Quarantine will be the one thing that will allow us to control these outbreaks.

Twilley: And it hadn’t been rethought since earlier eras. We wanted to be the people who warned this was coming. And then it came.

Advertisement

Who is the reader for this book?

Twilley: We hope it will reach a popular audience. The way quarantine has shaped the world was fascinating and now that we’ve all been through it, the book is interesting in a different way. But I also want people who make policy to read it so we can redesign quarantine better for next time.

You mention Hoffman and Swinburne Islands in New York, the sites of quarantine for immigrants arriving through Ellis Island. The setup successfully kept diseases out of the city but unfairly crammed people together in unsafe conditions. Have we learned to do better?

Twilley: We have not learned the lessons. The difficulty is really thinking about individual versus mass quarantine. People we spoke to had thought about how to reform quarantine for a few individuals, to make it safe and fair and give them legal rights. What hasn’t happened is thinking through how mass quarantine would work. We toured the new federal facility in Omaha before it opened and it hadn’t crossed their mind that the United States would need to quarantine more than 20 people.

Advertisement

Manaugh: As a society I don’t think we’ve learned to do it any better at all. The hope would be that COVID-19 lets us take a moment and think about quarantine and do it better the next time.

You write about how in the distant as well as recent past — Ebola in 2014 — people would panic and misinterpret facts and point fingers. Can we do better next time in this era of heightened division and mistrust?

Twilley: It’s astonishing to look at our research and then see contemporary examples play out the same way. There’s always a group that is stigmatized — and last year people started stigmatizing Asian Americans.

Advertisement

Manaugh: It depends on whether you’re a pessimist or an optimist. I think we’re going to see the same template over and over again. A lot of CDC planning was drawn out in great detail but we didn’t implement the plan. Parts of it were implemented successfully in places like South Korea.

Twilley: One expert told us the mistake he made before last year was not thinking through how politics would affect the implementation.

Manaugh: With the right political circumstances you can do quarantine, testing and tracing and isolation better. We just did not do it here. Ten years from now we’ll have another pandemic and we’ll see a lot of the same problems.

(MCD Books)

Advertisement

Is some distrust of the government justified?

Manaugh: A lot of things that happen in quarantine become permanent, so you run the risk of widespread implementation of facial recognition technology or biometric registration of civilians’ risk. There’s the dystopian risk of a government demanding quarantine.

Twilley: Trust is a big word in quarantine issues.

Manaugh: If we invest in quarantine the way we invest in earthquake, hurricane or tornado preparedness, it becomes normalized. You don’t think you’re in a dystopia if you see a tornado safe room at the airport. Communicating and having people believe you is essential. The problem is that public health gets presented as surveillance, but you need data points to understand if a disease is moving through society.

Advertisement

Would a president who cared and was competent have made a difference last year, or is it impossible to overcome a culture of American individualism?

Twilley: Things would have been better, but the simulations flagged those issues. There isn’t a strong civic culture anymore, and you can’t have public health without a public. People conflated liberty with the freedom to move around as they wished. We need to have a more sensible conversation about what we mean by freedom, but that’s a huge topic. And quarantine is very difficult to implement fairly in societies that are wildly unequal. So there are a lot of obstacles.

Manaugh: So many Americans give their genetic information to 23andMe but would never do that with the government. Right now, with the political culture in the United States, if a corporation stepped in with its own private quarantine plans, a large portion of the population would trust that before they trust the state.

Advertisement

That’s disheartening. Are we just doomed? Let’s start with the pessimist.

Manaugh: The optimistic answer is that if you tailor your quarantine plans for the specific cultural practices and different family sizes of each region, I think it can be successful.

Twilley: One researcher said if you present things as a choice, it’s much more acceptable. Quarantine will always be a little leaky and never will be perfect. But it doesn’t have to be perfect to work in terms of flattening the curve. It does have to get better. The point of our book is that people know how to make it better.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Who better to build bridges on behalf of President Biden than the queen of musical bridges herself, Olivia Rodrigo?

The president of Gen Z pop met with the president of the United States and his senior medical advisor, Dr. Anthony Fauci, this week as part of a calculated maneuver by the White House to convince young Americans that getting vaccinated against COVID-19 is good 4 u.

While visiting the nation’s capital, Rodrigo recorded a series of public service announcements outlining the rewards of protecting oneself and others against the coronavirus — as well as the dangers of going unvaccinated as the Delta variant continues to spread.

Shot inside the Oval Office, one video took a traditional approach, with a straightforward joint statement from the president and the chart-topping “Sour” artist on the “importance of getting vaccinated” — directed at “people Olivia’s age ... between the ages of 16 and 25.”

Advertisement

“We badly need you to get vaccinated — not only for your own sake and your own health, but for all those people around you,” Biden says in a clip posted Thursday. “It’s the right thing to do.”

Inspired by late-night comedian Jimmy Kimmel’s wildly popular “Mean Tweets,” segment, another video — uploaded Friday morning — implemented a more lighthearted strategy, as 18-year-old Rodrigo and 80-year-old Fauci took turns reading "(Vaccine) Fan Tweets.”

“‘Did anyone else spend their Friday afternoon driving to their second vaccine appointment and crying to Olivia Rodrigo or was that just me?’” the singer-songwriter read.

“I love that. I’m so happy that I’m soundtracking your vaccine appointment. That’s great.”

On Wednesday, the “Drivers License” hitmaker looked happy and healthy while touring the West Wing in a presidential pink plaid ensemble before taking the White House lectern to address reporters during a daily press briefing.

“I’m in awe of the work President Biden and Dr. Fauci have done and was happy to help lend my support to this important initiative,” Rodrigo said in a prepared statement.

Advertisement

“It’s important to have conversations with friends and family members encouraging all communities to get vaccinated and actually get to a vaccination site, which you can do more easily than ever before.”

The “Good 4 U” performer arrived at the White House shortly after Biden invited her, via Instagram, to participate in the government’s vaccination efforts as a youth liaison. (Rodrigo’s popularity on TikTok, signature middle part and unapologetic teen angst have made her somewhat of a poster child for the Gen Z demographic and therefore the perfect candidate for such a position.)

Between filming content for the White House’s social media pages, Rodrigo and Biden were photographed in the Oval Office rocking matching pairs of aviator sunglasses for the ‘gram — as the kids say. On her government Instagram account, Vice President Kamala Harris also shared some candid snaps taken with the “Deja Vu” singer.

Advertisement

“Thanks for stopping by, Olivia, and for using your voice to urge young people to get vaccinated,” read the caption on the official @potus Instagram account. “If we all do our part and get the COVID-19 vaccine, we can defeat this virus once and for all. Let’s do this.”

“if you are young and not immunocompromised, getting your covid vaccination is the best thing you can do for your health and your loved ones’ health,” Rodrigo said in a caption on a selfie with the president. “YOU have the power to save lives. ... thank you to everyone who has done their part in helping end this pandemic.”

Rodrigo’s White House collab is part of a larger campaign launched by the government in recent months to increase vaccination rates for young Americans, which have lagged far behind those of other groups.

In an effort to persuade America’s youth to hop on the immunization train, the Executive Office has deployed everything from Walgreens gift cards and free concert tickets to TikTok videos and video game livestreams.

Advertisement

Meanwhile, Fauci has been collaborating with Instagram influencers to disseminate information about vaccines to a wider, younger audience. The infectious-disease expert has also teamed up with a slew of prominent figures on TikTok, including actor Jennifer Garner and “Dance Moms” alumni Mackenzie Ziegler and Nia Sioux, for maximum exposure.

This isn’t the first time Team Biden has tapped Rodrigo in hopes of galvanizing America’s youth. Before the 2020 presidential election — back in the Pre-"Drivers License” Era (PDE) — the “High School Musical: The Musical: The Series” star joined forces with 20-year-old Maisy Biden, now the first granddaughter, to educate young Americans about voting and civic engagement.

“If you’re not of voting age, like me, there’s still so much that you can do,” said Rodrigo, then 17, while interviewing the president’s granddaughter, “so many conversations that you can have and ways that you can contribute and make your voice heard.”

Advertisement

Times staff writer Chris Megerian contributed to this report.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Foo Fighters have postponed their Saturday concert at the Forum in Inglewood after someone affiliated with the band tested positive for the novel coronavirus.

Tickets purchased for this weekend will be valid for the new date, which “will be announced shortly,” according to the musical act’s social media pages. The highly anticipated performance was supposed to mark the Forum’s first first full-capacity show and first ticketed event in more than a year.

“Despite having made every effort to follow CDC Covid protocols and local laws, there has been a confirmed Covid-19 case within the Foo Fighters organization,” the band said in a statement.

“Out of an abundance of caution and concern for the safety of the band, crew and most of all the fans, Saturdays show at the Los Angeles Forum is being postponed to a later date.”

Advertisement

Important information about the July 17th Forum show. pic.twitter.com/9EwtDorRDx — Foo Fighters (@foofighters) July 15, 2021

The COVID-induced delay comes about a month after the “Pretender” artists played their first full-capacity performance since the beginning of the pandemic.

The intimate set — held at the Canyon Club in Agoura Hills for 600 lucky fans — required proof of vaccination to attend and sparked a backlash among unvaccinated community members who accused the venue and the Foo Fighters of discriminating against them.

Shortly thereafter, the rock musicians kicked off their world tour with a comeback performance at New York City’s famed Madison Square Garden, which was also limited to fully vaccinated patrons.

Saturday’s stop at the Forum has since been removed from the Foo Fighters’ website, which lists forthcoming tour dates in Cincinnati, Milwaukee, Chicago, St. Louis, Mexico City, Boston and more cities worldwide.

During the first weekend of August, the Foo Fighters are set to headline Chicago’s annual Lollapalooza music festival alongside Miley Cyrus, Tyler the Creator, Post Malone, DaBaby, Marshmello and the Grammy Awards’ 2021 new artist of the year, Megan Thee Stallion.

Earlier this year, Foo Fighters frontman Dave Grohl and his bandmates participated in Global Citizen’s “Vax Live: The Concert to Reunite the World,” at Inglewood’s SoFi Stadium. The event, which also featured Jennifer Lopez, J Balvin, Prince Harry, Selena Gomez and more, was aimed at encouraging people to get vaccinated against the novel coronavirus.

“Dude,” Grohl mused onstage before playing to an in-person crowd. “I remember this.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A fund set up to provide money to victims of financier Jeffrey Epstein announced Monday that it has largely completed its work after agreeing to disburse nearly $125 million to more than 135 people.

The announcement came from Jordana Feldman, the administrator of the Epstein Victims Compensation Program, which since late June of last year has operated independently of Epstein’s estate.

Epstein, 66, killed himself in August 2019 in a Manhattan jail a month after his arrest on sex-trafficking charges. Dozens of women have alleged that Epstein for decades sexually abused teenage girls and women, often by turning mansion massages into sexual assaults.

Feldman said 92% of 150 eligible applicants accepted what was offered by the fund, which received 225 claims, far more than the roughly 100 or so claims that were expected based on the number of women who had sued and spoken to lawyers.

Advertisement

Payouts were generally processed and paid within two to three months after claimants shared their experiences in confidential meetings, according to a release from the fund.

Feldman, who declined to provide details about the claimants, said she met individually with more than 200 fund applicants and tried to put them at ease at the outset by saying nothing would be recorded, leading them to “kind of relax their shoulders a little bit.”

“I do think that there was a sense of comfort knowing that this was a safe space to share their stories. And I think that the process was exhausting but empowering for many of these victims — empowerment in having come forward and reclaiming a sense of control and ownership in their own narrative,” she said.

Feldman said she also did not record the meetings because she didn’t want to create an extra record of the meetings, which occurred as criminal probes continue into Epstein and those who might have aided in his sex crimes since the 1990s. His ex-girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell has pleaded not guilty to sex-trafficking charges and awaits a November trial in Manhattan federal court.

Though the meetings were scheduled for one hour, some went much longer, Feldman said.

“It was for many of the victims the first time they told their stories from the beginning,” she said.

Advertisement

The fund was designed as an alternative to lawsuits, which can take years to proceed to a payout.

Awards were not by formula but instead were calculated after a study of numerous factors, including the victim’s age, severity of abuse, frequency and impact of abuse, the extent of collaboration and the general credibility of the claim, Feldman said.

Brad Edwards, a Florida attorney who had several dozens clients participate in the process, called the claim program “largely successful.”

“The majority of victims accepted the determination of the administrators, settled their cases, and were happy to get through this process and resume healing,” Edwards said in an email.

Advertisement

Newsletter News Alerts Get breaking news, investigations, analysis and more signature journalism from the Los Angeles Times in your inbox. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

He said some victims, though, “felt the determination from the program was inadequate and will be litigating their claims.”

The fund was established with help from Kenneth Feinberg, who oversaw compensation funds for victims of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and of clerical sex abuse within New York’s Roman Catholic archdiocese. Feldman said she worked for a decade on the Sept. 11 compensation fund.

The payouts were financed with money from Epstein’s estate, including expenses of $8 million to $9 million, Feldman said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@One of Jeffrey Epstein’s longtime accusers sued Britain’s Prince Andrew on Monday, taking to a formal venue her repeated accusations that he sexually assaulted her when she was 17.

Lawyers for Virginia Giuffre filed the lawsuit in Manhattan federal court, where Epstein was charged criminally with sex-trafficking a month before he killed himself in August 2019 in an adjacent federal jail where he was ordered to await trial.

Giuffre has repeatedly made her allegations against Epstein, his onetime girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell and Prince Andrew, but the lawsuit represents the first time she has directly confronted the prince in such a formal setting. It steps up public relations pressure on the prince, even if he remains beyond the reach of the courts.

In a statement, Giuffre said she was “holding Prince Andrew accountable for what he did to me.”

Advertisement

“The powerful and rich are not exempt from being held responsible for their actions. I hope that other victims will see that it is possible not to live in silence and fear, but to reclaim one’s life by speaking out and demanding justice,” Giuffre said.

“I did not come to this decision lightly,” she added. “As a mother and a wife, my family comes first — and I know that this action will subject me to further attacks by Prince Andrew and his surrogates. But I knew if I did not pursue this action, I would be letting them and victims everywhere down.”

In late 2019, Prince Andrew told the BBC’s Newsnight program that he never had sex with Giuffre, saying, “It didn’t happen.”

He said he has “no recollection” of ever meeting her and told an interviewer that there were “a number of things that are wrong” about Giuffre’s account, which alleges that the encounter occurred in 2001.

“I can absolutely, categorically tell you it never happened,” the prince said.

The interview was widely panned by critics who said Andrew seemed insensitive to Epstein’s victims. Afterward, the prince quit royal duties.

Advertisement

Giuffre has long said Maxwell recruited her when she was 17 to be sexually abused by Epstein and Maxwell from 1999 to 2002.

The lawsuit, which seeks unspecified compensatory and punitive damages, alleges that the prince abused Giuffre on multiple occasions when she was under 18. “Express or implied threats” were made to Giuffre by Epstein, Maxwell and/or Andrew to persuade her to engage in sexual acts with the prince, the lawsuit said.

It said that she “feared death or physical injury to herself or another and other repercussions for disobeying” the trio because of their “powerful connections, wealth and authority.”

It said that on one occasion, Prince Andrew sexually abused her in Maxwell’s London home when Epstein, Maxwell and the prince forced her to have sex with the prince against her will.

Advertisement

On another occasion, the prince sexually abused Giuffre in Epstein’s New York mansion when Maxwell forced Giuffre and another victim to sit on Andrew’s lap as he touched her, the lawsuit said.

The lawsuit also alleged that Andrew sexually abused Giuffre on Epstein’s private island in the U.S. Virgin Islands.

Andrew knew her age at the time based on communications with Epstein and Maxwell, the lawsuit added. It said he went ahead anyway “for the purpose of gratifying his sexual desires.”

Advertisement

The lawsuit was brought under the Child Victims Act, a 2019 New York state law that allows victims to temporarily make legal claims of abuse that occurred when they were children regardless of when or how long ago the alleged abuse occurred.

Newsletter Must-read stories from the L.A. Times Get all the day's most vital news with our Today's Headlines newsletter, sent every weekday morning. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Maxwell, 59, has pleaded not guilty to sex-trafficking charges in Manhattan federal court, where she faces trial in November. She is being held without bail. Her lawyers did not respond to requests for comment.

As part of a continuing probe into Epstein and his encounters with women and teenage girls, Manhattan federal prosecutors last year formally requested to speak with Prince Andrew, who is Queen Elizabeth II’s second son.

Advertisement

The request, similar to issuing a subpoena, was made under the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty, an agreement between the U.S. and Britain to share evidence and information in criminal cases. U.S. prosecutors reportedly made a formal request through the British government to interview Andrew.

Brad Edwards, a lawyer who represents dozens of Epstein victims, has said that the prince has failed to answer questions for civil lawsuits before.

“I’ve always been given the impression that, whether he has immunity or not, he certainly behaves like he does,” Edwards said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Veteran news anchor Rob Nelson is leaving Nexstar Media Group’s NewsNation less than a year after the struggling cable news channel’s launch.

Nelson had been the anchor of “NewsNation Prime,” the nightly prime-time news program on the Chicago-based national channel. He joined the startup after stints at ABC’s New York station WABC-TV and ABC News.

“NewsNation Prime” has been cut from three hours a night to one hour, as the channel adds more host-driven topical talk programs to its lineup. Dan Abrams, longtime legal analyst for ABC News, is joining NewsNation next month on a recently launched show with Leland Vitter, a former Fox News correspondent.

NewsNation staffers were informed of Nelson’s departure in an email from Michael Corn, who recently joined the company after a long stint as a senior executive producer at ABC News.

Advertisement

Corn’s email said Nelson wants to “pursue other opportunities and we have decided to amicably depart ways.” A representative from Nexstar confirmed the departure of Nelson, who is the first of the major on-air hires to leave the operation.

NewsNation launched in September 2020 in an attempt to provide a neutral alternative to the opinion and commentary featured on Fox News, MSNBC and CNN in the evening hours.

But the channel, formerly the general entertainment outlet WGN America, has struggled to attract viewers with its format, which currently provides five hours of news programming a day.

There also has been high turnover among the top editorial executives, some of which is linked to the presence of Bill Shine, a former longtime top executive at Fox News. Some Nexstar insiders have been concerned that the channel will try to compete for the conservative viewers who watch Fox News.

Even with the slow start, Nexstar, the largest owner of TV stations in the U.S., is forging ahead to turn NewsNation into a full-time news operation. Along with the addition of Abrams, the channel is launching a three-hour morning program later this year with former ABC News correspondent Adrienne Bankert.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The #FreeBritney movement suffered a minor setback Monday after the Los Angeles Superior Court rejected Britney Spears’ request to expedite a forthcoming hearing related to her controversial conservatorship.

According to a court order obtained by the Los Angeles Times, Judge Brenda Penny has denied without prejudice the pop musician’s plea to reschedule a hearing regarding the suspension and removal of her father as a conservator of her estate.

Via her newly appointed attorney, Mathew Rosengart, the “Circus” singer petitioned last week to bump the pivotal court date up to late August. As of Monday, the hearing remains slated for Sept. 29.

Advertisement

“Every day that passes is another day of avoidable harm and prejudice to Ms. Spears and the Estate,” Rosengart’s Aug. 6 petition stated.

“Ms. Spears’s emotional health and well-being must be, and are, the paramount concern. Further, all interested parties forcefully agree that Mr. Spears’s continued presence as Conservator of the Estate is contrary to Ms. Spears’s best interests, health, and well-being, and that his prompt removal — or, at the very least, his immediate suspension — is ‘critical’ at this juncture.”

Britney Spears’ father, Jamie Spears, has long occupied a key role in her conservatorship, which has significantly restricted her financial, personal and medical autonomy for 13 years.

In June, the "...Baby One More Time” hitmaker astonished L.A.'s Stanley Mosk Courthouse with bombshell testimony demanding the immediate termination of her “abusive” conservatorship. During her speech, Spears claimed that her father “loved every minute of” the power he had “to hurt his own daughter 100,000%.”

“Keeping the conservatorship going and also keeping my dad in the loop made me feel like I was dead, like I didn’t matter, like nothing had been done to me — like you thought I was lying or something,” Spears said while addressing the court in June.

“I’m telling you again, because I’m not lying. I want to feel heard. And I’m telling you this again so maybe you can understand the depth and the degree of the damage that they did to me back then. I want changes. ... I deserve changes.”

Advertisement

In July — after the L.A. court granted the pop musician’s wish to choose her own lawyer — Rosengart’s first order of business was to move “aggressively and expeditiously” to boot Jamie Spears from the conservatorship.

Making good on his promise, Rosengart swiftly urged Jamie Spears step down and surrender his conservatorship privileges to Jason Rubin, deemed by Team Britney to be an acceptable temporary conservator.

Music A timeline of the #FreeBritney court case Britney Spears has been under a conservatorship since 2008. Before her virtual appearance at a court hearing today, here’s a deep dive into her case.

“Any father who genuinely loves his daughter and has her best interests at heart should willingly step aside in favor of the highly-respected professional fiduciary nominated here,” read Rosengart’s initial petition.

Advertisement

“In fact, if Mr. Spears were to oppose this outcome on the grounds previously suggested, his opposition would reveal his true priorities.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s not a good time for DaBaby to get away with anything. But apparently that’s not stopping him from trying.

An apology he addressed to the LGBTQ+ community last week has gone missing from Instagram. The rapper had apologized for homophobic comments he made at the Rolling Loud show in Miami in late July, sparking an immediate backlash that led to widespread criticism and several canceled festival gigs.

Also this past weekend, fellow rapper Kanye West or perhaps his team removed a 2020 remix of the song “Nah Nah Nah” featuring DaBaby and 2Chainz from streaming services Apple Music, Spotify and Tidal.

While the rapper’s July 27 Twitter apology for his comments remained live as of Monday afternoon, an Instagram apology posted several days later was nowhere to be seen Sunday.

Advertisement

“Social media moves so fast that people want to demolish you before you even have the opportunity to grow, educate, and learn from your mistakes ... ,” that post had said, in part. “I want to apologize to the LGBTQ+ community for the hurtful and triggering comments I made. I apologize for my misinformed comments about HIV/AIDS and I know education on this is important.”

DaBaby made his controversial comments at the Rolling Loud hip-hop festival June 25 in Miami.

During his performance, the 29-year-old told audience members to put their cellphone lights up “if you didn’t show up today with HIV/AIDS or other sexually transmitted diseases that’ll make you die in 2-3 weeks.”

He also made a homophobic remark — addressed to the “fellas” in the audience — about oral sex between men.

The rapper, who had performed after Megan Thee Stallion, also was accused of misogyny for inviting Canadian rapper Tory Lanez onstage and speaking crudely about women. Lanez pleaded not guilty last November to felony assault with a semiautomatic weapon and another charge after allegedly shooting “Hot Girl Summer” rapper Megan in the foot in July 2020.

Shortly after Rolling Loud, DaBaby doubled down on his comments, saying in his Instagram story that the internet had “twisted” his words and the people who didn’t pay to see him “wasn’t supposed to see that sh— anyway.” Then he reversed course and apologized for his anti-gay comments.

Advertisement

But there were repercussions: He was dropped from the lineups of Chicago’s Lollapalooza, Las Vegas’ Day N Vegas festival, New York City’s Governors Ball, the Parklife festival in Britain and a number of other summer shows.

“Anybody who done ever been effected by AIDS/HIV y’all got the right to be upset, what I said was insensitive even though I have no intentions on offending anybody. So my apologies,” the rapper wrote last month on Twitter. “But the LGBT community... I ain’t trippin on y’all, do you. y’all business is y’all business.”

Sunday on Instagram, DaBaby — real name Jonathan Lyndale Kirk — went another direction, wishing his late brother Glenn Johnson a happy birthday. Johnson died last November at age 34 of a self-inflicted gunshot wound.

Times staff writer Christi Carras and intern Ruth Etiesit Samuel contributed to this report.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Did somebody say “Cheese Trail?” Well, I’m here for it. I’m Carolina A. Miranda, arts and urban design columnist for the Los Angeles Times, and I’m here with the week’s essential arts news and more art reports cultivated during my cross-country drive — because what’s the point of writing a newsletter if you can’t foist your vacation photos on everyone?

‘Dirty South’ is revelatory

Is it too early, in the month of August, to start compiling one of those year-end “best” lists? No, you say? Well, good. Because No. 1 on my working list at the moment is a powerful and engrossing group show in Richmond, Va. “The Dirty South: Contemporary Art, Material Culture, and the Sonic Impulse,” on view at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts through early September, is a tour de force. Or, more accurately, a tour de South. And it will leave you wanting more.

Organized by the VMFA’s curator of modern and contemporary art, Valerie Cassel Oliver, the exhibition charts the ways in which Black artists have drawn from Southern tradition in the creation of art, music, design and the countless hybrid spaces in between.

Nadine Robinson’s “Coronation Theme: Organon,” from 2008, mimics the outline of the Ebenezer Baptist Church, where Martin Luther King Jr. served as a pastor. (Nadine Robinson / High Museum of Art)

Advertisement

It’s a show about the art that has emerged from a region that is also about so much more. It’s a show about the ways in which different forms have reacted and engaged with one another — how landscape materializes in art, how Black bodies materialize in those landscapes, how spirituality materializes in culture, how music permeates it all and how all of it has informed American culture.

The exhibition goes back a century — with works, such as a watercolor by Aaron Douglas, that date to the 1920s — drawing from the region’s rich cultural history. This includes folk art, vernacular architecture and music. The point, says Cassel Oliver, is to look at art “not necessarily through a Western sensibility, but a Southern sensibility.”

This includes, for example, a three-dimensional geometric wall piece by contemporary artist Sanford Biggers that employs an antique quilt as its source material. (Biggers is currently the subject of a solo exhibition at the California African American Museum in Los Angeles, where he is displaying work from that series.)

But if the show draws from history, it isn’t mired by it. “There is this whole generation of artists who are reframing how we look at the South,” Cassel Oliver tells me. “It’s not just civil rights and the struggle. They are reframing the South as a new place of the future.”

Newsletter Your essential guide to the arts in L.A. Get Carolina A. Miranda's weekly newsletter for what's happening, plus openings, critics' picks and more. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

And, in fact, “Dirty South” feels more like intense journey than run-of-the-mill museum exhibition. And that journey begins in the lobby of the museum, which features a SLAB — that’s Houston parlance for a lowrider, standing for “Slow, Loud and Bangin’” — a tricked-out Cadillac bearing the license plate “DRTYSTH,” created by hip-hop artist Richard “Fiend” Jones. Get in, it seems to say. You are going on a ride.

Functioning as the exhibition’s principal wayfinders are three sound and video installations that provide visceral jolt and serve as a framework for all of the other work in between. This includes a large-scale installation at the entrance by Paul Stephen Benjamin titled “Summer Breeze” that features a stack of TV monitors playing fragments of Billie Holiday’s “Strange Fruit” spliced with Jill Scott‘s 2015 rendition of the song. The phrase “black bodies swingin’” is endlessly looped and juxtaposed against a visual loop of a little Black girl rocking back and forth in a swing — Black joy and Black pain inextricably intertwined.

“The Dirty South” touches on landscape, spirituality and the Black body — as seen in El Franco Lee II’s “DJ Screw in Heaven 2,” 2016. (El Franco Lee II)

Advertisement

At about the show’s midpoint comes Nadine Robinson’s “Coronation Theme: Organon,” from 2008, which features a stack of amplifiers arranged in a way that evokes the Gothic profile of Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, where Martin Luther King Jr. once served as a pastor. From it emerges a sonic work that fuses elements of George Frideric Handel’s “Coronation Theme” with “notes” that are crafted from the sound of fire hoses and barking dogs. It is a magnetic combination of the wretched and the angelic.

The exhibition closes with Arthur Jafa’s searing video “Love is the Message, The Message is Death,” which drew widespread acclaim when numerous museums streamed it online last year in the wake of the uprisings. The video, set to Kanye West’s rousing “Ultralight Beam,” weaves together strips of found footage to articulate the traumas and the exhilaration of the Black experience in the U.S. — as if all of the content from the 200-plus pages of Toni Morrison’s “The Black Book” had been compressed into seven minutes of lived experience.

I first saw Jafa’s piece in a group show called “Prisoner of Love” at the MCA Chicago in 2019. I watched it again when it briefly landed online last year. Like many people, I was left stunned by it — grappling with the emotional and historical enormity he manages to deliver with such concision.

Since the piece began to gain a widespread following last year, the artist has expressed a certain wariness about how it is being received. “He himself has had a lot of trepidation about that work because it’s almost a spectacle of pain,” says Cassel Oliver. “Yes there is pain. But there is pleasure. There is an ecstatic that comes out of the spiritual, and the ecstatic that comes out of sex.”

Advertisement

In the context of “The Dirty South,” however, “Love is the Message” is informed by every object that comes before it: the ebullient depiction of a revival meeting, the folk art that infused Modernism, the painting of a blackened nighttime landscape illuminated by a constellation of lightning bugs, the generational struggles of Black people in the United States. In that setting, Jafa’s video feels less like a surprising blow and more like a logical conclusion, in all its terror and its sublimity.

“Dirty South” is a journey. The viewer who goes in will not be the same one who emerges.

An installation view from “The Dirty South” shows a sound suit by Nick Cave standing before a nighttime landscape illuminated by lightning bugs by Michi Meko. (Travis Fullerton / Virginia Museum of Fine Arts)

“The Dirty South: Contemporary Art, Material Culture, and the Sonic Impulse,” is on view at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts through Sept. 6.; find additional information at vmfa.museum. The show is also scheduled to open at the Contemporary Arts Museum in Houston in the fall, after which it will travel to Crystal Bridges in Arkansas and the Museum of Contemporary Art Denver in Colorado. Do not miss.

Advertisement

Art report

The Times’ Jessica Gelt has been immersing herself in the “Immersive Van Gogh” experience so that you don’t have to. (What would Van Gogh do? “Run far away,” she writes, “or at least to the nearest absinthe bar.”) She comes through with a ranking of the merch — the dog bowls and the “Gogh to Sleep Darling” onesie — because the whole point of “Immersive Van Gogh” isn’t simply to selfie, it’s to pick up a thing or two in the gift shop. This is the kind of reporting that merits hazard pay.

Think that the “Immersive Van Gogh” experience couldn’t be any more terrible? Just wait ‘til we show you the gift shop. (Claire Reid / Los Angeles Times; molotovcoketail / GettyImages)

The San Francisco Museum of Modern Art announced last month that it was eliminating a series of divisions, including its film program and its online arts magazine Open Space, in the name of cultivating “a holistic visitor experience that attracts larger, more diverse audiences.” The move has generated opposition and street protests among San Francisco’s arts communities. It’s a strategy, as I write, “that reeks of business consultant-speak.” And it doesn’t “begin to solve the problem at the heart of SFMOMA, which is the museum itself.”

Want some great background reading on SFMOMA and the cultivation of art as asset class? And the ways in which art museums and the finance industry have increasingly become entwined? Then absolutely read this eye-opening piece by reporter Sam Lefebvre.

Advertisement

KQED’s Sarah Hotchkiss offers some necessary alternatives to SFMOMA‘s soon-to-be-defunct film program.

And, five years on, Hotchkiss’ guide to SFMOMA remains the best of the best.

Enjoying this newsletter? Consider subscribing to the Los Angeles Times Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Become a subscriber.

Meanwhile, in Los Angeles: Contributor Jean Trinh writes about the work of artist Stephanie H. Shih, who has her first solo show on view at Stanley’s in Chinatown. The artist uses ceramics to render foods that “feel” Asian even if they have Western origins. This includes tins of Spam, condensed milk and Maggi seasoning. “Culture isn’t static,” says Trinh. “It’s ever moving. And so, with this series, I really wanted to make a statement that these Western products, which we have incorporated into our cuisines, are authentically part of our cultures as well.”

Advertisement

New York-based ceramic artist Stephanie H. Shih creates works inspired the common Western grocery items that appear in Asian cooking. (Myung J. Chun / Los Angeles Times)

Performance notes

The L.A. Phil staged a chamber music concert at the newly reopened Ford earlier this week that featured work by composers Arvo Pärt and Julius Eastman. Times classical music critic Mark Swed reports that the show, which was conducted by Christopher Rountree, was a beguiling union of opposites. “Pärt offers us an out-of-body experience, whereas Eastman aims gleefully at gut and groin,” he writes in his review. “Pärt’s music is self-control, riveting in its reflection an orderly universe. Eastman is the extreme, riveting opposite.”

Conductor Christopher Rountree the L.A. Phil in concert as part of the Ford’s new season. (Jason Armond / Los Angeles Times)

Antoinette Chinonye Nwandu’s “Pass Over,” a play about two Black men confined to the glare of a street light, lest they be killed by police, is the first to be staged on Broadway since the pandemic shuttered New York’s theaters.

Advertisement

The San Francisco Ballet is prepping its first in-person performance, which will take place outdoors at Stanford University. And the San Francisco Opera will demand proof of vaccination for attendees age 12 and over, as will more than a dozen theaters around Washington, D.C.

Michael Tilson Thomas, the L.A.-born conductor who led the San Francisco Symphony for 25 years, is in recovery after a successful surgery to remove a brain tumor.

Design time

The Times’ Roger Vincent writes about the dismantling of the giant fiberglass elephants at Hollywood & Highland, part of a $100 million makeover of the mall where the Oscars are held. The design had been inspired by the Babylonian-style set D.W. Griffith employed in his 1916 movie “Intolerance.” Part of the makeover is intended to attract more locals to the spot — but also to eliminate the visible tributes to a director with a wildly racist legacy.

Last year, Curbed’s Alissa Walker went in deep on the fraught significance of the architecture.

Advertisement

Work is underway on a $100 million makeover of the Hollywood & Highland shopping center that will be reborn as Ovation Hollywood. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

“If you’re dressed correctly and carry a clipboard around, you can get away with a lot of stuff.” L.A. artist Richard Ankrom reminisces with the LAnd Magazine about that time he made a fake freeway sign to correct a real problem around a poorly marked interchange on the northbound 110. The piece, titled “Guerrilla Public Service,” lives on in L.A. lore. Whatever you do, don’t miss Ankrom’s video, a key part of the work.

Essential happenings

If you’ve been counting the minutes to the weekend, Matt Cooper will make sure that you don’t run out of things to do. This includes a rack of cultural happenings, including a night of Tchaikovsky at the Hollywood Bowl — complete with fireworks. He also rounds up all that is doing in L.A. and O.C.'s museums, including a new installation of work by Brian Jungen at the Hammer Museum. The artist often repurposes commercial goods — think: sneakers and softballs — into pieces that comment on Indigenous tradition and colonialist legacies.

Brian Jungen’s “The Evening Redness in the West,” 2006, goes on view at the Hammer Museum next week. (SITE Photography / Catriona Jeffries, Vancouver)

Advertisement

On my recent cross-country jaunt, I caught an exhibition by Marie Watt and Cannupa Hanska Luger at the Denver Art Museum. “Each/Other,” as the show is titled, features work by the two Indigenous artists, who are known for their collaborative practices. You may recognize Luger’s name because I wrote about his show, “Passage,” at the Mesa Contemporary Arts Museum in Arizona in last week’s newsletter (now in its final weekend). Luger was also codirector of “Sweet Land,” the experimental opera staged by the Industry in the Los Angeles State Historic Park early last year — where, in addition to helping oversee the production, he also designed the costumes.

“Each/Other” features some of those costume designs in its galleries, as well other pieces that are born of collaboration. This includes a piece, made with Watt, that consists of a large-scale figure of a canine — a companion species — that has been quilted together out of stitched bandanas submitted by hundreds of contributors.

“Each/Other,” a large-scale collaborative sculptural project organized by artists Marie Watt and Cannupa Hanska Luger. (Kevin McConnell)

I was especially intrigued by the arquitectonic ways Watt works with textiles such as blankets, an object freighted with so much historic and personal symbolism. This included a 2016 sculpture, “Blanket Stories: Talking Stick, Works Progress, Steward (White Pine),” a slender, vertical wooden piece, almost minimalist in nature, that evokes an impossible tower of folded blankets. Another piece, “Skywalker/Skycraper (Babel),” 2012, features actual blankets, pierced by a steel I beam, that nod to the Indigenous workers who helped build Manhattan’s skyscrapers.

Advertisement

In Watt’s collaborative patchwork quilts, the myriad voices of the sewing circles that help produce them come to life — literally, in the form of words and phrases that have been stitched onto the surface of the piece by individual contributors. A quilt devoted to trees contains poetic expressions like “invisible ancestors” and “monsoon clouds.”

We may feel like we’re falling apart, but in these works you find evidence of the small but potent ways in which we come together.

“Each/Other: Marie Watt and Cannupa Hanska Luger” is on view at the Denver Art Museum in Denver, Colo., through Aug. 22; denverartmuseum.org. Missed it? “Each/Other” will travel to the Michael C. Carlos Museum at Emory University in Atlanta in the fall, followed by a showing next year at the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Mass.

Marie Watt, “Trek (Pleiades),” 2014, from the artist’s exhibition “Each/Other” at the Denver Art Museum. (Marie Watt / Aaron Johansen / Tia Collection)

Advertisement

Because everything seems to be happening at once: The Getty is organizing a virtual public reading of Book 12 of the Florentine Codex — about how the Spanish took Mexico City — that will go down all day next Friday. You can sign up to be a reader, or you can simply watch. Get all the deets here. (ICYMI: I wrote about the significance of this colonial codex to our plague-ridden era last year. )

Passages

Louise Fishman, a painter who put a feminist, lesbian and Jewish spin on Abstract Expressionist painting, is dead at 82.

In other news

— When it comes interior design, it appears that less is now a bore. Thank. God.

— The Met’s Alice Neel retrospective is coming to the West Coast. It will land at San Francisco’s de Young Museum in March.

— Speaking of the Met: The museum’s guards there say that the reopening has been a strain.

— Meanwhile, in Los Angeles ... William Poundstone parses MOCA’s new acquisitions.

— In constructing its new Peter Zumthor-designed building, LACMA has been turning up bones.

— Writer Jody Zellen has a look at how artist Vera Lutter created the surreal pinhole images of the demolished LACMA buildings currently on display at the museum.

— Ela Bittencourt catalogs the damage that fire has wreaked on Brazil’s Cinemateca.

— The New York Times has a good story on the squabble between the heirs of artist Harvey Fite and the foundation that maintains his unusual work of land art, “Opus 40.” It involves a terrible fence.

— Hiroshi Sugimoto is set to give the Hirshhorn’s sculpture garden a makeover in Washington, D.C.

— Can we please get some mushroom-shaped bathrooms designed by Toyo Ito in L.A.?

— I really dig this collaboration between novelist Judith Freeman and photographer Anthony Hernandez about MacArthur Park.

And last but not least ...

An oral history of how artist Ragnar Kjartansson and an entire crew of collaborators created his hypnotic video work “The Visitors,” which centers around a piece of music he describes as “a feminine nihilistic gospel song.” The musical and technological aspects of the way this story is presented are just phenomenal.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@WWVGD? What would Van Gogh do? That’s the question when it comes to the “Immersive Van Gogh” show that switched on its high-powered lights Thursday in Los Angeles.

A humble guess as to the artist’s WWVGD answer: Run far away (or at least to the nearest absinthe bar).

Taking place in the former Amoeba Records store on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood, the relentlessly publicized art event features monstrously large projections of the misunderstood Post-Impressionist’s famous canvases. Step into “Starry Night,” wander through “Irises,” hustle up to the table of “The Potato Eaters.”

Have you seen a selfie of your high school girlfriend inside of one of Van Gogh’s sunflowers? Chances are the shot was taken at an “Immersive Van Gogh” exhibit. Which raises the question: Are guests attending to stand in awe of the paintings, or to add a jolt of color to their Instagram feeds?

Advertisement

And more importantly: Are you experiencing art if what you’re seeing is the projected equivalent of walking through a poster shop filled with reproductions?

The Los Angeles iteration, which had to postpone its opening while waiting for safety clearance from the L.A. Fire Department, costs $40 or $50 (plus ticketing fees) a pop — more than twice what you’d pay to stand in front of the actual “Starry Night” at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. Art is commerce, so in this most commercial of art affairs, we thought it made sense to rate the offerings in the gift shop — reproductions you can hold, wear and turn into a TikTok prop.

Van Gogh might have felt despondent if he knew the almond blossoms he labored over would be turned into a shower curtain or (drum roll, please): Van Goghgurt.

Just kidding. Really, Van Goghgurt is seemingly the only thing that the marketing wizards behind “Immersive Van Gogh” missed when they put together their panoply of Van Gogh-themed products. We’ve picked half a dozen to rank from worse to worst.

6. Face shield, $29.99

Although we applaud the public-health-forward messaging of the face shield, we are appalled by the price for this piece of foam-lined plastic topped by a band of Van Gogh self-portraits. Also: A face shield is pointless without a mask. Good thing the gift shop features those in three styles: Ninja, pleated and the ever-popular snood.

5. Sunflower bucket hat, $29.99

Van Gogh would never have worn a bucket hat, and neither should you.

4. “Starry Night” jar opener, $20

Shop the store long enough and you will sense a theme, and that theme is “Starry Night.” You could take home this jar opener featuring sturdy silicone grips, sure to help you foist open the lid of even the most stubborn jar of Ragu pasta sauce, artfully.

Advertisement

3. “Gogh to Sleep Darling” baby onesie, $25

There isn’t even a picture of a painting to redeem the terrible word play on this onesie — which is the same plain-white you find at every baby shower you’ve ever gone to. At least the art that guests draw on the onesies at showers is usually interesting, or has something meaningful to say, like, “Poop master in training.”

2. “Starry Night” expandable dog bowls, set of two, $30

We have to draw the line somewhere out of respect for the deeply sensitive man who, in a letter to his brother Theo, wrote: “So, frankly, I shall not blame you for telling me candidly that you don’t think my work is good enough … but if you put it away in a corner somewhere and do not show it, it isn’t kind to couple that with the assurance — which is not accepted — that you yourself see something in it.”

If Van Gogh was pained by the thought of his work in a dusty corner, imagine how he’d feel about someone putting it on a collapsible dog bowl.

1. Bomber jacket, $219.99

This collaboration between “Immersive Van Gogh” and Bibisma Apparel, which recently disappeared from the online store, made the bottom of the list for its outrageous price as well as for the inexplicable ad copy accompanying it. Van Gogh’s name is mixed with a catchphrase from the Pixar film “Toy Story” as potential buyers are encouraged to “Gogh to infinity and beyond.” The artist is also referred to as the “original Starboy,” which is kind of like calling Monet the “original Haystackboy.”

Advertisement

Wait, did we mention that “Claude Monet: The Immersive Experience” is coming to L.A. in the fall?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Michael Tilson Thomas, the L.A.-born conductor who served as music director for the San Francisco Symphony for 25 years, is recovering after a successful surgery to remove a brain tumor, his representative said Friday.

Tilson Thomas had his surgery on an undisclosed date and will undergo therapy for several months. Previously scheduled public appearances by the conductor will be canceled through November, including performances with the National Symphony Orchestra for the Kennedy Center’s 50th anniversary and with the Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra, the New World Symphony in Miami Beach and the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.

“I deeply regret missing projects that I was greatly anticipating,” Tilson Thomas said in a statement. “I look forward to seeing everyone again in November.”

Tilson Thomas, affectionately known as MTT, maintained a deep connection with the West Coast, serving seven times as music director for the Ojai Music Festival, while serving as assistant conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and later as music director of the Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra. From 1981 to 1985, he served as the principal guest conductor for the Los Angeles Philharmonic. Two years later, he founded the New World Symphony orchestral academy.

Advertisement

A gifted pianist known for his exuberant compositions and his dynamic interpretations of Gustav Mahler, Tilson Thomas became San Francisco Symphony’s 11th music director in 1995. He stepped down from that position after the 2019-20 season and was named the organization’s music director laureate.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Before Brooklyn-based ceramic artist Stephanie H. Shih sculpted clay pieces for her first solo exhibition in Los Angeles — currently on display in Chinatown’s Stanley’s gallery — she crowdsourced ideas from her 20,000-plus social media followers.

As a way to paint a broader picture of the East and Southeast Asian diasporas that were beyond her own experiences as a Taiwanese American, she asked her followers what common Western grocery items “felt” Asian to them. Shih was surprised and touched by people‘s eagerness to share their stories.

Groceries are very personal, said Shih, who is 34. “We bring them into our homes, and we feed ourselves and our loved ones with them. So, this food feels very, very personal to people.”

Shih’s “New World Mall” exhibition is a collection of 30 life-size ceramic and hand-painted replicas of these nostalgic products. (The show’s name is a reference to a shopping center in Flushing’s Chinatown in New York City.) There’s a Carnation Sweetened Condensed Milk tin, a nod to its use in Vietnamese coffee and Hong Kong-style toast. A ceramic Libby’s Vienna Sausage can represents its role in Filipino meatloaf and Korean budae-jjigae (“army stew”). And a bottle of Heinz ketchup stands in as an essential ingredient for Japanese spaghetti.

Advertisement

The seed of the idea for “New World Mall” stemmed from a previous group show, “Making in Between: Contemporary Chinese-American Ceramics,” at the American Museum of Ceramic Art in Pomona that Shih participated in last year. (One of her featured sculptures was a can of Spam, which is part of her new show.) Her work caught the attention of Sebastian Gladstone, the director of the Chinatown art gallery.

Stephanie H. Shih stocked her “New World Mall” with ceramic re-creations of Western food items that Asians enjoy using. (Myung J. Chun / Los Angeles Times)

“There was this real intimacy to these handmade objects that I thought was fantastic,” Gladstone said.

He reached out to Shih last December, and she started working on the pieces that touch upon the ideas of migration and colonization. Except for the Spam and Ferrero Rocher chocolates, everything was made specifically for this new exhibition. The collection includes a blue Royal Dansk cookie tin, a bottle of Maggi seasoning and a bag of King’s Hawaiian sweet rolls.

Shih questions the idea of authenticity when it comes to certain foods. As an example, she said, many people consider banh mi to be Vietnamese, even though its creation was a byproduct of French occupation and the introduction of baguettes and pâté to the country.

Lookalike ceramics crafted by Stephanie H. Shih. (Myung J. Chun / Los Angeles Times)

“There’s all this discourse around how American Chinese food isn’t authentic, but I actually think that’s really inaccurate and an almost dangerous way to think about what culture is,” Shih said. “Culture isn’t static. It’s ever moving. And so, with this series, I really wanted to make a statement that these Western products, which we have incorporated into our cuisines, are authentically part of our cultures as well.”

Shih does a lot of research before she creates her artworks. She prefers replicating older versions of product labels, ideally from the 1980s or 1990s when there was a big wave of East Asian immigration to the United States. (Her parents left Taiwan in the early 1980s to attend graduate school in Philadelphia, where Shih was born.) She spends hours searching Google Images and old commercials on YouTube to get the details right. For this series, she even bought a 1990s Ovaltine canister from eBay. It was still half-full of the original chocolate milk powder.

Advertisement

Stephanie H. Shih’s ceramic pieces are on view at Stanley’s gallery. (Myung J. Chun / Los Angeles Times)

After Shih sculpts one of her clay pieces, she paints it with meticulous detail using underglaze before its first firing in the kiln. The next round of glaze depends on the material — glass or paper or metal, for example — used in the original product. If there’s a paper label, she’ll skip the second glaze for that part of the sculpture. The appearance of glass is replicated through a high-gloss finish, while plastic and metal lids have a glaze with a lower sheen. Then she fires the artwork in the kiln again.

At Stanley’s, her 30 sculptures are presented together on a U-shaped table, taking up a small amount of space in the 1,200-square-foot gallery.

“I love the idea of this really subtle, small body of work that you’ll get really intimate with in this large space,” Gladstone said. “Big statements can come in very small packages.”

Advertisement

Shih took a nonlinear path to her art career. Growing up in Princeton Junction, N.J., she always had an interest in the arts, specifically in printmaking, photography and oil pastels. In high school, she took a ceramics class, where she said she “made bad bowls and pretty embarrassing sculptures of naked women.”

Stephanie H. Shih raised money this year for Asian immigrants who have been fighting deportation by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. (Myung J. Chun / Los Angeles Times)

Shih wanted to go to art school but her parents didn’t approve of it. She attended Boston University and then ended up working as a copywriter and creative director at tech companies for a decade.

In 2015, she picked up ceramics again as a form of art therapy to manage her chronic back pain. One of her first pieces to garner notice consisted of ceramic dumplings. In 2018, after she created her first product replica, a Chinkiang black vinegar bottle, she was inspired to do a series of grocery items. For the last couple of years, Shih, who’s had other solo exhibitions featuring grocery items at the Perrotin gallery in New York and Wieden+Kennedy gallery in Portland, Ore., makes her living mostly through her artwork.

Advertisement

There’s a sense of home and belonging in Shih’s artwork that extends to her activism in supporting marginalized communities through fundraisers. This year, she raised $45,000 for Asian immigrants who have been fighting deportation by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

As anti-Asian racism and hate crimes have increased in recent months, Shih said she believes the Asian American diaspora is going through a big moment of growth, and she hopes to see it continue.

Food is “very, very personal,” says Stephanie H. Shih. She asked the public to share favorites as she shaped her art project. (Myung J. Chun / Los Angeles Times)

“The current discourse around Asian American identity is focused on representation and authenticity, both of which can be interesting topics,” Shih said. “It’s exciting to watch my peers take more interest in our power as a unified bloc.

Advertisement

“I hope we can progress beyond these issues and onto political projects that will actually bring us equity and safety, like healthcare for all, workers’ rights and ending deportation,” she added. “So I’m feeling a bit antsy but overall I’m hopeful about what this moment could bring.”

“New World Mall” runs through Sept. 3 at Stanley’s, 944 Chung King Road, Los Angeles, stanleyshouse.com
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than a dozen pianos placed in public spaces across Beverly Hills and the return of the L.A. Phil’s “Tchaikovsky Spectacular” with fireworks lead our short list of culture to catch this weekend. Before you go, remember to call or check online for reservation requirements and other COVID-19 protocols.

“Sing for Hope Pianos”

The public is invited to tickle the ivories — no lessons required — with this initiative co-sponsored by the city of Beverly Hills and the Wallis Annenberg Center for the Performing Arts. Sixteen upright pianos decorated by local artists are waiting in locations around the city. Friday through Sept. 6. Free. Details at singforhope.org.

For the record: An earlier version of this story listed “Michael Feinstein Sings Sinatra’s Songbook” as a Pasadena Pops presentation this Saturday. That concert will be presented Aug. 14.

“Tchaikovsky Spectacular With Fireworks”

Guest conductor Bramwell Tovey and the Los Angeles Philharmonic light up the night with the return of this annual all-Tchaikovsky program. It’s capped by the USC Trojan Marching Band joining the orchestra for the Russian composer’s thrilling “1812 Overture.” Hollywood Bowl, 2301 N. Highland Ave., Hollywood. 8 p.m. Friday-Saturday. $21-$164. hollywoodbowl.com

Sunset Concerts at the Skirball

Quetzal, the Grammy-winning East L.A. rock band fronted by singer Martha Gonzalez, kicks off a new season of this outdoor concert series. Skirball Cultural Center, 2701 N. Sepulveda Blvd., Brentwood. 8 p.m. Thursday. Free; reservations required. skirball.org

Advertisement

“Forever Plaid: The 30th Anniversary Reunion Concert”

Cast members from the original New York production of the nostalgic musical revue belt out pop hits from the 1950s in this outdoor concert presented by Musical Theatre West. Blair Field, 4700 Deukmejian Drive, Long Beach. 8 p.m. Thursday-Friday, 5 and 8 p.m. Saturday, 8 p.m. Sunday. $10-$50. musical.org

“Piazzolla 100”

L.A.-based chamber music ensemble Salastina marks the centenary of Argentine tango composer Astor Piazzolla with a pair of concerts. Wallis Annenberg Center for the Performing Arts, Promenade Terrace, 9390 N. Santa Monica Blvd., Beverly Hills. 8 p.m. Saturday. $40 (sold out; waitlist available). thewallis.org. Also at Levitt Pavilion, Memorial Park, 85 E. Holly St., Pasadena. 6 p.m. Sunday (also streaming live at facebook.com/Salastina). Free. salastina.org

Dilla Fest feat. Talib Kweli

The life, career and creative output of the late hip-hop producer J Dilla are celebrated in this program featuring special guest DJs and live performances by rapper Talib Kweli and others. Grand Performances, 350 S. Grand Ave. downtown L.A. 7 p.m. Saturday. Free. grandperformances.org

“Hedwig and the Angry Inch”

Invisible Girl Creative stages John Cameron Mitchell and Stephen Trask’s hit off-Broadway musical about a trans rock singer from East Germany. Sherry Theater, 11052 W. Magnolia Blvd., North Hollywood. 8 p.m. Friday, 3 and 8 p.m. Saturday, 8 p.m. Sunday. $40. eventbrite.com

“The Best of Ballet Project OC”

The local company founded by dancer-choreographer Ally Helman performs a pair of shows that be can seen in person or watched via a live stream. Curtis Theatre, 1 Civic Center Circle, Brea. 3 and 7 p.m. Saturday. $39.95. balletproject.tv

Our weekly arts and culture recommendations are posted every Thursday.

Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@2020 was not a good year for the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art in the court of public opinion. And it doesn’t seem like 2021 is getting any better.

Last month, the San Francisco Chronicle reported that the museum was eliminating the museum’s online arts magazine, Open Space, launched in 2008, as well as its longtime film program, which dates to 1937. Also on the chopping block were SFMOMA’s “Raw Material” podcast, its Modern Art Council (a volunteer group that supports the museum’s fundraising and programming efforts and presents an annual artist award), as well as its off-site Artists Gallery, which sells and rents work by Bay Area artists to the public. The cuts will result in seven layoffs by the end of the year.

In a statement later posted to its website, SFMOMA said that the changes were part of a “strategic refresh” and that the museum was looking to cultivate “a holistic visitor experience that attracts larger, more diverse audiences.”

Advertisement

The museum’s existing audiences are not having it.

On July 21, when the museum staged a virtual public board meeting with time set aside for public comment, Director Neal Benezra and the museum’s trustees faced a phalanx of artists, art professionals and San Francisco cultural workers who turned out to lambaste them. Attendees described the cuts as “shameful” and an “insult to art,” as noted in a detailed report about the meeting by Nastia Voynovskaya of KQED.

“Are you really telling the Bay Area that you spent the last year and a half forging diversity, equity and inclusion committees, to then eliminate the three most diverse and accessible programs that foster a sense of connection and support for local artists?” asked artist Lindsey White, chair of the photography department at the San Francisco Art Institute.

Three days later, protesters showed up at the museum bearing placards that read, “Stay Relevant” and “Save Open Space!!” Rick Prelinger, a noted filmmaker and archivist who teaches at UC Santa Cruz, was among those in attendance. “Every other museum is trying to figure out how to be hospitable and open it up,” he told Hyperallergic, “and this place is doing the opposite.”

And it’s not over: Another protest is planned for Thursday evening. In addition, a petition opposing the cuts has garnered more than 2,700 signatures on Change.org as of Wednesday afternoon.

A view of SFMOMA’s atrium in 2016, as the museum prepared to reopen after its 235,000-square-foot expansion designed by Snohetta. (Carolina A. Miranda / Los Angeles Times)

Certainly, the cuts are a curious way for SFMOMA to pursue a broader and more diverse audience.

Open Space is freely accessible online and over the course of its existence has published essays on a wide range of subjects by an even wider range of artists, curators and critics. This has included poetry, essays and criticism, as well as public programs, such as a 2017 series that examined the ways in which the AIDS epidemic have shaped culture. More recently, the site asked scholar LaNada War Jack and writer and artist Julian Brave NoiseCat to lead an issue devoted to the Indigenous occupation of Alcatraz. It included a poignant short story by Tommy Orange, author of the novel “There There,” a recipient of the 2019 American Book Award and a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize.

Advertisement

In other words, Open Space isn’t museum public relations churn disguised as “content.” The site’s editorial director, Claudia La Rocco, is a widely published essayist with a professional journalism background, having covered performance for the New York Times and other media outlets for a decade. (Full disclosure: I once participated in a conversation about arts journalism with New York-based culture writer Siddhartha Mitter for the site, but I did not accept compensation.)

SFMOMA’s film program was, likewise, wide-ranging in its ambitions.

In 2018, as part of its Modern Cinema series, the museum’s film team organized a two-week festival devoted to Black filmmakers titled “Black Powers.” It featured screenings of movies by influential directors from the “L.A. Rebellion” movement, such as Charles Burnett and Julie Dash, as well as more contemporary pictures, such as Jordan Peele’s “Get Out.”

Advertisement

The following year, for its “Haunted!” series, SFMOMA turned to Gothic tales inspired by female creators. That included Mary Shelley’s “Frankenstein” and Ana Lily Amirpour’s “A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night,” a film that fused Iranian and Western themes into a story about vampires.

The film program was no add-on. Gina Basso, its director, worked within the curatorial division, making it an intrinsic part of the museum’s artistic offerings.

“Film is the quintessential art form of the 20th century; it continues to be one for the 21st century,” Basso told me via telephone last week. “The museum collects artists who straddle art and the film world: Apichatpong Weerasethakul and Steve McQueen and Miranda July. And Bruce Conner. Artists who have equally important practices working outside the gallery context.”

Basso declined to answer any questions about SFMOMA’s internal politics or discuss specifics about the cuts, but she did say that the elimination of the program would chip away at San Francisco’s film scene.

Advertisement

“I have often brought up the fragile ecosystem of the film community,” she says. “These are networks that are very delicate. And you take away one thing and it creates an incredible imbalance.”

A view of one of SFMOMA’s Snohetta-designed terraces during the reopening of the museum in April 2016. (Carolina A. Miranda / Los Angeles Times)

Certainly, there are financial reasons SFMOMA can point to in justifying the cuts.

Like all museums, it was battered by the COVID-19 pandemic. In March 2020, SFMOMA laid off and furloughed hundreds of employees; it is unclear how many of those positions have been reinstated. And a spokesperson says the museum reported a $4-million deficit for fiscal year 2020.

Advertisement

But $4 million is hardly insurmountable for an institution whose annual budget hovered just below $100 million in the years before the pandemic and whose board features billionaires such as financier Charles Schwab. In addition, SFMOMA is no stranger to red ink, having run deficits of $5 million and almost $12 million in 2017 and 2018, respectively, according to 990 tax forms filed with the IRS. A 990 filed in 2019, the last year for which these are publicly available, showed a surplus of $25 million.

In addition, KQED reported that Benezra sent an internal email to staff noting that the savings generated by the elimination of these programs would be “minimal at best” and that the cuts were more in keeping with the institution’s “strategic refresh.”

The timing for all of this is certainly odd. Earlier this year, Benezra announced that he’d be stepping down from the role of director, and it would seem that such major strategic shifts would be best left in the hands of his successor. Especially as Benezra’s time in the director’s chair has not been without controversy. (A successor has yet to be named.)

SFMOMA has for many years contended with hard questions over representation and equity. In 2019, representatives for the museum refused to answer the basic question of whether there were any Black curators on staff. Last year, in the wake of the uprisings, the museum deleted comments critical of the institution by a former Black staffer on social media. After that, a senior curator was forced to resign over comments about “reverse discrimination” in connection with white male artists.

Advertisement

SFMOMA’s expansion made the museum bigger — and far more blue chip. (Carolina A. Miranda / Los Angeles Times)

As outlined in SFMOMA’s strategic statement, the refresh appears to consist largely of increasing attendance to the museum. Bullet points include “investing in programs and exhibits that drive visitors to the museum,” “focusing on the production of educational content that directly supports the in-gallery visitor experience” and “sunsetting programs that do not drive attendance at the museum, including the Film Program ... and the Artists Gallery...”

The last item on the list suggests “modernizing the retail strategy by investing in new product development.” (New merch will save the museum!) It’s a strategy that reeks of business consultant-speak.

If the museum really wants to improve its reach and the diversity of its audiences, it should undertake a fundraising campaign so it can drop its prohibitive admission fees. SFMOMA charges $25 per adult at a time when many other museums are scrapping fees altogether. And if you’re a local hoping for discounted admission, tough noogies. The most you qualify for is free admission during a four-hour window once a month.

Advertisement

Part of this may be because the museum still counts on admission fees to supplement its budget. In fact, admission fees made up almost 11% of the museum’s budget, according to the 990 tax forms filed in 2019.

Admission revenues, however, won’t begin to solve the problem at the heart of SFMOMA, which is the museum itself.

Motivating SFMOMA’s $305-million, 235,000-square-foot expansion in 2016 was the long-term loan of the Fisher Collection, assembled by Gap founders Donald and Doris Fisher. A majority of the museum’s real estate has been turned over to showcasing this collection — a loan; not a promised gift — that is appropriately renowned for its Ellsworth Kellys, its Agnes Martins and its Anselm Kiefers. It is the bluest of blue chip. It is also exceedingly white and exceedingly male. When the new wing first opened five years ago, an entire floor of galleries didn’t contain a single work by a woman.

Advertisement

The details behind the Fishers’ loan remain largely unknown, despite the best reporting attempts of Charles Desmarais, the former art critic for the San Francisco Chronicle, who was able to ascertain a few facts about the deal. Among them: that no more than 25% of what is on view in the Doris and Donald Fisher Collection Galleries is allowed to come from other lenders or donors.

As Desmarais wrote at the time, this “means that something like 60% of SFMOMA’s indoor galleries (not counting free-admission areas that serve as combination lobby and exhibition spaces) must always adhere — or, at least, respond — to a narrative of art history constructed by just two astute but obdurately private collectors.”

Doris and Donald Fisher are quoted as wanting to give back to the city, but their art has never been donated to SFMOMA; instead, it’s on long-term loan. (Carolina A. Miranda / Los Angeles Times)

This means that repeat visits to SFMOMA are liable to feel the same, since much of the art in the new wing has to be, by terms of the contract, art that belonged to the Fishers.

Advertisement

By my third visit to the museum after its reopening, I started to feel suffocated by the installation: Expressionists in one room, Color Field paintings in another, no surprises — just a single path of art history, one with no room for anything that evokes even a hint of Bay Area weirdness, queer activism or Chicano printmaking. It’s a collection that acts as if San Francisco — or much of the rest of California, for that matter — doesn’t exist.

It’s boring and corporate and feels like an albatross around the museum’s neck — something for the curators to work around, rather than work with.

Platforms such as Open Space and the film program examined the ragged edges of culture, the places full of friction and debate. They may have not had massive audiences, but they incorporated a wide range of voices and made many of us feel as if there were at least one corner of the museum that cared about what Latino, Indigenous, Black and queer artists had to say about the world.

Now, those programs will be gone. And no amount of fancy-pants design in the gift shop is going to make up for it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Arvo Pärt and Julius Eastman, who shared the bill for the Los Angeles Philharmonic chamber music concert at the newly reopened Ford Tuesday night, are the matter and antimatter of Minimalism.

Pärt, the spiritually aesthetic 85-year-old Estonian composer, happens to be the holiest of the Holy Minimalists, as those Eastern European composers who get to consonant essentials are sometimes called. Eastman, the New Yorker from Ithaca who died in 1990 homeless at age 50, paraded himself as the unholiest Minimalist, an outrageous dissonant dissident even in the seemingly accepting new music community.

Pärt is accepted as the epitome of chill. Eastman is hot, hot, hot. Pärt is one of the most performed classical composers of our time. Whether you know it or not, you know his music, so widely has it been imitated and commercially co-opted. The obstinately elusive Eastman is only recently rising out of extreme, self-inflicted obscurity and finding a cult.

What their music shares, conductor Christopher Rountree told the audience in this 1,200-seat jewel of an outdoor theater, is a sense of transcendence. In Pärt’s case, religious transcendence extends beyond our wide universe. For Black and gay composer and vocalist Eastman, transcendence was of the body. I’d take that a step further to say that Pärt offers us an out-of-body experience, whereas Eastman aims gleefully at gut and groin. Pärt’s music is self-control, riveting in its reflection an orderly universe. Eastman is the extreme, riveting opposite.

Advertisement

The concert began with Pärt’s “Spiegel im Spiegel.” The title translates as “Mirror in the Mirror.” You very well have encountered it at as apt accompaniment at weddings and funerals. The score has found its way into film and TV soundtracks and even “The Simpsons.” At the Ford, each ringing note in Joanne Pearce Martin’s piano was like the mirror on a telescope amplifying the light from a star in the night sky, while the meditative lyricism of Gabriela Peña-Kim’s violin was the holy vessel that transported you skyward.

That was followed by “Joy Boy,” written in 1974, four years before “Spiegel” and, like it, a mirror. Only this mirror is Eastman looking unflinchingly at himself. One of the first of his provocatively titled pieces (“Gay Guerilla” is another, as is “Evil ...,” the second half of that title being the N-word), it has as few harmonies as Pärt’s score and as much shimmer. But Eastman’s notation is so vague as to be almost meaningless. He implied that it was for a quartet of singers, or maybe of instrumentalists, or maybe both. The L.A. Phil went all out with four singers and eight strings.

Unlike “Spiegel,” though, there is no stopping “Joy Boy” from the excited raucous behavior it received. The singers whooped it up, howling to the night sky like wild animals. Those handful of chords implied multitudes as they were jiggered, pulled apart and put back together again.

Take your transcendental pick, the program seemed to say: Pärt’s purity or Eastman’s animistic urges. Pärt’s “Summa,” a spiritually unruffled short string quartet that followed, was, thus, either salvation or simply calm before the next Eastman irruption.

In fact, something more exceptional was afoot. Neither Pärt nor Eastman may be what he seems. However different their cultural backgrounds, both were trained as staunch formalists — Pärt in the old Soviet conservatory system and Eastman at Curtis and Cornell. Each created a persona. Photos of Pärt from his school days show the bearded mystic of now to have been then something of a jock. Eastman, on the other hand, early on revealed a dreamy, mystical side.

Moreover, what struck me when I first met each composer was a shared whimsical sense of humor. Each displayed a shyness that seemed not entirely sincere, as if it were a shield. I’ve consequently never entirely trusted the surface of either reclusive composer’s music.

Entertainment & Arts Indispensable classical music for newbies and aficionados alike Coronavirus may have silenced our symphony halls, taking away the essential communal experience of the concert as we know it, but The Times invites you to join us on a different kind of shared journey: a new series on listening.

Rountree’s inspired performances of Pärt’s “Fratres” and Eastman’s “The Holy Presence of Joan d’Arc,” two fabulous pieces for 10 cellos written four years apart (1977 and 1981) and played after intermission, uncovered, alternately, passion and spirituality. Rountree brought out the extremes of such otherness in both.

Advertisement

“Fratres” is all glassiness, and it too has been a moody choice for filmmakers, the sound of what can’t be said, be it a documentary about Auschwitz or a feature set in New York City. You may have caught it in “There Will Be Blood.” But for Rountree, every carefully ethereal gesture held something downright fleshy in its sound.

Meanwhile, Rountree, who is on a mission to make Eastman essential, brought out the sanctity of “Joan d’Arc,” one of Eastman’s last and greatest works, which also be will performed at the Proms in London next week. Cellos break from the rhythmic intensity with swooping, lyrical flights as though they represent the spirit leaving the body.

There are near-infinite conventional ways the L.A. Phil could have given its first chamber music concert in the Ford, now that the orchestra is running the venue at L.A. County’s behest. Instead, it offered an unexpected, revelatory program as a special gift to first responders and other invited guests in an idyllic setting, by far most meaningful live event I’ve attended since the pandemic.

A word about the state of the Ford. It remains lovely and friendly. Other than the piano in “Spiegel” being too loud, amplification proved involving. And I wish success to Todo Verde, the local, plant-based Latin American food service, as refreshing (and maybe challenging) an idea for the Ford as Pärt and Eastman.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A Lite-Brite is not just a retro toy. The little box with its cloaked but ready illuminated panel is a storytelling device, through the images it can create and the memories it can evoke.

It’s also a very handy gadget to have if you’re building an escape room, as its colorful pegs instantly attract the attention of the audience. So when we encounter one in a staged nursery inside “The Nest,” we may instantly wonder what role it will fill or what we may need to craft on it. After all, we’re moving from mini room to mini room to uncover a story.

But puzzles matter less than tone in “The Nest,” even if experiencing this participatory theatrical production, staged in a storage facility just outside of downtown, at times can feel like being in an escape room, or participating in a podcast, the narration unfolding via cassettes and the environments that envelop us.

In some ways, “The Nest” is like a live-action video game, tiny rooms full of personal ephemera for us to explore. In others, it is a glimpse at the future of all experiential entertainment as theaters and theme parks continue to wed the personal with the universal.

Advertisement

Technically, “The Nest" is a work of immersive theater that pulls most heavily from the game and theme park spaces. At its core is a puzzle, but there is no grand mystery to unravel, no trick to reveal. Instead, “The Nest” asks us to piece together a life, to think deeply about our own memories and the ones we’re striving to create.

“The Nest” follows the story of a woman named Josie, who is presented as a long lost, previously unknown relative who has died. We’re tasked with exploring her storage unit , an actual storage unit that’s been transformed into a magical place where school lockers and forests intermingle. In the production created by the Scout Expedition Co., cluttered boxes give way to childhood nooks, classrooms and visions of road trips and Christmas pasts.

Consider it a storage unit turned reverie turned extremely intimate and personal theater, where attendees slyly become participants on their own individual quests.

“It understands, better than most immersive theater pieces, that the audience needs to have a role in the world,” says Noah J. Nelson, founder of online immersive destination No Proscenium, which has tracked “The Nest” through its various productions over the last four years. Nelson compares “The Nest” to the exploratory game “Gone Home,” in which players scour over personal items to discover the story of two siblings.

“It takes more magic realism narrative risks than most escape rooms,” Nelson says of “The Nest.” “Then there is the intimacy factor.”

“The Nest” is theater at its most private — only two theatergoers can explore the space at a time — and an active one. You’ll be asked to step into a darkroom and develop a photo, or construct a map that seems to come alive. Get stuck, and a phone will ring featuring in-character suggestions, a sort of real-life hint line. Ultimately, “The Nest” is a reminder that we are all made of stories.

Jarrett Lantz, left, and Jeff Leinenveber are the co-creators of “The Nest.” (Jason Armond/Los Angeles Times)

“It’s wholly unique to you,” says Jeff Leinenveber, co-creator of the show with Jarrett Lantz. The two met while working with Walt Disney Imagineering, the company’s arm to devoted to theme park experiences.

Advertisement

“Every guest that comes to see ‘The Nest’ gets a sense of Josie’s story, and how that happens is fully dependent on every individual guest, depending on what kind of player they are or what their background is. Each guest receives the same narrative, but they may understand it in very different ways.”

By spending an hour devouring someone’s life, “The Nest” asks what we can better learn about our own hopes, dreams and desires. It’s currently running through mid-September, its initial block of performances cut short by the pandemic.

Versions of “The Nest” have been playing in Los Angeles since 2017, but in 2021 it’s operating in its most poignant form; it hits harder now that we have spent so much time at home being surrounded by stuff. No doubt many of us re-examined our living spaces over the last year and a half, reassessing what was clutter and what was truly meaningful, and likely coming to some surprising conclusions.

Advertisement

Key to the world-building of “The Nest” is the way in which the storage unit was filled — many of Josie’s things were purchased from actual liquidated storage units, and the finds themselves helped create the story. When the team came across some school lockers, for example, they decided to use them to capture how Josie spent her days at class daydreaming of the natural world beyond the walls by surrounding them with greenery.

“The space is a representation of Josie’s mind,” says Leinenveber. “When you first go in, there are several locked doors, but as you progress the story you’re unlocking decades or chapters of her life, going along the ride with her as she pieces together her own life.”

“The Nest” keenly understands that a home isn’t defined by any one era or decade, but by a culmination of newly purchased trinkets and hand-me-down items, the latter often more priceless to their owner. It also understands that one object or memory can conjure a nostalgic world in our imaginations.

“We don’t know Josie,” says Lantz. “We never see Josie, but we’re finding all these objects, we’re hearing her voice and we’re putting together the story of her in our head. People then kind of create her in the image of their own mother or their sister or a friend. Just like when you’re reading a book. It’s the same idea here. It feels personal learning about her life because she’s not just a random character. She just lives in your head.”

One of the hidden rooms in “The Nest,” a video game inspired show running through the end of the month. (Jason Armond/Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

In “The Nest,” what a Lite-Brite means to Josie is no less important than what it may mean to you. And somewhere amid the collection of toys, objects, letters, books, notebooks, plushies and holiday lights will be something that will likely stoke some memory. “The power of seeing an object from your childhood can transport you to the exact place, the exact smells,” Leinenveber says. “The smallest details are transportive.”

We’re prodded along the story via audiotapes, and as we listen to Josie’s aural journals multiple love stores unfold, ones that touch on various fears — loneliness, commitment — as well as her personal passions and hobbies, some that went unexplored. It allows attendees to get a sense of the various crossroads Josie faced, and where she played it safe or where she embraced the unknown. There is, of course, a melancholic bent, but that’s clear from the start, as we know we’re investigating a storage unit of someone who died alone, but that doesn’t mean she didn’t die full of life.

There is no great drama in “The Nest,” and that may be the key to its success. Josie isn’t revealed to have lived some double life. She was normal, like most of us, and struggled, like all of us, and this is ultimately one of the core appeals of stories that unfold via an environment. They don’t need standard beginnings, middles and ends because they’re primarily narratives designed to inspire our own thoughts and conversations.

Think of those early pandemic Zoom calls when we finally got a peek into the home of a co-worker or an acquaintance via a video chat and tried to conjure the narrative of their lives by their surroundings. “The Nest” is sort of like that, but without the awkward conversation and stifling screen, allowing us to roam free in a small space. The relatively light but downcast tone allows for room to contemplate the story without worrying about a complicated plot, and time to linger and wonder about tangible objects.

Advertisement

“At the heart of it all is this sad, but beautiful, story about a very particular life,” Nelson says. “Which makes it novelistic in a way that so few anythings are these days.”

“The Nest” is the rare piece of immersive theater to be recognized with an award from the Themed Entertainment Assn., which has lauded New York’s site-specific theatrical production “Sleep No More” but more famously recognizes work at major theme parks such as those from Disney and Universal.

But like a theme park or a video game, “The Nest” pulls from multiple mediums, and shows how environments can be used to not only tell stories, but make them feel personal to the ticket buyer. What “The Nest” does on a tiny scale — creates a sense of intimacy — is precisely a problem larger providers, from art collective-turned-themed-storytellers Meow Wolf to Disney, are aiming to solve.

Advertisement

Designers today are trying to create play-focused stories that feel tailored to one’s individual experience. Evidence of this, for instance, can be seen in Disney’s plan to launch a two-day, fully-immersive “Star Wars” story-hotel next year in Florida.

“The Nest” is powerful because it understands that this isn’t necessarily achieved by special effects, elaborate puzzles or even dramatic stories; one can simply reframe how we look at ordinary objects. Each one is hiding its own tale.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Charming 19th century photographic portraits at LACMA, illuminated prayer books at the Getty and a groundbreaking 1946 graphic memoir at the Japanese American National Museum lead our August list of exhibitions across Southern California.

Check back here for weekly updates. And before you go, call or check online for reservation requirements and other COVID-19 protocols.

The shows that have our attention:

New and upcoming

“Acting Out: Cabinet Cards and the Making of Modern Photography, 1870–1900”

Examples of photographic portraits of celebrities and everyday people from the closing decades of the 19th century are on view Aug. 8 through Nov. 7. Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 5905 Wilshire Blvd., L.A. Closed Wednesdays. $10-$25; kids 12 and younger are free; discounts available to L.A. County residents. (323) 857-6010. lacma.org

Advertisement

“Hammer Contemporary Collection: Brian Jungen”

The Canadian and First Nations artist interrogates depictions of the Native American experience in popular culture in an installation on view Aug. 14 through Oct. 31. Also coming: “Hammer Projects: David Hartt,” a multimedia installation that examines culture, geography and colonial histories in the Americas during the 19th century (Aug. 21 through Jan. 2); “Houseguest: Shadows Fall Down,” L.A.-based Monica Majoli curates a centuries-spanning selection of drawings from the collections of the Hammer and the UCLA Grunwald Center for the Graphic Arts (Aug. 21 through Jan. 2). Hammer Museum, 10899 Wilshire Blvd., Westwood. Closed Mondays. Free; reservations required. (310) 443-7000. hammer.ucla.edu

“What Now: Collecting for the Library in the 21st Century, Part 2”

The pandemic-delayed concluding segment of this exhibition tied to the Huntington’s centennial features an eclectic mix of photographs, sketches, maps, historical documents and ephemera; on view Aug. 7 through Nov. 1. Also coming up: “A Garden of Words: The Calligraphy of Liu Fang Yuan,” exhibition of contemporary Chinese calligraphy (Part 1: Aug. 28 through Dec. 13; Part 2: Jan. 29 through May 26). Huntington Library, Art Museum, and Botanical Gardens, 1151 Oxford Road, San Marino. Closed Tuesdays. $13-$29; children younger than 4 are free; advance timed-entry tickets required. (626) 405-2100. huntington.org

“Transcending Time: The Medieval Book of Hours”

Examples of illuminated prayer books and manuscripts from the Getty’s collection will be on view Aug. 31 through Feb. 20. Also on view: “Paolo Veneziano: Art and Devotion in 14th-Century Venice,” works by the medieval painter regarded as the founder of the Venetian school (through Oct. 3); “In Focus: Protest,” photographs by Dorothea Lange, Robert Mapplethorpe and others taken in response to social upheaval in America (through Oct. 10). Getty Center, Sepulveda Boulevard and Getty Center Drive, L.A. Closed Mondays. Free; advance timed-entry tickets required. (310) 440-7300. getty.edu

“Miné Okubo’s Masterpiece: The Art of Citizen 13660”

Illustrations from Okubo’s groundbreaking 1946 graphic memoir, depicting the harsh conditions that she and her fellow Japanese American citizens endured in a U.S. government-run incarceration center during World War II, will be on view Aug. 28 through Feb. 20. Japanese American National Museum, 100 N. Central Ave., downtown L.A. Open Tuesdays-Sundays. $7, $16; advance ticket reservations encouraged, walk-ups available. (213) 625-0414. janm.org

“Artistic Legacy: The Ann and Bill Cullen Collection”

Paintings and drawings from the estate of actress, model and artist Ann Macomber Cullen, wife of the late game-show host Bill Cullen, will be on view Aug. 28 through Dec. 19. Bowers Museum, 2002 N. Main St., Santa Ana. Closed Mondays. $10-$15; children younger than 12, free; advance purchase recommended. (714) 567-3600. bowers.org

“Anna Wittenberg: The Ruminant”

The L.A.-based interdisciplinary artist’s video-enhanced sculptural installation, referencing cattle, sheep and other similar animals, will be on view Aug. 21 through Feb. 6. Also on view: “Facing Fire: Art, Wildfire, and the End of Nature in the New West” (through Aug. 15). UCR Arts (California Museum of Photography, Culver Center of the Arts), 3824 Main St., Riverside. Open Thursdays-Sundays. Free; advance timed-entry tickets required. ucrarts.ucr.edu

“Dimensions in Testimony”

Holocaust Museum LA has reopened with this new permanent interactive holographic exhibit from the USC Shoah Foundation that allows visitors to ask questions of 97-year-old Holocaust survivor Renée Firestone. Holocaust Museum LA, 100 The Grove Drive, L.A. Open Thursdays-Sundays. $10, $15; students and California residents with valid ID, free; advance timed-entry tickets required. holocaustmuseumla.org

Advertisement

Ongoing

“Don Reitz: Life Is Not a Dress Rehearsal”

Works by the influential American ceramicist are on display through Feb. 20. American Museum of Ceramic Art, 399 N. Garey Ave., Pomona. Open Wednesdays-Sundays. $5, $7; 12 and younger, free. (909) 865-3146. amoca.org

“Alison Saar: Of Aether and Earthe”

This super-sized survey of the acclaimed artist’s works is spread over two venues. Through Dec. 19 at the Benton Museum of Art at Pomona College, 120 W. Bonita Ave., Claremont; open Tuesdays-Saturdays; free; reservations required; pomona.edu. The other half of the exhibition is on view through Dec. 12 at the Armory Center for the Arts, 145 N. Raymond Ave., Pasadena; open by appointment only Friday-Sunday; free; armoryarts.org

“When I Remember I See Red: American Indian Art and Activism in California”

On view through Nov. 14. Also on view: “What’s Her Story: Women in the Archives” (through Aug. 28). Autry Museum of the American West, 4700 Western Heritage Way, Griffith Park, L.A. Closed Mondays. $6-$14; children younger than 3 are free; reservations available online; walk-ups allowed at box office. (323) 667-2000. theautry.org

Advertisement

“Invisible Sun”

Works by Julie Mehretu, Keith Haring and others from the Broad museum’s collection explore social justice; on view through Oct. 3. The Broad, 221 S. Grand Ave., downtown L.A. Open Wednesday-Sunday. Free; advance timed-entry tickets required; no on-site standby line. (213) 232-6200. thebroad.org

“Sanford Biggers: Codeswitch”

Quilt-based works by the New York artist explore African American history and traditions; on view through Jan. 23. Also on view: “Enunciated Life,” contemporary works exploring Black spirituality (through Aug. 15). California African American Museum, 600 State Drive, Exposition Park, L.A. Closed Mondays. Free. (213) 744-7432. caamuseum.org

“Jonathan Michael Castillo: Car Culture”

Candid photographs examine Angelenos’ relationships with their automobiles. Also on view: “The Memory Project,” installation features the written and recorded personal reflections of visitors to the museum (through August). California Museum of Art Thousand Oaks at the Oaks, 350 W. Hillcrest Drive. Open Friday-Sunday. Free. (805) 405-5240. cmato.org

“Life Beginnings”

This immersive and interactive exhibit explores procreation in the human and animal worlds. California Science Center, 700 Exposition Park Drive, L.A. Open daily. Permanent exhibits are free; special exhibits (including the current Lego art show and IMAX films vary in price. Reservations required. (323) 724-3623. californiasciencecenter.org

Advertisement

“Titanic: Real Artifacts, Real People, Real Stories”

The maritime disaster is revisited through photographs and personal effects on view through Feb. 13. Catalina Island Museum, 217 Metropole Ave., Avalon. Open Wednesdays-Sundays. $15, $17; kids 15 and younger are free with a paying adult; advance purchase recommended. catalinamuseum.org

“Veil Craft”

This architectural installation made from construction textiles will be on view through Sept. 12. Craft Contemporary, 5814 Wilshire Blvd., L.A. Open Thursdays-Sundays. $7, $9; Sundays are pay what you can; reservations required. craftcontemporary.org

“Free State”

Exploration of human rights, democracy, the environment; on view through Sept. 18. ESMoA (El Segundo Museum of Art), 208 Main St., El Segundo. Open Fridays and Saturdays. Free; advance timed-entry tickets required. (424) 277-1020. esmoa.org

Advertisement





“Mesopotamia: Civilization Begins”

Statuary, pottery, wall paintings and other antiquities from the Louvre; on view through Aug. 16. Also on view: “Assyria: Palace Art of Ancient Iraq” (through Sept. 5). Getty Villa, 17985 Pacific Coast Highway, Pacific Palisades. Closed Tuesdays. Free; advance tickets required. (310) 440-7300. getty.edu | TIMES REVIEW

“Motown: The Sound of Young America”

The storied record label is celebrated through stage costumes, musical instruments and more; on view though January. Grammy Museum, 800 W. Olympic Blvd., L.A. Open Friday-Sunday. $13, $15; ages 5 and under are free; advance timed-entry tickets required. (213) 765-6800. grammymuseum.org

“Queer Communion: Ron Athey”

The long career of the influential L.A. performance artist and activist is explored through videos, photographs, props, costumes and ephemera, on view through Sept. 5. Institute of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, 1717 E. 7th St., L.A. Open Wednesdays-Sundays. Free. (213) 928-0833. theicala.org

Advertisement

“Reconnecting: A Vision of Unity by Kengo Kito”

The contemporary Japanese artist explores unity, diversity and interconnectedness in this site-specific installation that uses more than 2,000 brightly colored hula hoops, on view through Sept. 6. Japan House Los Angeles, Hollywood & Highland, Level 2 Gallery, 6801 Hollywood Blvd., Hollywood. Open daily. Free. japanhousela.com

“Carlos Almaraz: Evolution of Form”

Times columnist Carolina A. Miranda called the work of this late painter, subject of a 2017 LACMA retrospective, “vital to the ways in which Los Angeles sees itself.” This exhibition explores the Chicano artist’s early life to reveal influences on his style and form (through Jan. 9). LA Plaza de Cultural y Artes, 501 N. Main St., downtown L.A. Thursday-Sundays. Free; reservations suggested. (213) 542-6200. lapca.org

“Matthew Rolston, Art People: The Pageant Portraits”

The photographer presents his 2016 series of large-scale, high-resolution images inspired by the tableaux vivant presentations at Laguna Beach’s annual Pageant of the Masters; on view through Sept. 19. Laguna Art Museum, 307 Cliff Drive, Laguna Beach. Closed Wednesdays. $5, $7; 17 and younger are free. (949) 494-8971. lagunaartmuseum.org

“Tristan Eaton: All At Once: 25 Years of Art & Design”

New exhibit surveys the career of the L.A. painter, muralist, illustrator and designer; through Oct. 31. Long Beach Museum of Art, 2300 E. Ocean Blvd., Long Beach. Open Thursdays-Sundays. Free; advance timed-entry tickets required. lbma.org

Advertisement

“Evidence: Selections from the Permanent Collection”

A survey of the Museum of Contemporary Art’s holdings; through Feb. 21. Also on view: “Jennifer Packer: Every Shut Eye Ain’t Sleep,” new and recent paintings by the New York artist (through Feb. 21). MoCA, 250 S. Grand Ave., downtown L.A. Open Thursdays-Sundays. Free; special exhibitions, $10, $18. (213) 626-6222. moca.org

“50 Faces”

Contemporary mosaic artwork from Italy’s Scuola Mosaicisti del Friuli, on view through Oct. 7. Muckenthaler Cultural Center, 1201 W. Malvern Ave., Fullerton. Open Monday-Thursday. $5 per group of up to four people. themuck.org

“Cudra Clover: Hysteria”

Biologically inspired silk paintings; on view through Sept. 5. Museum of Art & History, 665 W. Lancaster Blvd., Lancaster. Closed Mondays. Free; reservations required. (661) 723-6250. lancastermoah.org

“Judy Baca: Memorias de Nuestra Tierra, a Retrospective”

This survey of works by the acclaimed Chicana muralist, educator and activist will be on view through January. Museum of Latin American Art, 628 Alamitos Ave., Long Beach. Open Tuesdays-Fridays. $7, $10; younger than 12, free; advance purchase suggested. molaa.org

Advertisement

“The Swineherd”

This 1888 painting by Paul Gauguin on loan from LACMA is exhibited with related post-Impressionist works in the museum’s 19th century art gallery; on view through Nov. 18. Norton Simon Museum, 411 W. Colorado Blvd., Pasadena. Closed Tuesday-Wednesday. $12, $15; students, active military and ages 18 and younger are free. (626) 449-6840. nortonsimon.org

“The Anthropocene Epiphany: Art and Climate Change”

Multimedia exhibition examines the climate crisis, on view through Aug. 21. Orange County Center for Contemporary Art, 117 N. Sycamore St., Santa Ana. Open Fridays-Saturdays; open other days by appointment. Free. occca.org

“Pole Position: The Juan Gonzalez Formula 1 Collection”

Installation includes examples of F1 race cars from across three decades, surrounded by a 180-degree immersive video; on view through June 5, 2022. Petersen Automotive Museum, 6060 Wilshire Blvd., L.A. Open Wednesdays-Sundays. $11-$16; children younger than 4 are free; advance purchase required. (323) 930-2277. petersen.org

Advertisement

Newsletter Your essential guide to the arts in L.A. Get Carolina A. Miranda's weekly newsletter for what's happening, plus openings, critics' picks and more. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

“The Map and the Territory: 100 Years of Collecting at UCLA”

UCLA’s Fowler and Hammer museums and the UCLA Library co-organized this survey of paintings, drawings, prints, rare books, ceramics, musical instruments and more, on view through Oct. 24. Fowler Museum, 308 Charles E. Young Drive North, Westwood. Open Wednesdays-Sundays. Free. (310) 825-4361. fowler.ucla.edu

“Divine Immersion: The Experiential Art of Nick Dong”

Modern technology and ancient Buddhist traditions inspired this exhibit of five experiential sculptures, on view through Oct. 3. USC Pacific Asia Museum, 46 N. Los Robles Ave., Pasadena. Open Wednesdays-Sundays. $7, $10; free for ages 17 and younger, and every second Sunday of the month; advance tickets recommended. (626) 787-2680. pacificasiamuseum.usc.edu

“See Thy Neighbor: Stern Photographers Thomas Hoepker and Harald Schmitt in the GDR”

Two photographers with very different points of view on East German life in the 1970s and ’80s; through Oct. 24. Wende Museum, 10808 Culver Blvd., Culver City. Open Friday-Sunday. Free; advance reservations required. (310) 216-1600. wendemuseum.org
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Jeopardy!” executive producer Mike Richards confirmed he is under consideration to become the new host of the iconic game show while also doing damage control on reports on his past workplace behavior while running “The Price Is Right.”

Variety reported last week that Richards is in negotiations with the show’s production company, Sony Pictures Television, to replace the late Alex Trebek, following the use of guest hosts in the last seven months. Richards also did a fill-in stint and there was talk among insiders on the program that he was positioning himself for the full-time role.

Once Richards emerged as the leading candidate for the job, dissatisfied fans have claimed the public search was a façade. They also have cited discrimination suits by employees at “The Price Is Right,” the CBS daytime game show where Richards was an executive producer from 2008 to 2018.

Richards, who was named “Jeopardy!” executive producer in 2020, said in a memo to staff obtained by The Times that he is in talks to succeed Trebek, who died in November, but that no deal has been finalized.

Advertisement

“It is true that I was asked if I would consider hosting the show,” Richards said. “I was humbled and deeply honored. No final decisions have been made and discussions with me and other potential hosts are still ongoing. I know I have mentioned this to you all before, but the choice on this is not my decision and never has been.”

Richards also defended himself over his being named in discrimination suits filed by employees of the CBS game show “The Price Is Right,” which is produced by Fremantle.

Whether Richards survives the ongoing controversy is now an open question. In any event, it has tarnished what had been a celebration of Trebek, as the guest hosts — which included CNN’s Anderson Cooper, NBC’s “Today” cohost Savannah Guthrie, actress Mayim Bialik, actor LeVar Burton and Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers — raised $3 million for charity through their appearances, which were largely seen as auditions.

In 2010, model Shane Stirling sued producers of “The Price Is Right” for wrongful termination, alleging that she was improperly let go in 2008 after returning from pregnancy leave. The case was dismissed in 2012 after Stirling had trouble providing sufficient evidence to prove her claims and the judge decided that the statute of limitations had run out.

In 2010, model Brandi Cochran sued for wrongful termination, alleging that she got less work after telling producers she was pregnant with twins. She said she had not wanted to reveal her pregnancy because she was afraid she would be fired.

One of her twins died in miscarriage while the other was born three months premature and had health issues. Cochran said producers sent her mixed signals about whether she could return to work; then she found out she’d been fired.

Advertisement

A jury initially awarded Cochran more than $8 million, but the judge tossed that out and ordered a new trial after deciding the jury had been improperly instructed. The parties reached an out-of-court settlement in 2016.

Finally, Lanisha Cole sued in 2011, alleging wrongful constructive termination, retaliation, sexual harassment and more. Cole said in her court filing that in 2009, six years into her stint on the show, Richards began treating her differently from the other models and refused to speak with her directly, causing her “great uncertainty” about her performance.

She linked this change to Richards starting a personal relationship with fellow “Price” model Amber Lancaster in early 2009, according to the lawsuit.

Advertisement

Richards was dismissed as a defendant in the case, which also named Fremantle and co-executive producer Adam Sandler (not the film actor).

“These were allegations made in employment disputes against the show,” Richards said in the memo. “I want you all to know that the way in which my comments and actions have been characterized in these complaints does not reflect the reality of who I am or how we worked together on ‘The Price Is Right.’ I know firsthand how special it is to be a parent. It is the most important thing in the world to me. I would not say anything to disrespect anyone’s pregnancy and have always supported my colleagues on their parenting journeys.”

Richards said the female cast members on “The Price Is Right” and “Let’s Make a Deal,” the other CBS program he oversaw, had seven children during his tenure on the programs.

“We embraced and celebrated each pregnancy and birth both in front of and behind the camera,” Richards said. “It was a joy to watch their families grow and highlight their happiness as part of the show.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The streaming wars have created an arms race for the hottest shows and movies, but the writers behind them are getting a raw deal.

That’s the perspective of Meredith Stiehm as she prepares to take on her presidency of the Writers Guild of America, West, which has about 10,000 members.

“Creatively, it’s sort of like the Wild West — you can do anything you want and find a home for it, but financially it’s like an emergency what’s going on,” Stiehm said in a video interview from her Santa Monica home.

The 53-year-old creator of the procedural “Cold Case” for CBS and longtime writer and executive producer on Showtime’s “Homeland” is running unopposed for the role and is expected to succeed two-term President David Goodman on Sept. 21.

Advertisement

Stiehm is a longtime WGA member, having first joined in 1994, and has spent six years on the union’s West Coast board, participating in the last round of negotiations with producers on a contract that expires in 2023.

The next round of talks, expected to begin in 18 months, could prove even more contentious, as the WGA will face a changing lineup of Hollywood studios that will for the first time include Netflix.

Last year, the COVID-19 pandemic averted a potential writers strike over streaming pay. While writers were one of the few groups that could continue to work, there was no production to stop, limiting the union’s leverage.

“I’m actually surprised how well we did,” Stiehm said.

Stiehm was born in Madison, Wis., the daughter of a feminist political science professor mother and academic pediatrician father who worked at UCLA. She grew up in the Los Angeles area before going on to the University of Pennsylvania, where she studied playwriting and joined the varsity tennis team.

While Goodman ran last time in a contested election, Stiehm says she is running unopposed at a time of relative calm with the union on a high from its win against the major Hollywood agencies in a dispute over conflicts of interest.

“We’re sharing information and contracts and we’re working in a new relationship with them,” Stiehm said. “You can see when money is owed and when the guild can step in and help. But it’s also really important for the [collective bargaining] negotiation that’s coming up.”

The current three-year contract approved last year contained various improvements, including paid parental leave and higher residuals for shows distributed on streaming platforms.

But it will take more than an increase in residuals to reach an agreement next time, Stiehm said.

Advertisement

“It’s really a whole new business model,” Stiehm said. “It’s the short seasons and vertically integrated streaming. It has changed our job so much and squeezed our income so much. It’s a pretty serious problem we have to solve. We have to figure out ... how do writers get paid properly?”

To be sure, before the pandemic television employment reached its highest level in history: There were more than 4,500 members working in TV from 2014 to 2019, with more than 350 scripted series in production from 2016-2019. Global subscription streaming revenue had ballooned to $37 billion in 2019 and had been projected to reach $62 billion in 2023, according to the WGA.

Yet the proliferation of streaming services has not translated to a bigger payday for writers, the union says.

Advertisement

Stiehm, who walked the WGA picket line during the 2007-2008 writers strike with a baby in tow, said writers are still getting paid less for writing scripts for Netflix than for broadcasters like CBS, a discount that was allowed when streaming was in its infancy.

The next contract renegotiation is pivotal, she believes.

“It’s going to take a fight,” Stiehm said. “I don’t think members are going to need to be convinced that their incomes are being squeezed. We all feel it. It is going to take both sides solving a very complicated problem and the writers having to decide how much they want to fight for it. It’s sort of like a turning point the way it was in 2007 with the internet. We have to fix this now or let that ship sail.”

The 2007 strike lasted 100 days and cost the state an estimated 37,700 jobs and $2.1 billion in lost output from late 2007 through the end of 2008, according to a 2008 Milken Institute report.

Advertisement

Despite the hardships, the walkout was widely supported by WGA members for establishing a template for compensating writers in the streaming era.

Part of the problem is the short nature of the series that streaming companies like Netflix have established. Instead of signing up to create 22 episodes in what had been the typical format for a broadcast series, writers are finding themselves caught up in so-called mini rooms, where they might be committed for a year but paid for as little as six episodes.

Stiehm was on the union’s negotiating committee in 2017, when a strike was averted at the 11th hour.

“A lot of the next year and a half is to strategize and figure that out and hear what the priorities are,” she said.

Advertisement

The union leader was impressed by Scarlett Johansson’s recent lawsuit against Walt Disney for allegedly breaching its contract over its decision to stream her movie “Black Widow.” Disney said the suit had no merit.

“That makes a big statement,” Stiehm said. “Writers, we don’t have big stars as much. We have the 10,000 members who, if unified, can move the needle. So it’s a little different. I’m certainly impressed with people who sort of call out the powers that be and say ‘that’s not fair.’”

Stiehm also has called for diversifying writers’ rooms. She is part of a WGA initiative helping to educate showrunners on diverse hiring, but also believes studios have a key role in picking top diverse writer-producers.

“I’ve been a showrunner three times and I always have gender equity on my staff. I always hire people of color, and nobody stops me from doing that at the studios, but nobody makes me do it either,” Stiehm said, noting the lack of racial and gender diversity and representation of writers with disabilities. “My first job was like that. ‘NYPD Blue’ was all white men and me, and all the way through ‘Homeland,’ all white men and me. No one says ‘that’s a problem’ and that’s what the studio can do.”

Advertisement

Since her first L.A. job as a production assistant on “Batman Returns,” Stiehm has had a stellar career but has seen writers get the short end of deals. When she created “Cold Case” at 32, she didn’t know what packaging meant. It was only after the show had been running seven years and a slice of the profits started flowing to the creators that she realized for every dollar she was earning, CAA, which had packaged the show, was earning over 90 cents, she said.

“I didn’t even know until eight years later that CAA had made a deal for themselves,” she said. “It was incredible and awful.”

Stiehm had been told by her agent about the packaging process and fees, CAA said in a statement. “Focusing on the future, we look forward to working with the WGA on the actual issues challenging all artists,” the agency added.

She became a co-chair of the the guild’s agency campaign committee and was a plaintiff in the lawsuit that the WGA brought against the four big Hollywood agencies including CAA for packaging shows without their knowledge or consent.

Advertisement

CAA said in a court filing that Stiehm’s claims against the agency were “preposterous” and denied the allegations.

The agencies sued the WGA but the suits were withdrawn when agencies agreed to divest most of their investments in affiliated production companies and phase out packaging.

“We have a lot of momentum now and perceived strength,” Stiehm said. “I’ve just seen in the last three years of this campaign how effective we can be. So I’m grateful and activated.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hollywood’s biggest union has waded into the fight over profits between Scarlett Johansson and Walt Disney.

The president of SAG-AFTRA, which represents more than 160,000 actors and performers, criticized the response of the Burbank-based studio to Johansson’s lawsuit over its release strategy of her “Black Widow” movie.

“Disney should be ashamed of themselves for resorting to tired tactics of gender-shaming and bullying,” outgoing SAG-AFTRA President Gabrielle Carteris said in a statement Friday. “Actors must be compensated for their work according to their contracts.”

Disney had no immediate response to the statement.

Advertisement

Last week, Johansson accused Disney of breaching its contract by debuting the big-budget Marvel Studios superhero movie on Disney+ and in theaters at the same time, saying it decreased her compensation, which was largely linked to movie ticket sales.

The move escalates bubbling tensions between A-list stars and the media companies using their movies to grow streaming services. Recently AMC Networks paid $200 million to settle a lawsuit over streaming and profits from “The Walking Dead,” while WarnerMedia paid $200 million to make good on deals with creators after it shifted many of its movies to streaming on HBO Max, the Wall Street Journal reported.

“Scarlett Johansson is shining a white-hot spotlight on the improper shifts in compensation that companies are attempting to slip by talent as distribution models change,” Carteris said. “Nobody in any field of work should fall victim to surprise reductions in expected compensation. It is unreasonable and unjust. Disney and other content companies are doing very well and can certainly live up to their obligations to compensate the performers whose art and artistry are responsible for the corporation’s profits.”

Carteris’ comments follow those of the star’s agent, Bryan Lourd, who also made the unusual move of speaking out against Disney.

Johansson’s filing said Disney broke a promise to give “Black Widow” a full, exclusive theatrical release “in order to prevent Ms. Johansson from realizing the full benefit of her bargain with Marvel.”

Disney called the suit meritless. It went on to say Johansson’s suit showed “callous disregard for the horrific and prolonged global effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.” Disney said it complied with her contract and, in a rare move, revealed the A-lister’s pay, saying, “The release of ‘Black Widow’ on Disney+ with Premier Access has significantly enhanced her ability to earn additional compensation on top of the $20M she has received to date.”

The criticism had a gendered tone that was deeply concerning to SAG-AFTRA, the union said.

Advertisement

“Women are not ‘callous’ when they stand up and fight for fair pay — they are leaders and champions for economic justice,” Carteris said. “Women have been victimized by pay inequity for decades, and they have been further victimized by comments like those in Disney’s press statements. These sorts of attacks have no place in our society and SAG-AFTRA will continue to defend our members from all forms of bias.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jane Withers, the former child actor who bedeviled Shirley Temple on the screen and went on to star in a series of B movies that made her a box-office champion, has died, her daughter said. She was 95.

Withers, also known as “Josephine the Plumber” from TV commercials in the 1960s and ’70s, died Saturday, her daughter Kendall Errair said. Withers was one of the last remaining stars from the 1930s and 1940s, the height of Hollywood studio dominance.

After a series of minor roles as a child actress, Withers was cast by Twentieth Century-Fox in the 1934 “Bright Eyes,” as the nemesis of lovable Temple, then Hollywood’s most popular star.

“I had to play the meanest, creepiest little girl that God ever put on this planet,” Withers recalled in 2000. “I ran over Shirley with a tricycle, and a baby buggy. And I thought, ‘Oh dear, everybody’s going to hate me forever because I was so creepy mean to Shirley Temple!‘ ”

Advertisement

It didn’t turn out that way. Critics claimed that she stole the picture from Shirley. Children wrote fan letters admiring what she did to Shirley “because she’s so perfect.”

Fox boss Darryl F. Zanuck figured there was room for another child actress at the studio, and she was signed to a contract. She played the anti-Shirley, a bright, talky, mischief-prone girl with wide eyes, chubby cheeks and straight black hair that contrasted with Shirley’s blonde curly top.

For four years, Fox ground out three or four Withers films annually at budgets far lower than the Temple specials. Among the titles: “Ginger,” “Paddy O’Day,” “Little Miss Nobody,” “Wild and Wooly” and “Arizona Wildcat.”

Even though B pictures were aimed for the bottom half of double bills, a theater owners poll named Withers one of the top money-making stars in 1936 and 1937.

While the Temple films were made on Fox’s modern Westwood lot, Withers made hers at the old studio on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood.

“I wasn’t allowed to shoot in Westwood until Shirley left the studio,” she said.

Withers proved less of a draw as a teenager, and her career dwindled.

As an adult she appeared in a few films and on television.

Advertisement

Her biggest prominence came from portraying “Josephine” in TV commercials for Comet cleanser for 12 years.

“Oh, the money is nice, all right,” she told the Los Angeles Times in 1963. “I got five figures for eight of those commercials, and I’m doing four more.”

The main advantage, she said, was that unlike the Broadway offers she was getting, the job didn’t interfere with her home life in Hollywood.

She said in a later Times interview that she felt the original Josephine character was “too smart-alecky, too brash,” but she thought “any lady who was going to become a plumber” would take pride in her work and care about her customers.

Advertisement

Fame started early for Jane Withers. Born April 12, 1926, in Atlanta, she had appeared as Dixie’s Dainty Dewdrop on local radio by the age of 3.

Her mother had greater ambitions, and she persuaded her husband to move the family to Hollywood.

Jane played bit roles in movies and supplied voices for the Willie Whopper and the Looney Tunes cartoons.

Her experience with W.C. Fields in “It’s a Gift” (1934) belies the legend — encouraged by Fields himself — that the comedian hated children. Fields chose her for a scene in which she played hopscotch in front of his store, frustrating his exit. He coached her and afterward praised her professionalism.

Advertisement

When she won her first starring role, he sent her two large bouquets and a note saying, “I know you’re going to knock them dead in `Ginger’ and you’re going to have a fantastic career.”

Her popularity led to Jane Withers dolls and other merchandise. At her peak, she was earning $2,500 a week and $50,000 a year in endorsements. Unlike other child stars, her earnings did not disappear.

She explained in 1974: “Fortunately, my dad had a great love of California land. He kind of dibble-dabbled in real estate in a marvelous way.”

During her childhood she started collecting dolls and teddy bears, and she continued throughout her lifetime. In 1988 she reported that she owned 12,000 dolls and 2,500 teddy bears which were boxed and crated in a 27,000-square-foot warehouse.

Advertisement

Withers’ film appearances as an adult were sporadic, partly because of three marriages and five children. Her most notable credits were “Giant” (1956) and “Captain Newman, M.D.” (1963).

In 1947, Withers left Hollywood to live with her first husband, producer-oil man William Moss, in Midland, Texas. The marriage produced three children and ended after seven years.

She returned to Hollywood and was paralyzed with arthritis. She recovered after spending five months in a hospital.

She had two more children with second husband Kenneth Errair, one of the Four Freshmen singing group, who died in 1968. In 1985 she married Thomas Pierson, a travel agency executive.

Advertisement

An interviewer in 1974 asked Withers how she managed to escape the troubles that plagued many child stars in adulthood. A lifelong Presbyterian, she commented: “I always took my troubles to the good Lord, and I never failed to get an answer.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Moviegoing, once expected to be closer to semi-normal levels by now, continues to be battered by the pandemic, the delta variant of the coronavirus and in-home streaming. The latest casualty: James Gunn’s “The Suicide Squad,” a critically acclaimed, carnage-ridden would-be smash that disappointed with $26.5 million in estimated ticket sales.

The Warner Bros. film, which was released simultaneously on HBO Max, could claim one pandemic record: the top R-rated opening. But “The Suicide Squad,” featuring the “Guardians of the Galaxy” director’s first DC Comics film, had seemed poised to be a bigger hit — and may have been if the delta variant wasn’t keeping a lot of moviegoers home.

Jeff Goldstein, distribution chief for Warner Bros., acknowledged the recovery is taking longer than anyone hoped.

“We always knew the ramp-up would be two steps forward and one step back,” Goldstein said. “But when we’re living it, it’s not great.”

Advertisement

As recently as a month ago, the outlook for movie theaters was brightening. Marvel’s “Black Widow” set a pandemic-best mark with a $80 million domestic debut. Now, that movie’s hybrid release is the focus of a bitter legal battle between star Scarlett Johansson and the Walt Disney Co. that has larger ramifications for the economics of big-budget movies in the streaming era.

More importantly, COVID cases in the United States have since rocketed — from a few thousand daily infections to more than 100,000. That has led some to curtail indoor activities and some states to consider changing regulations. New York is planning to make vaccination a requirement for indoor dining and other venues, including movie theaters.

“I think avid moviegoers have returned to theaters, and they show up first night and through the weekend,” Goldstein said. “But what we’re not seeing is the casual moviegoers — those who were interested and would have gone in a pre-pandemic context. Right now, they’re not quite there.”

The result for “The Suicide Squad” — strong reviews, underwhelming opening — is a kind of inverse to 2016’s “Suicide Squad,” which was lambasted by critics but also made a lot of money. The film, directed by David Ayer, opened with $133.7 million in the U.S. and Canada, eventually grossing $745 million worldwide.) In part because of fan backlash to DC titles like “The Suicide Squad,” Gunn was brought in to set a more irreverent tone.

Gunn’s movie, a sequel-reboot that returns some cast members but not others, drew good reviews (92% fresh on Rotten Tomatoes), already has a series spinoff starring John Cena upcoming and was largely endorsed by moviegoers with a B+ CinemaScore. The film stars Idris Elba, Margot Robbie, Viola Davis and Joel Kinnaman. Not back: Will Smith or Jared Leto.

“The Suicide Squad” cost about $185 million to make, but the current state of the box office doesn’t offer much of a chance for profitability for movies at that scale. Warner didn’t release any streaming or subscription data related to the “The Suicide Squad,” but Goldstein said that every release has seen “a proportional response” on HBO Max that correlates to its popularity in theaters. If it’s a hit in theaters, it’s a hit on streaming.

Advertisement

Paul Dergarabedian, senior media analyst for data firm Comscore, said that while he believes day-and-date releases can hurt a movie’s box office, the dominant variable is still the pandemic.

“Today is a very different marketplace than it was even just a few weeks ago, which makes any kind of long-term proclamations as to what’s going on with the movie industry or movie theaters very challenging,” Dergarabedian said. “The desire for going to the movies is there, but the marketplace is in flux.”

Last week’s top film, Disney’s even pricier “Jungle Cruise,” also opened softer than expected, collecting $34 million in the U.S. and Canada against a reported budget of $200 million. While most titles this year have fallen fast after release, “Jungle Cruise” held reasonably well, dropping 55% in its second week with $15.7 million. Globally, it has totaled $122 million. That doesn’t include the $30 million Disney said “Jungle Cruise” made in its first weekend in “early access” purchases on Disney+. (Disney didn’t share updated streaming revenue in the movie’s second week.)

“Under normal conditions, a strong marketing campaign can overcome a few drawbacks and generate a good weekend. Under current conditions, that isn’t happening.” David A. Gross

Advertisement

If COVID-19 cases don’t drop soon, studios will be faced with the difficult question of what to do with upcoming tentpole releases — especially distributors that aren’t as tethered to streaming platforms. Eyes will be on how MGM handles the James Bond film “No Time to Die” (Oct. 8) and whether Sony holds with “Venom: Let There Be Carnage” (Sept. 24). Paramount recently postponed the release of “Clifford the Big Red Dog” citing the rise of the delta variant.

“Currently, this is an unforgiving market,” said David A. Gross, who runs the movie consultancy firm Franchise Entertainment Research. “The last couple of big movies have been flawed. Under normal conditions, a strong marketing campaign can overcome a few drawbacks and generate a good weekend. Under current conditions, that isn’t happening.”

Goldstein said that if not for the streaming half of its releases, Warner Bros. wouldn’t likely be opening films like “The Suicide Squad.”

“We’ve definitely declared that a day-and-date strategy with HBO Max is not our plan and it’s not what we’re going to do in 2022. But if we didn’t do this in 2021, we couldn’t afford the marketing, let alone it would have been ridiculous to put the movies out,” Goldstein said. “It’s definitely a complicated time.”

Advertisement

Some independent films have still found relative success. Tom McCarthy’s “Stillwater,” starring Matt Damon, added $2.9 million to bring its two-week total past $10 million for Focus Features. David Lowery’s “The Green Knight” grossed $2.6 million to bring its two-week gross to $12.2 million.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“The Green Knight,” David Lowery’s beautiful, sometimes baffling medieval epic starring Dev Patel, has inspired equally passionate acclaim and dissent from critics and audiences. Times film writers Mark Olsen, Justin Chang and Jen Yamato sat down to discuss their lingering reactions to the film; how it echoes and deviates from its source material, the 14th-century poem “Sir Gawain and the Green Knight”; and what it all means, if it means anything at all. (Spoiler alert: This conversation discusses major plot details from the movie, including the ending.)

MARK OLSEN: “The Green Knight” opens on titles announcing that the film is an adaptation of the chivalric romance by Anonymous. From the start there’s something unknowable, handed down through the centuries. More titles announce the name of the lead character “Sir Gawain” in different lettering, pointing to the idea there is more than one way to tell a story. Then the film truly begins, having set the stage for all the beguiling, mystical, perplexing business to follow.

All of this is a roundabout way of saying I kind of didn’t get it. I am not an Arthurian scholar and not particularly familiar with the original story, but I don’t think that’s it. Writer-director David Lowery and star Dev Patel present a young man attempting to find his way, fearful that he has nothing to offer the world: Gawain, wastrel nephew of King Arthur and not yet a knight, impulsively accepts a challenge from the Green Knight and perhaps assigns himself to death. Traveling to a remote location to uphold his end of the bargain, he finds inner resolve, purpose and grace he did not know he possessed.

There are many questions raised along the way, without many direct answers. Is Alicia Vikander in two roles or just one? What is the meaning of the ambiguous giants Gawain sees after eating mushrooms? Is the talking fox helping him or misdirecting him? What does his mother really want for him? And does he get that particular bodily fluid out of his enchanted sash? While the movie is undoubtedly crafted with care and precision, for me it was often itself stuck in the mud of the ponderous atmosphere it seems to insist upon.

Advertisement

I’m a big admirer of Lowery and his work, including “Ain’t Them Bodies Saints,” “A Ghost Story,” “Pete’s Dragon” and “The Old Man & the Gun,” which also trafficked in a certain poetic reverie. Having seen “The Green Knight” twice now, I liked it more on second viewing, in part because it was easier to attune to its pacing, but still feel it at best a movie to admire and respect more than actively like.

Dev Patel as Gawain in the 2021 drama “The Green Knight.” (A24)

JUSTIN CHANG: “Respect more than actively like” actually sums up my own feelings about a lot of Lowery’s work, with a few exceptions. I borderline-disliked “The Old Man & the Gun,” which felt embalmed in its own whimsy. But I was a very active liker of “A Ghost Story,” which, as with “The Green Knight,” seems to unfold in some eerie netherworld between life and death. So I approached Lowery’s latest with high but not overly inflated expectations. And for more than two hours I sat there properly transfixed, bewitched, ensorcelled. Enveloped, too: The fog that clung to my glasses as I breathed through my mask seemed to merge with the mist rolling through the movie’s magnificently craggy landscapes (gorgeously shot by Andrew Droz Palermo).

Given Lowery’s delight in excavating old cinematic and literary archetypes, it seemed intuitive that he would leave behind the rural Americana of his earlier work and dive into the fertile and, yes, muddy soil of Middle English lore. I’m no Arthurian scholar either, Mark, and can offer few satisfactory answers to the questions you raise. But let me start with one: the meaning of those giants. Other than the obvious takeaway (those were some damn good mushrooms), I was most struck by the moment when one giant moves her hand as though to crush Gawain, who ducks in panic — a foreshadowing of the climax, when he will flinch before the Green Knight’s ax. But then the giant pulls back her hand, a compassionate gesture that reminded me, of all things, of that scene from Terrence Malick’s “The Tree of Life,” where one dinosaur decides to spare another. Maybe that’s a random association, though we know from “Ain’t Them Bodies Saints” that Lowery’s Malick affinity runs deep. (Could this movie be his “Knight of Cups”?) In any case, for me that moment goes to the heart of something “The Green Knight” cares deeply about, and that’s mercy.

Mercy is something Gawain lacks at first, given the callow, callous blow he deals the Green Knight during their initial challenge. But he learns mercy over the course of his travels — even when he is denied it, as he is by the robber (Barry Keoghan) he encounters early in his travels. Mercy is what he learns to show St. Winifred (Erin Kellyman), the ghostly maiden who — in another echo of Gawain’s journey — has lost her head. When he asks her what she will do for him if he helps her retrieve it, she retorts, “Why would you ask me that?” Why indeed? Why should we do good only in the expectation that we will be rewarded for it?

I mention all this because as intoxicated as I was by “The Green Knight’s” not-inconsiderable surface pleasures (that lovely Daniel Hart score not least among them), I was even more taken with its intellectual riddles, its deep investment in its protagonist’s moral education. I know what you mean, Mark, about certain movies that seem to hint, ever so slowly and self-admiringly, at artistic and philosophical depths that may not really be there. But for me there seemed to be mysteries tucked within mysteries in almost every frame of Lowery’s film, and I found myself delighted, rather than irritated, by the fact that it seemed in no hurry to solve them.

Gawain (Dev Patel) encounters the Lady (Alicia Vikander) in “The Green Knight.” (Eric Zachanowich/A24 Films)

JEN YAMATO: Asking more questions than it answers, or may even have answers to, makes “The Green Knight” an apt release for A24 — a distributor that knows its audience so well, they’re already selling a tie-in RPG game that retails for $35. Impenetrable as it may be to many an alienated, confounded moviegoer — Lo, an 88% Rotten Tomatoes rating! That C+ Cinemascore! — Lowery’s latest has given English lit majors an early Christmas gift: ample opportunity to dust off their medieval studies know-how. Woe to the weary “Green Knight” agnostic.

Advertisement

In all the chatter surrounding the film, however, few think pieces have concretely identified Lowery’s narrative intentions. And that may be because “Green Knight,” a slow boil loaded with oblique references to religious and sociopolitical context and interpretations of the original lore, seems more concerned with positing ambiguous provocations to its audience than spelling out the choices it makes onscreen.

That’s great for a certain kind of moviegoer, less so for others. Much of what befuddles in “The Green Knight” is of the “What did I just see?” variety. If you don’t know Morgan le Fay from her sister Morgause, for example, you’re already behind the game compared with those deeply versed in all manner of Arthuriana. Which begs the question: Is it better to go in blindly, or to have read the CliffsNotes?

The film is sumptuous and beautiful to gaze upon. (As is Dev Patel, in an enthralling lead turn.) It’s also overly languid and meandering. The stakes of Gawain’s side quests don’t quite add up to the life-changing shift the film’s ending projects, and those CGI giants feel slight but for the fact that the one Gawain cowers from is female, tying into how chivalric values go only so far in a society built around lionized toxic masculinity.

As for the talking fox? Well, chaos reigns. So does noted Arthurian scholar J.R.R. Tolkien, who famously published his own translation of the poem, when it comes to the genre of adventuring young men and the mythological beings they meet en route to some kind of fated, earned greatness. But for a fairly straightforward journey, “The Green Knight” takes a lot of runway to reach its relatively salient and still-timely point: How many fairy tale pickles, free rides and tests of honor does it take for a feckless playboy to learn a lesson — in the 5th century, or the 21st?

Advertisement

Dev Patel as Gawain in the movie “The Green Knight.” (Eric Zachanowich/A24 Films)

OLSEN: I have also been struck, Jen, by just the sheer volume of writing on the film, as those with feelings pro, con and in-between all feel a stronger than average need to work out those emotions and unpack the ideas that the film doles out.

The movie that “The Green Knight” repeatedly brought to mind for me was “Apocalypse Now.” As Gawain makes his way north toward the Green Chapel and his uncertain fate, the images become more stylized and psychedelic, as when the sky turns an acidic mustard-gas yellow. Having made his way from one outpost to the next, each weirder and more disconcerting than the last, the final leg of Gawain’s journey finds him peacefully paddling himself upstream in a small canoe. As with Frances Ford Coppola’s masterwork on war and its discontents, Lowery wants to reshape a classic work of literature to speak to a modern moment. It’s one of the ways in which the pandemic delay of more than one year for the film’s release has perhaps been a benefit — audiences are primed for a movie of confusion and ambiguity by the simple fact that has been so much of their own recent experience.

Which brings us to the ending, when Gawain at last finds his Kurtz. Having carelessly beheaded the Green Knight as part of their initial bargain, Gawain is uneasily prepared to now accept the same blow in return. Still wearing the protective sash that has been given to him twice, assured it would save him from harm, he has a vision of what his future will hold, one of betrayal, loss and defeat. He removes the sash to ready himself and it seems he has learned his final lesson, to stand truly on his own, accepting responsibility for his actions.

Advertisement

But was that ill-fated vision only one possibility or a certain destiny? If in fact the Green Knight does not take his head and end his life, what will Gawain have learned from his trials? Will it be mercy, as Justin has suggested, or a sense of humility and definition of purpose, realizing that his life of wasted days and wasted nights will lead only to a dreary end? I don’t know if a deeper knowledge of the original text, in whatever form, will actually help in answering any of those questions, as the movie continually folds back in on itself. I’m also not sure that this conversation has elevated my appreciation for the film, though it is fun to tease out these ideas and pet theories. Which is perhaps all we can really ask from it.

Ralph Ineson in the movie “The Green Knight.” (A24)

CHANG: And really, isn’t that enough? A movie whose questions and ambiguities persist in the memory strikes me as an experience to cherish these days. Not that I begrudge anyone their impatience with “The Green Knight,” which certainly moves to its own leisurely rhythms (though I have to say, it felt a hell of a lot shorter than “Jungle Cruise”) and delights in playing a confoundingly circular game with the audience. How the viewer responds to that game, that challenge, is entirely up to them.

I’ve never believed that full narrative comprehension is a prerequisite for admiring or even loving a movie. So while it’s fun to get lost in the textual minutiae of “The Green Knight” — the significance of this or that symbol, the ways the movie does and doesn’t deviate from the original poem — such analysis runs the risk of overlooking all the other ways the movie makes meaning. That includes its rich array of allusions to other movies, from Ingmar Bergman’s medieval epics to “The Last Temptation of Christ.” Like a lot of folks, I thought of Martin Scorsese’s passion play when I saw Gawain’s grim vision of the future, which reinforces the idea that “The Green Knight,” like its source material, can be read as a parable of Christlike suffering and perseverance.

Advertisement

I didn’t think of “Apocalypse Now,” but Mark, you’ve clearly hit on something there; what is “The Green Knight” if not a journey into Gawain’s own heart of darkness? Does this mean that someday, we’ll get a longer, undeleted version of those scenes in Lord Bertilak’s castle? I hope so, especially since Joel Edgerton and Alicia Vikander make such a dangerously seductive duo. Speaking of Vikander: I think she’s clearly playing two roles here. The fact that Gawain’s regal temptress, the Lady, is a dead ringer for his lover, Essel, is one of several giveaways that Gawain’s entire quest is a gauntlet of supernatural tests devised by Morgan le Fay (Sarita Choudhury, making a powerful impression in an almost wordless performance). And as Jen alluded to earlier, Morgan is presented here not as Gawain’s aunt, as she is in the poem, but as his mother — a tweak that adds a layer of Freudian ickiness to Lowery’s witchy brew.

But there I go, getting hung up on the text in precisely the ways I said I wouldn’t. And why not? It’s part of the fun of diving into “The Green Knight’s” particularly fecund rabbit hole. The implicit connection between the Lady and Morgan le Fay is further driven home by the fact that they both offer Gawain that damned sash, an amulet of protection that becomes a kind of Achilles’ heel. It’s green, the color of “what lust leaves behind,” in the Lady’s own incredibly blunt analysis, which perfectly sets up the scene in which she, er, takes matters into her own hands.

But really, interpretive license is what “The Green Knight” is all about. Well, that and the overpowering hotness of Dev Patel, as Jen and I and countless others have already noted. “The Green Knight” is merely the latest film, after “Slumdog Millionaire,” “The Personal History of David Copperfield” and others, to send Patel off on a quest for moral improvement. But Lowery’s film might be the first one to tap, wholly and unabashedly, into Patel’s great sensual charisma as a movie star. That’s another thing I love about “The Green Knight”: It’s moralistic filmmaking, to be sure, but it’s also sexy as hell. Or sexy as heaven. It suggests that there’s less of a difference between the pagan world and the Christian one, between decency and desire, and maybe even between God and humanity, than we like to think.

YAMATO: Yes ... I, too, thought of other lofty cinematic forbears as Patel’s wannabe knight traveled forth to meet his destiny. For instance: Anyone who’s seen “Monty Python and the Holy Grail” knows it’s not the viridian vanquisher whose wrath Gawain should fear, but the Killer Rabbit of Caerbannog!

King Arthur and Round Table-adjacent stories have been told and taken from so often, it’s tough to make a new telling feel fresher than the derivative works that cribbed from them. And when you feel like you’ve heard a story before, the mind wanders. Somewhere between all the drawn out questing and the medieval shroom trip I wondered — what if Baby Groot crash-landed out of the MCU and into 5th century Britain, got old, got bored, and started messing with the locals?

Advertisement

But you said it, Justin: There’s a real dank, human lustiness to “The Green Knight” that brings the genteel, courtly ideals of Gawain’s social programming crumbling back down to Earth. That erotic undercurrent reaches its peak, of course, during his eventful stayover with the very friendly Lord and Lady. Performance-wise, that delicious, menacing crackle between Patel, Edgerton and Vikander at the castle was, for me, the best part of the film.

Whether you end up loving a movie, loathing it or landing somewhere in between, the name of the arthouse game is almost always managing expectations. Is “The Green Knight” an action-packed medieval blockbuster? Extremely not. Is it even that weird of a movie? Not really! Could be weirder. As a meditation on mortality, time and how we choose our fates, it’s a cinematic puzzle that demands to be met halfway between the screen and the mind. Who’s up for the challenge?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Spoiler alert: The following conversation discusses the entirety of “The Suicide Squad” and is intended to be read after you’ve seen the film. We’re dissecting the movie’s most surprising twists and turns, and reading this before you see the movie would spoil that fun. Instead, we suggest checking out our review and feature on breakout star Daniela Melchior, and then coming back later.

JUSTIN CHANG: One of the best surprises, for a moviegoer, is walking into a film for which you had low expectations — or no expectations at all — and watching it blossom before your eyes into one of the better, smarter, funnier entertainments you’ve seen in some time. And I do mean blossom: Of all the memorably bizarre images in “The Suicide Squad,” I keep coming back to the sight of Margot Robbie unleashing a whirlwind of cartoon flowers as she hacks and slashes her way through an army of bad guys; it’s like a Harley Quinn fight scene meets a Mary Poppins musical number.

And like so much of what works in James Gunn’s movie — an incalculably superior sequel to 2016’s misbegotten “Suicide Squad” — it plays out with the kind of comic gusto and daring that might have seemed like sub-Tarantino obnoxiousness in less assured hands.

I felt I was in those hands from the movie’s surprise-laden opening frames, in which Gunn and some very game actors pull off a pretty amusing narrative fake-out. For a while you think you’re watching a movie about a harrowing top-secret mission featuring a bunch of shlubby third-rate comic-book villains with names like Blackguard (Pete Davidson) and Captain Boomerang (Jai Courtney) and Javelin (Flula Borg) and Savant (Michael Rooker) and TDK (Nathan Fillion) and Weasel (Sean Gunn, the director’s younger brother). But then, (nearly) all of them are gruesomely killed in the first 15 minutes or so, at which point the movie’s actual protagonists — Bloodsport (Idris Elba), Peacemaker (John Cena), Ratcatcher 2 (Daniela Melchior) and Polka-Dot Man (David Dastmalchian), plus those original “Squad” holdovers Harley Quinn and Col. Rick Flag (Joel Kinnaman) — take their place centerstage.

Advertisement

Margot Robbie as Harley Quinn in “The Suicide Squad.” (Warner Bros. / DC Comics)

Having entered the theater with, as stated, zero expectations or knowledge of what was going to happen, I went along with the gag more or less completely. One reason it works is that Gunn is basically thumbing his nose at the dubious premise of these movies, and also at the very nature of the superhero/supervillain mashup subgenre. He’s laughing at how ridiculously arbitrary the process of character selection can be when it comes to these mass-convergence exercises.

He’s also foreshadowing something: Unlike, say, “Justice League” (whichever version) or “The Avengers,” which are all about preserving narrative continuity between franchise installments, this movie seems to have very little interest in long-term brand extension, and as such will have no qualms about killing off some of its leads. OK, so Harley Quinn isn’t going anywhere. But a couple of her costars, I’m happy to say, aren’t so lucky.

TRACY BROWN: The body count in this movie is just absurd. But to echo Justin’s point about expectations, what is so refreshing about “The Suicide Squad” is that it doesn’t appear to care about them at all.

I love comic book movies, but after a decade of watching multiple Marvel and DC offerings every year, I’m not always surprised by them anymore. That’s not to say they aren’t still delightful — a lot of them are also just predictable. But “The Suicide Squad” manages to be surprising, without coming across as just shock for shock’s sake. So even though I feel like I shouldn’t have been surprised that Gunn presented us with a ridiculously fun adventure starring a ragtag group of misfit criminals, I was.

Idris Elba as Bloodsport with King Shark in “The Suicide Squad.” (Warner Bros. / DC Comics)

I really enjoyed how much “The Suicide Squad” embraced the weird, which for me is best reflected in all of the deadly marine life. King Shark (voiced by Sylvester Stallone) comes off as just stupid comic relief in the trailer, but he’s got some layers in the film, and works so well in this version of Task Force X. He wants to eat you but he also wants you to be his friend! And I still think about the tank of cute, colorful jellyfish-like things that initially come across as much less harmless than they actually are. The highlight, of course, is Starro, the giant alien starfish that unleashes tiny versions of himself to take over people’s minds. He’s terrifying and kind of gross, and amps up the stakes by suddenly turning “The Suicide Squad” into a kaiju movie.

Advertisement

SONAIYA KELLEY: One of my favorite things about this movie — and about James Gunn’s films overall — is the balance between absurdity and moments of levity. Ratcatcher 2’s loving monologue about her late father, Ratcatcher 1 (Taika Waititi), was heart-wrenching, particularly since it came as a counterpoint to Bloodsport’s more tragic and traumatic memories of his own father. But Gunn is able to plumb the depths of his character’s trauma for comedic effect as well, as evinced by Polka-Dot Man’s murderous fixation on his mother.

Gunn is also a master at knowing how to give depth to characters who are silly or just plain cute. Much as he did with Baby Groot in “Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2,” the director incorporates aww-inducing characters like Weasel and King Shark while employing the most unlikely meathead actors (Stallone! Vin Diesel!) to play them.

I can also appreciate Gunn’s loyalty to his actors. It’s nice to see him cast “Guardians” holdovers like Stallone, Rooker and Pom Klementieff, even in small roles. It’s no wonder his cast rallied around him when that whole Twitter controversy went down.

Daniela Melchior as Ratcatcher 2 in “The Suicide Squad.” (Warner Bros. / DC Comics)

Advertisement

CHANG: That controversy Sonaiya mentions is, of course, one of the reasons we have this movie in the first place: After Disney fired Gunn from “Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3” in response to those resurfaced tweets, Warner Bros. quickly swooped in, giving him creative carte blanche and making Gunn the rare director to steer films in both dominant comic-book cinema universes. So, thanks, I guess, Twitter trolls? The franchise wars usually bore me to tears, but the Gunn affair is fascinating because it resonates with the story told in “The Suicide Squad” itself: It’s a coded parable about the irredeemable finding redemption.

Happily, the movie wears that subtext lightly. More than anything — and more so than the first two “Guardians” movies, where Gunn’s delightfully warped sensibility felt tamed and constrained by Marvel specifications — “The Suicide Squad” feels very much like the movie he wanted to make, and also a movie made by someone with nothing to lose (but also, of course, the heftiest studio resources at his disposal).

Gunn has since been reinstated by Disney — and, as apparently every Marvel filmmaker is obligated to do, recently fired off some comments berating Martin Scorsese for his now-notorious distaste for comic-book movies. Without reviving the tedious “Are superhero movies cinema?” debate, I will say that “The Suicide Squad” certainly feels cinematic in ways that most recent Marvel and DC movies haven’t.

That’s partly because of the vibrantly seedy texture of the filmmaking; I can’t remember the last time I saw an extraterrestrial menace lay waste to human civilization and found myself pausing, amid the onslaught, to admire the surreal beauty of the images. Witness the captivating sight of Harley Quinn swimming around inside the giant starfish’s eyeball, its rainbow hues matching her own colorful hair and wardrobe. (Like Tracy, I’m enchanted by this movie’s commitment to super-weird marine life.)

Advertisement

Another reason “The Suicide Squad” feels more cinematic: It doesn’t feel like a movie that was made to accommodate some overarching narrative strategy, or to usher a franchise from one tedious setup phase to another. That’s partly why the deaths have such impact, such finality. OK, I gather that John Cena’s Peacemaker isn’t gone for good, as his upcoming HBO Max series makes clear. But when, say, Polka-Dot Man gets unceremoniously trampled by the starfish, it seems pretty clear he’s a goner. And too bad, really: This ridiculous, willfully off-putting character is played with such freakish poignancy by David Dastmalchian that you actually wish he’d come back.

David Dastmalchian as Polka-Dot Man in “The Suicide Squad.” (Warner Bros. / DC Comics)

BROWN: A moment of silence for Dastmalchian’s Polka-Dot Man — one of my favorite (human) performances in the movie. He gave “The Suicide Squad” a side of mommy issues to go with the bigger daddy-issues theme.

Advertisement

I also want to avoid getting into the minutiae of the “Are superhero films cinema?” debate but ... “The Suicide Squad” absolutely shows they can be. I think the argument gets muddled sometimes because of people who don’t make much of a distinction between cinema and movie-theater experience. I only bring this up because it’s such a shame that this movie is being released amid this latest surge in COVID cases — “The Suicide Squad” is one of the few films I saw in a theater setting when I felt more safe about going to them. I’m glad that’s how I got to experience it, since now I don’t know when I’ll be going back to one.

I would say the death that surprised me the most was Rick Flag’s, and not because I thought he wasn’t as expendable as anybody else on the team. But he was one of the few remaining threads that tied this movie to the much-maligned 2016 “Suicide Squad” by that point in the story, so his death really hammered it in for me that “The Suicide Squad” wasn’t playing by any rules around a shared universe or franchise continuity.

Plus, when I watched the movie I’d forgotten that the Peacemaker series had already been announced. So up until the very end, a part of me thought, “Well, maybe Rick Flag isn’t dead dead.”

Joel Kinnaman as Rick Flag, left, John Cena as Peacemaker, Margot Robbie as Harley Quinn, Peter Capaldi as the Thinker and Idris Elba as Bloodsport in “The Suicide Squad.” (Jessica Miglio / Warner Bros.)

Advertisement

KELLEY: I too was surprised by Rick Flag’s death, mostly because I appreciate Joel Kinnaman as the straight man to all of these other zany characters. Sure, Bloodsport seems poised to take a similar leadership position by the end of this film, but Flag’s death felt meaningful, a sign that “good” doesn’t always prevail in these movies (as the lone non-felon on the squad, Flag is the only character who is not forced to be there).

I’d forgotten about the upcoming Peacemaker series too, so his death also surprised me. But not to the same extent as Flag’s, whose shrapnel to the heart seems pretty unambiguously final. And I was grateful that the Weasel was revived in the mid-credits scene, I’m looking forward to seeing more of him!

I’m curious to see how the story continues in the Peacemaker HBO series but I feel like this format can be rinsed and repeated endlessly. This reinvigorated franchise has raw potential for DC and Warner Bros. in a way similar to what “Iron Man” did for Marvel. Because these characters are relatively obscure, there’s less at stake in taking creative license with them than, say, another Batman outing (although I have high hopes for Robert Pattinson in the role). I think that if the studio continues to prioritize strong filmmakers and unexpected takes as it did here and with Todd Phillips’ “Joker,” DC could have a film franchise that is not necessarily interconnected like the MCU but performs at the box office and wins over both critics and die-hard fans.

Joel Kinnaman, Alice Braga, Daniela Melchior, Idris EIba and John Cena are among the ensemble cast of “The Suicide Squad.” (Warner Bros. / DC Comics)

Advertisement

CHANG: It’ll be interesting to see how “The Suicide Squad” fares amid the ongoing COVID surges; like you, Tracy, I was grateful to have seen it in a proper theater (with super-sharp Imax projection to boot). Will audiences shell out money for the same experience, or will they stay home and watch it on HBO Max? As Scarlett Johansson’s recent lawsuit against Disney in the wake of “Black Widow’s” day-and-date release strategy and disappointing theatrical performance shows, the effects of the pandemic on the economics of the movie industry are significant — and likely to reverberate for years to come.

I find myself of two minds on a lot of these issues: Most of the time I wouldn’t mind seeing most new superhero movies crash and burn at the box office, if only so the studios might be persuaded to invest their time, talent and resources in, y’know, different kinds of movies for a change. But then, when a movie like “The Suicide Squad” comes along — a rare comic-book adaptation that possesses an actual, tangible directorial sensibility — well, it’s hard not to root for it, or at least hope it fares better than most, for all the reasons Sonaiya noted. If we must have superhero and supervillain blockbusters, surely they should be as smartly written and directed as possible. (And more of them, I agree, should star Kinnaman, whose role as the Suicide Squad’s leader and conscience is one of the movie’s bright spots.)

These days, of course, it’s hard not to cheer when any movie draws people to theaters — though, of course, it’s also hard not to shudder at the thought of the coronavirus spreading through packed houses. A lot of us would quite literally breathe easier if theaters began requiring all patrons to show proof of vaccination — a proposal that the L.A. City Council is weighing as we speak.

Advertisement

Whatever gets decided on that front, I will tip my hat to “The Suicide Squad” for doing something unexpected and almost certainly unintended: turning one of the movie’s climactic sequences into a metaphor for the importance of mask wearing. Surely I’m not the only one who saw all those parasitic little starfish minions attaching themselves to any exposed human hosts, sparing only those who were quick enough to cover their faces — and thought immediately of the pandemic. Yes, I know the movie finished shooting before all COVID hell broke loose; I’m reading too much into this, which is of course part of my job. But since Gunn’s Twitter downfall was spearheaded by the kinds of folks who now vehemently object to masks and vaccines, there’s a certain satisfaction in imagining that he might be thumbing his nose at them.

Idris Elba and James Gunn on the set of “The Suicide Squad.” (Warner Bros.)

BROWN: One of the things Gunn said that resonated with me the most when I spoke to him about “The Suicide Squad” is how “taking crappy Z-grade supervillains and giving them meaning and depth means that we all have meaning and depth. If they can have that, then maybe ... we all have that sort of humanity and depth to each of us.”

So as much as I also find some satisfaction in imagining Gunn taking jabs at the types of people who went out of their way to target him, I think the message I walked away with is this reminder about how complicated humanity is. Something to grapple with at a time where we have a tendency to flatten people and ideas into absolutes, especially if we disagree with them. (Though, to be clear, sometimes things are actually black-and-white — just wear your masks, people.)

Advertisement

What I hope DC and Marvel take from “The Suicide Squad” is a reminder that comic books aren’t a genre, they’re a medium to tell stories. There isn’t one formula for comic books, or even superhero comic books, so it doesn’t make sense to try to find one type of mold for all superhero comic-book movies. That’s why “The Suicide Squad” and “Joker” and “Birds of Prey” are exciting. More movies with filmmakers getting to present their sensibilities and points of view, please.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Beyoncé channels her Houston roots for the latest collection of Ivy Park athletic wear.

In a major win for the “Yeehaw Agenda,” the prolific performer and Adidas dropped a fierce trailer Friday for their forthcoming Ivy Park Rodeo campaign, “inspired by the inimitable style and undeniable influence of Black cowboys and cowgirls.”

Throughout the fiery video, models — including the “Lemonade” artist herself — can be seen horseback riding, lassoing and straddling a bull swing while rocking an array of Ivy Park originals.

Advertisement

Among the many rootin'-tootin’ new looks are a matching cow-print sports bra and legging set, colorful hoodies and sweatpants, as well as denim bodysuits, tracksuits and chaps — accessorized with bolo ties, gold belt buckles, spurred boots, bandit-style face masks and, of course, lots and lots of cowboy hats.

To really complete the Wild West theme, the promo also features a variety of high-concept sets peppered with flaming fences, tumbleweeds, horse ranches and rocky mountain landscapes.

According to an announcement from Adidas, the Ivy Park Rodeo collection “celebrates the formidable impact of Black men and women on American Western culture” by honoring the “oft-hidden history of Black pioneers within cowboy and cowgirl culture and their continued influence and impact on the American Rodeo.”

Comprising 58 pieces of adult apparel, five adult footwear styles and 13 assorted accessories, the line is derived from dark denim fabrics and washed heavy French terry materials. In addition to the garments highlighted in the teaser, the collection also includes a denim bucket hat and a small cotton canvas waist bag.

Beyoncé's fourth collaboration with Adidas — arriving six months after the success of their winter collection, Icy Park — debuts Aug. 19.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After several delays, the first phase of the sex trafficking trial of R&B hitmaker R. Kelly started Monday with jury selection in New York City.

Lingering health threats caused by the coronavirus pandemic and a shakeup of Kelly’s defense team pushed the trial into the summer, nearly two years after he was charged with abusing women and girls for nearly two decades.

U.S. District Judge Ann Donnelly began questioning potential jurors about whether they can keep an open mind about Kelly two years after he was charged with abusing women and girls for nearly two decades. She reminded them the defendant is presumed innocent and that they should not be influenced by anything they have previously heard about the case.

The proceeding was being conducted amid coronavirus pandemic precautions, restricting the press and the public to overflow courtrooms with video feeds. Much of the time, Kelly and potential jurors weren’t clearly visible on the feeds and the audio was faint.

Advertisement

More screening was set for Tuesday. It was unclear how long the process will take.

Kelly, 54, has been locked up since he was indicted, housed mostly in a federal jail in Chicago. He was moved last month to the federal Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn to face trial in a case that’s further diminished his superstar status.

Last week, defense attorney Deveraux Cannick told a judge that Kelly needs to be measured for new clothing because he’s gained so much weight in jail. And he asked that court transcripts be provided at no cost because Kelly has been unable to work for two years, saying: “His funds are depleted.”

The Grammy-winning, multiplatinum-selling singer has denied any wrongdoing and pleaded not guilty to charges accusing him of leading an enterprise of managers, bodyguards and other employees who helped him recruit women and girls for sex. Federal prosecutors say the group selected victims at concerts and other venues and arranged for them to travel to see Kelly.

Defense lawyers have said Kelly’s alleged victims were groupies who turned up at his shows and made it known they “were dying to be with him.” They only started accusing him of abuse years later when public sentiment shifted in the #MeToo era, they said.

The trial had been expected to start earlier in the year, but opening statements were moved to Aug. 18 after Kelly fired his original defense team.

Jurors are expected to hear testimony from several of his accusers. A judge has ruled that the women will be referred to only by their first names.

Prosecutors also are expected to offer evidence that Kelly schemed with others to pay for a fake ID for Aaliyah when she was a singer on the rise at 15 years old.

Advertisement

Aaliyah is identified as “Jane Doe #1” in court papers because she was still a minor when Kelly began a sexual relationship with her and believed she had become pregnant, the papers say.

“As a result, in an effort to shield himself from criminal charges related to his illegal sexual relationship with Jane Doe #1, Kelly arranged to secretly marry her to prevent her from being compelled to testify against him in the future,” the papers say.

Aaliyah, whose full name was Aaliyah Dana Haughton, worked with Kelly, who wrote and produced her 1994 debut album, “Age Ain’t Nothing but a Number.” She died in a plane crash in 2001 at age 22.

The case is only part of the legal peril facing the singer, born Robert Sylvester Kelly. He also has pleaded not guilty to sex-related charges in Illinois and Minnesota.

Advertisement

Kelly won multiple Grammys for “I Believe I Can Fly,” a 1996 song that became an inspirational anthem played at school graduations, weddings, advertisements and elsewhere.

Nearly a decade later, he began releasing what eventually became 22 musical chapters of “Trapped in the Closet,” a drama that spins a tale of sexual deceit and became a cult classic.

But Kelly has been trailed for decades by complaints and allegations about his sexual behavior, including a 2002 child pornography case in Chicago. He was acquitted in that case in 2008.

Advertisement

Scrutiny intensified again amid the #MeToo movement in recent years, with multiple women going public with accusations against the singer. The pressure intensified with the release of the Lifetime documentary “Surviving R. Kelly” in 2019.

Criminal charges soon followed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@With new COVID-19 cases surging in Louisiana, the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival won’t be returning this year after all, organizers said Sunday.

The festival, which traditionally is held in the spring, had been scheduled to run Oct. 8-10 and Oct. 15-17 this year after being canceled last year because of the pandemic.

But organizers cited “current exponential growth” of new COVID-19 cases in the city and region, as well as an ongoing public health emergency, in announcing that the festival will not occur as planned.

“We now look forward to next spring, when we will present the Festival during its traditional timeframe,” organizers said in a news release, adding that next year’s dates are April 29-May 8.

Advertisement

Music New Orleans’ Jazz Fest turns 50, an American institution with humble roots Cultural movers and shakers in New Orleans received one of the most fortuitous rejections ever when they floated a business proposal half a century ago to the man behind the celebrated Newport jazz and folk music festivals, George Wein.

Ticketholders for both festival weekends will receive an email this week with details about the refund and rollover process, the release says.

Jazz Fest celebrates the indigenous music and culture of New Orleans and Louisiana. The music encompasses nearly every style imaginable: blues, R&B, gospel, Cajun, Zydeco, Afro-Caribbean, folk, Latin, rock, rap, contemporary and traditional jazz, country, bluegrass and everything in between.

It’s held at the Fair Grounds Race Course & Slots, where multiple stages are erected for fans to gather in and around.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When COVID-19 vaccines were triumphantly rolled out this spring, musicians and touring industry professionals eagerly made plans to return to long-shuttered clubs, arenas and stadiums across the United States. Locally, most venues have reopened, and artists are back on the road, but the recent surge in infections, now from the highly contagious Delta variant, has once again threatened to upend L.A.'s live music scene.

As per Times data, Los Angeles County is reporting an average of more than 2,800 new cases a day , six times the rate of infections reported a month prior. The vast majority are among unvaccinated people. As legislators struggle to reach consensus on mask and vaccine mandates, venues in Los Angeles County are gearing up for battle once more.

In L.A. County, masks are again required in all indoor public spaces; health officials recommend but do not mandate vaccination. Yet a growing number of local venues, from the Troubadour to Zebulon, are now requiring patrons to show proof of vaccination or a negative test within the past 48 hours to enter the premises. For Jef Soubiran, co-owner of Frogtown live venue and restaurant Zebulon, it’s a matter of survival.

“We are worried for the safety of the artists who are going to perform,” says Soubiran, who just reopened the venue on Thursday, the first time since March 2020. “I’m worried for the safety of our staff, who have to work to make a living. We really hope that people will be responsible and respect the guidelines.”

Advertisement

Angelenos pining for live music over the next few months have options of pre-pandemic proportions, including gigs by Harry Styles, Cypress Hill, H.E.R., Foo Fighters, Limp Bizkit, Patti Smith, Cheap Trick, Guns N’ Roses, Ozomatli, the Flaming Lips and dozens more. The regulations for entry may vary by venue or even at the artists’ discretion.

Live Nation, the country’s largest music promoter, announced on Friday that its touring artists can choose to implement mask and/or vaccine mandates for entry at their upcoming concerts. A representative for Live Nation said in a statement: “We’re working closely with local officials and following the recommended safety guidelines. We also encourage everyone who can to get vaccinated as that is the best way for us all to take care of each other and get back to doing what we love.”

Accordingly, attendees at Live Nation’s BottleRock festival in Napa Valley, which takes place the weekend of Sept. 3, will now have to show proof of vaccination or a recent negative test result. Headliners include Guns N’ Roses, Stevie Nicks and Foo Fighters.

Mia Berrin, frontwoman of indie-pop outfit Pom Pom Squad, will embark on her first-ever U.S. tour, opening for Nada Surf. The bands are slated to pass through states like Michigan and Iowa, where indoor mask mandates have been lifted, but they have requested venues to enforce them regardless.

“I’ve heard plenty of stories about singers whose lung capacity hasn’t been the same since getting COVID,” says Berrin. “If anyone on my team or at a show got sick and, God forbid, had lasting health issues because of it, I’d feel tremendous guilt.”

For mega-promoter AEG, whose SoCal portfolio includes festivals including Coachella, arena shows at Staples Center and theaters such as the Fonda, policies reflect state and local guidelines around masking and vaccination. Dennis Dennehy, a representative for AEG, said that “as of now no concrete decisions have been made” as to potential changes in vaccination or testing policy, “but we are monitoring everything closely.”

160,000 fans attended the Hard Summer festival on July 31 and Aug. 1 in San Bernardino. (Gina Ferazzi / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

With the outdoors less charitable to COVID spread, business is booming for the L.A. Philharmonic, whose two outdoor venues, the Hollywood Bowl and the Ford, opened at full capacity this summer. At the Hollywood Bowl, acts including Kool & the Gang and Christina Aguilera sold out multiple nights in July; meanwhile, the Ford has scheduled Devendra Banhart, Lido Pimienta and Moses Sumney to take the stage this fall. There will be no vaccine card or negative PCR test result required for entry at either L.A. Phil venue.

“We post signs throughout our venues with the LADPH’s requirements for wearing masks on our buses and in indoor spaces, as well as its strong recommendations for mask-wearing when one is outside of their ticketed seat,” says Sophie Jefferies, the Philharmonic’s director of public relations.

Still, it’s not beyond the realm of possibility to contract the highly contagious Delta strain at an outdoor concert — and the fuller the crowd, the more likely the spread. Outbreaks were linked to events such as Oregon’s Pendleton Whisky Fest and the Faster Horses festival in Michigan, as well as the Verknipt festival in the Netherlands.

The Hard Summer festival, held July 31 and Aug. 1 in San Bernardino and attended by 160,000 fans, did not require proof of vaccination or a negative test. Compare that with last week’s Lollapalooza festival in Chicago, where one or the other was necessary for admittance.

Advertisement

And on Sunday, the 2021 edition of the famed New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival, scheduled for Oct. 8-17, was canceled and rescheduled for spring of 2022.

City Council President Nury Martinez and Councilman Mitch O’Farrell have recently proposed a motion to require L.A. residents to demonstrate that they’ve received at least one vaccination dose to visit indoor public places, including restaurants, bars, retail stores, gyms, spas, movie theaters, stadiums and concert venues. But some artists and venue owners fear it may not be enough to fight the spread.

Los Angeles emo band Glass Beach, scheduled to play West Hollywood’s Roxy Theatre this November, will ask its audiences to show proof of vaccination and to wear masks during the shows. “Part of the push for tours to happen again is out of necessity,” says drummer William White. “But there is a distinct level of responsibility we need to be taking. The government won’t do what’s needed.”

Advertisement

The sentiment is shared among independent club owners, who feel unfairly burdened with the task of pandemic risk assessment. Carl Lofgren, owner of downtown Latin club La Cita, says that beginning on Monday, his staff will require proof of vaccination or a negative COVID-19 PCR test for entry. “We were really hoping the city would have the backbone to take this off of business owners’ shoulders,” Lofgren tells The Times. “But I don’t think we can wait for them to do the right thing.”

Electronic music promoter Lights Down Low, highly regarded for its events across L.A., wrote in an email to show-goers that “moving forward you will be required to present proof of vaccination along with your ID (proof of age) at the door. ... You will NOT get in without this. Your special friend that you are bringing will NOT get in without this. Go ahead and re-read this line three times to memorize it.

“If you are the kind of person who lies about such things,” the email concluded, “there is no level of hell low enough for you.”

Staff writers August Brown and Randall Roberts contributed to this story.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Horse only knows a life of war. But during a mission with her Rider to collect a mysterious artifact that’s supposed to help their side to victory, she finds herself suddenly transported into a colorful, magical world inhabited by singing and dancing centaurs.

Lost in a weird, unfamiliar place, the battle-hardened warhorse soon discovers she now has the ability to speak. Understandably, she freaks out a little.

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

“I wanted it to genuinely feel like you took someone from a different series and put them into Centaurworld,” says Megan Nicole Dong, the showrunner and executive producer of “Centaurworld,” a new musical animated fantasy series now streaming on Netflix. “The world is really like a snapshot into my brain. A lot of the way it looks and the way the characters move is based on my sketchbook drawings. We tried to make it look like it was almost like marker on paper, to contrast the way Horse looks and the way that her world looks.”

Advertisement

The 10-episode first season follows Horse (voiced by Kimiko Glenn) and her new centaur friends — Wammawink (Megan Hilty), Durpleton (Josh Radnor), Glendale (Dong), Zulius (Parvesh Cheena) and Ched (Chris Diamantopoulos) — as they travel across Centaurworld to collect the items she needs in order to get home.

Ride (Jessie Mueller) and Horse (Kimiko Glenn) in an episode of “Centaurworld.” (Netflix)

In contrast to Horse’s world, Centaurworld is vibrant and whimsical. In addition to traditional human-horse hybrids, the world is inhabited with “half-animal, half-man things” of all kinds, including beartaurs, moletaurs, cattaurs and whaletaurs. Even the mountains, trees and weather phenomena in Centaurworld look like quadrupeds with hooves.

“Biology was always something that I was really interested in so I wanted to have as many different kinds of creatures be the centaurs,” says Dong. “I wanted it to also be a place that, because we have so many different kinds of creatures of all different sorts of shapes and sizes and colors, naturally felt inclusive.”

Much of the magic initially introduced in “Centaurworld” is silly and frivolous — from blinking sparkles and turning handsome for a few seconds to shooting miniature versions of oneself from a hoof. But the magic of “Centaurworld” is anything but.

The show is delightfully fun and strange and the soundtrack slaps. It’s also a sincere story about embracing change and how you can learn about yourself when life throws you a surprise challenge.

“I tried to draw from my own emotional experiences,” says Dong, an Asian American born and raised in Southern California. “Growing up, I always felt a lot of pressure to perform academically and keep up with my peers. The whole [story] is based on me going into high school, getting ready to take all these [Advanced Placement] classes and then ending up in a show choir because the only available extracurricular was show choir.”

Advertisement

It was this chance scheduling snafu that set Dong on a course toward her future creative endeavors. The unexpected experience not only helped her see performing in a new light, it also helped convince her to pursue the arts as a career.

“I ended up falling in love with the whole thing, even though, initially, I felt completely out of my element,” says Dong. “That was the basis for Horse’s story. Being from one world, thinking that there was one way to do things, and then ending up in this really musical, silly place and having that really change her as a character.”

Glendale (Megan Nicole Dong), left, Durpleton (Josh Radnor), Ched (Chris Diamantopolous), Wammawink (Megan Hilty), Horse (Kimiko Glenn) and Zulius (Parvesh Cheena) in “Centaurworld.” (Netflix )

While “Centaurworld” is remarkable for its aesthetic ambition — in addition to distinct styles that visually emphasize how different its two worlds are , the show has two studios, Mercury Filmworks and Red Dog Culture House, handling its animation in both styles — it’s the music that first gives viewers a hint there’s more to the series than the “Wizard of Oz”-like journey that initially meets the eye.

Advertisement

The songwriting “was super integrated into the scripts and into the writing process, which was a lot of fun,” says Dong, who along with co-executive producer Dominic Bisignano wrote all of “Centaurworld’s” songs. “We wanted to make sure that the songs weren’t just songs happening for the sake of having them. They had to be actual musical moments that progress the story or informed the audience of where a character was emotionally.”

All of these elements are on top of Dong’s decision to center a realistic horse in a show set in a world of quadrupeds.

“Horses are notoriously hard to draw,” says Dong, who always knew she specifically wanted a warhorse as the main character of the show. “We were really lucky that James Baxter, who animated ‘Spirit’ and Belle from ‘Beauty and the Beast’ and so many other amazing Disney characters, joined the studio. In the beginning, he did a masterclass on how you draw horses, how they move and all of that, with some of our artists.”

Advertisement

The herd Horse encounters upon arriving in Centaurworld seems to be — at least initially — the opposite of realistic: For instance, Dong’s own character, Glendale, has the constant urge to steal things — which she hides in a magic portal located at her stomach. But appearances can be deceiving.

Glendale (Megan Nicole Dong) reaching into her portal tummy. (Netflix)

“I tried to figure out the herd all at the same time,” says Dong. “I wanted them to feel like their own distinct characters whose personalities and quirks all come from a place of trauma.”

Over the course of the season, the audience gets a closer glimpse into that trauma, and it’s always clear that the characters are neither defined nor judged by their quirks or flaws.

Advertisement

“No one is actually judging Glendale for her stealing, you know,” Dong says. “Everyone is just accepted for who they are.”

As wonderfully whimsical and weird the show’s world may be, then, Horse and her story — as well as the magical centaurs — remain very much grounded.

“Animation is one of those things where you can kind of visually show anything,” says Dong. “The fun of it is being able to portray relatable themes in the most unexpected ways possible. I’ve always loved taking advantage of the freedom you have in animation to do that.”

‘Centaurworld’



Where: Netflix



When: Any time



Rating: TV-Y7 (may be unsuitable for children under the age of 7)




















@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bob Odenkirk, known for playing the scheming Jimmy McGill in “Breaking Bad” and “Better Call Saul,” is identifying with another famous Jimmy while recovering from a recent health scare.

While updating concerned fans on his condition Friday, Odenkirk compared the outpouring of support he had experienced to the Christmas classic “It’s a Wonderful Life,” starring screen icon Jimmy Stewart as a distressed banker who nearly dies — only to return home to an avalanche of hugs, kisses and gifts from friends and family.

Odenkirk’s latest statement came about a week after the actor suffered “a small heart attack” while shooting the final season of “Better Call Saul” in New Mexico. The Emmy winner, 58, is now in recovery after collapsing on set and being rushed to a local hospital.

“I am doing great,” Odenkirk tweeted Friday. “I’ve had my very own ‘It’s a wonderful life’ week of people insisting I make the world slightly better. Wow! Thank you, I love everyone right now but let’s keep expectations reasonable!”

Advertisement

I am doing great. I’ve had my very own “It’s a wonderful life” week of people insisting I make the world slightly better. Wow! Thank you, I love everyone right now but let’s keep expectations reasonable! — Mr. Bob Odenkirk (@mrbobodenkirk) August 7, 2021

In the days following his collapse, many of Odenkirk’s Hollywood peers and admirers flooded social media with well-wishes and kind words for the veteran performer.

“Thank you ... To my family and friends who have surrounded me this week. And for the outpouring of love from everyone who expressed concern and care for me,” Odenkirk tweeted shortly after his hospitalization.

“It’s overwhelming. But I feel the love and it means so much ... I’m going to be ok thanks to Rosa Estrada and the doctors who knew how to fix the blockage without surgery. ... I’m going to take a beat to recover but I’ll be back soon.”

Production on the sixth and last season of “Better Call Saul” was delayed previously — along with most other industry projects — because of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The popular spinoff series, which premiered in 2015, centers on Odenkirk’s scene-stealing character (a.k.a. Saul Goodman) from the seminal AMC drama “Breaking Bad.” Odenkirk has collected four Emmy nominations for his leading “Better Call Saul” performance opposite costars Rhea Seehorn, Jonathan Banks, Michael Mando and Giancarlo Esposito.

The revered actor and TV writer also serves as a producer on the AMC program, which has received five Emmy nominations for drama series.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The prime-time TV grid is on hiatus in print. You can find more TV coverage at: latimes.com/whats-on-tv.

SERIES

Jeopardy! Sportscaster Joe Buck begins his turn as guest host of the questions for answers quiz show. 7 p.m. ABC

Super Heists This new six-episode documentary miniseries features real-life master thieves and the investigators who pursue them, telling stories about some of their most audacious heists. Tonight’s premiere recalls a bank robbery targeting a $30 million slush fund for President Richard Nixon. 7, 8 and 11 p.m. CNBC

Advertisement

American Ninja Warrior The semifinals continue. 8 p.m. NBC

Roswell, New Mexico Liz (Jeanine Mason) confronts Max (Nathan Parsons), and Maria (Heather Hemmens) is desperate to solve the mystery of her vision. Tyler Blackburn and Michael Vlamis also star in this new episode of the science fiction series. 8 p.m. The CW

The Bachelorette Katie Thurston chooses which romantic partner will get the “final rose,” in the season finale. Kaitlyn Bristowe and Tayshia Adams join a studio audience to watch the final moments unfold. 8 p.m. ABC

Hell’s Kitchen (N) 8 p.m. Fox

Drain the Oceans The first of two new episodes reveals Hollywood’s hidden history. The second visits Venice, Italy. 8 and 9 p.m. National Geographic

Darcey & Stacey (N) 8 p.m. TLC

The Republic of Sarah Corinne (Hope Lauren) confides in Sarah (Stella Baker) about what happened with Danny (Luke Mitchell), and also admits that she needs Sarah’s help with something else in this new episode. 9 p.m. The CW

Advertisement

HouseBroken Honey (voice of Lisa Kudrow) is racked by indecision when Coyote (voice of Brian Tyree Henry) tries to persuade her to run away to Altadena with him in this new episode of the animated series. 9 p.m. Fox

BBQ Brawl In the first of two new episodes, team captains Michael Symon, Eddie Jackson and Bobby Flay challenge the competitors to stretch their imaginations and make the barbecue of the future. Then, in the season finale, the captains preside over an all-day competition. 9 p.m. Food Network

Small Town News: KPVM Pahrump (N) 9 and 9:30 p.m. HBO

Cheap Old Houses Hosts Ethan and Elizabeth Finkelstein tour older houses across America that are architecturally intact and available for less than $150,000 in this new home improvement series based on the hosts’ popular Instagram site. A second new episode follows. 9 and 9:30 p.m. HGTV

Advertisement

The Wall (N) 10 p.m. NBC

Titans Dick (Brenton Thwaites) makes his alliance with Kory, Gar and Rachel (Anna Diop, Ryan Potter, Teagan Croft) official, after which they all demonstrate their powers in this new episode of the superhero series. Reed Birney also stars. (N) 10 p.m. TNT

SPECIALS

Return to Tokyo NBCSP devotes most of the day to highlights from the Tokyo Olympics. 6, 7, 8, 9 and 11 a.m.; 1, 2, 3:30; 5, 7, 8 and 9 p.m.

Advertisement

SPORTS

Baseball The Chicago White Sox visit the Minnesota Twins, 5 p.m. ESPN

TALK SHOWS

CBS This Morning Author Asante McGee. (N) 7 a.m. KCBS

Today (N) 7 a.m. KNBC

KTLA Morning News (N) 7 a.m. KTLA

Advertisement

Good Morning America (N) 7 a.m. KABC

Good Day L.A. (N) 7 a.m. KTTV

Live With Kelly and Ryan Whitney Cummings; chicken perlo; guest cohost Ali Wentworth. (N) 9 a.m. KABC

The View Richard Branson and Sirisha Bandla on their flight to space; Jamie Lee Curtis. 10 a.m. KABC

Advertisement

Rachael Ray (N) 10 a.m. KTTV

The Talk Roselyn Sanchez; guest cohost Terrence J. (N) 1 p.m. KCBS

Tamron Hall (N) 1 p.m. KABC

Amanpour and Company (N) 11 p.m. KCET; 1 a.m. KLCS

Advertisement

The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon 11:34 p.m. KNBC

The Late Show With Stephen Colbert 11:35 p.m. KCBS

Jimmy Kimmel Live! 11:35 p.m. KABC

Late Night With Seth Meyers Kristen Bell; Dax Shepard; John Stamos. (N) 12:36 a.m. KNBC

Advertisement

The Late Late Show With James Corden Sharon Stone; Matthew Rhys. 12:37 a.m. KCBS

Nightline (N) 12:37 a.m. KABC

MOVIES

A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood (2019) 8:11 a.m. Starz

Hero (2002) 8:35 a.m. HBO

Advertisement

Hot Fuzz (2007) 9:35 a.m. Cinemax

Working Girl (1988) 9:52 a.m. and 5:13 p.m. Encore

Obvious Child (2014) 10:35 a.m. TMC

Dodgeball: A True Underdog Story (2004) 11:30 a.m. and 6 p.m. MTV

Advertisement

Kill Bill: Vol. 2 (2004) 11:37 a.m. Cinemax

Cliffhanger (1993) 11:45 a.m. Epix

Out of Sight (1998) 11:48 a.m. Starz

Roxanne (1987) 11:49 a.m. and 7:10 p.m. Encore

Advertisement

In the Line of Fire (1993) Noon TMC

Hustlers (2019) 1 p.m. Showtime

The Dark Knight Rises (2012) 1:15 p.m. HBO

Bloody Sunday (2002) 1:45 p.m. Epix

Advertisement

The World’s End (2013) 1:55 p.m. Syfy

Cujo (1983) 2:10 p.m. TMC

Cast Away (2000) 2:30 p.m. Freeform

Pulp Fiction (1994) 3:30 p.m. AMC

Advertisement

American Made (2017) 3:30 p.m. FX

Fist of Fury (1972) 3:45 p.m. TMC

Fargo (1996) 4 p.m. Ovation

One Way Passage (1932) 5 p.m. TCM

Advertisement

Live and Let Die (1973) 6 p.m. Ovation

Kill Bill: Vol. 1 (2003) 6:08 p.m. Cinemax

Trouble in Paradise (1932) 6:30 p.m. TCM

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016) 7:03 and 10:56 p.m. TNT

Advertisement

Up in the Air (2009) 8 p.m. Cinemax

Despicable Me (2010) 8 p.m. Disney

Bumblebee (2018) 8 and 10:30 p.m. FX

The Client (1994) 8 p.m. POP

Advertisement

Crocodile Dundee (1986) 8 p.m. Sundance

Star Trek: First Contact (1996) 8:30 p.m. BBC America

Enemy of the State (1998) 9 p.m. AMC

Dallas Buyers Club (2013) 9 p.m. Encore

Advertisement

The Devil Wears Prada (2006) 10:28 p.m. Starz

The Lincoln Lawyer (2011) 11 p.m. POP

Advertisement

Movies on TV the week of Aug. 8 - 14 in interactive PDF format Movies on TV for the entire week, Aug. 8 - 14 in interactive PDF format for easy downloading and printing



TV Grids for the week of Aug. 8 - 14 in PDF format TV Grids for the entire week of Aug. 8 - 14 as PDF files you can download and print



Advertisement

Television What’s on TV: Television listings Looking for what to watch on TV? Here are the television listings from the Los Angeles Times in printable PDF files.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Markie Post, who played the public defender in the 1980s sitcom “Night Court” and was a regular presence on television for four decades, has died. She was 70.

Post’s manager, Ellen Lubin Sanitsky, said Post died Saturday in Los Angeles after a years-long battle with cancer.

Post was a longtime television regular who appeared in shows that included “Cheers” and “Scrubs.” But she was best known for her seven-season run on NBC’s “Night Court,” the Manhattan municipal court sitcom that ran from 1984 to 1992 and starred Harry Anderson as Judge Harry T. Stone.

Post became a full-time cast member of “Night Court” in Season 3 as Christine Sullivan, a sincere and strong-willed woman who served as a constant foil to Dan Fielding, John Larroquette’s womanizing, narcissistic prosecutor. With comic rebuttal, Post’s Christine deflected Fielding’s lechery throughout the series’ run. Though an unrealized romance between Christine and Harry was often teased, “Night Court” ended with Fielding realizing the public defender was the love of his life.

Advertisement

Several of Post’s “Night Court” co-stars have died in recent years. Harry Anderson died at age 65 in 2018. In July, Charles Robinson, who played the clerk Mac, died at 75. NBC is currently developing a sequel to the series.

Post had two daughters with her second husband, TV producer and writer Michael A. Ross. In a statement, the family said, “Our pride is in who she was in addition to acting; a person who made elaborate cakes for friends, sewed curtains for first apartments and showed us how to be kind, loving and forgiving in an often harsh world.”

Post started in television behind the camera, working on the production crew of the game shows “Double Dare” and “Card Sharks.” Her first series regular role was in the Lee Majors action adventure series “The Fall Guy,” in which she played Terri Michaels from 1982 to 1985.

Post’s other credits include playing Cameron Diaz’s mother in “There’s Something About Mary”; Elliot Reid’s mother on “Scrubs”; and appearances in the shows “The Love Boat,” “The A-Team” and “Fantasy Island.” While receiving chemotherapy treatments, Post acted in the Lifetime movie “Christmas Reservations” and guest starred on the ABC series “The Kids Are Alright.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the Shelf Once There Were Wolves By Charlotte McConaghy

Flatiron: 272 pages, $28



If you buy books linked on our site, The Times may earn a commission from Bookshop.org, whose fees support independent bookstores.

Lupus est tibi visus, Pliny the Elder wrote in his Natural History. “You have seen a wolf; therefore you are silent.” The loss of language in the wake of such encounters underlies much of Charlotte McConaghy’s blazing new novel, “Once There Were Wolves.”

The character initially deprived of speech is Aggie. She and her twin sister, Inti, have arrived in the Scottish Highlands as part of a rewilding program to introduce 14 gray wolves into its rugged environment. Inti is a biologist, and Aggie — as the result of a trauma gradually revealed — has stopped speaking and on certain days is nearly catatonic. Inti is her caretaker, a reversal of childhood roles; growing up, Aggie had been her sister’s protector.

Inti has a gift, or a neurological disorder, depending on your perspective: an excess of empathy allowing her to feel a creature’s emotions as if she herself were under its skin. She became aware of its full effects at age 8 while living in the woods of British Columbia. As her father dressed a freshly killed rabbit, Inti collapsed, convinced she had been eviscerated.

Advertisement

“I had always known there was something different about me,” Inti says, “but that was the day I first recognized it to be dangerous. It was also the day, as I stumbled out of the shed into a long violet dusk, that I looked to the trees’ edge and saw my first wolf, and it saw me.”

Their father tells the girls that compassion is the greatest thing to learn, that the ability to understand another’s pain would heal the world. But one day when they are teens, he walks into the forest and never returns. They learn different lessons from their mother, a detective investigating violent crimes in Australia. “She had no kindred ocean of kindness inside her, no forgiveness,” Inti thinks. “She had a different knowledge of what people do to each other. I shied from it. It felt rough and hard and those were not the instincts I was born with …[but] Mum was right … I am embarrassed, and now I have had enough, I have no forgiveness left.”

“Migrations,” McConaghy’s previous novel and her debut as a literary author, followed a mysterious woman in search of the last terns in a near-future world of mass extinction. In both novels, McConaghy explores a core dilemma of the Anthropocene era: how to persuade people they should care about the fate of animals. As she has previously noted, a common response to climate change is an apathy born of helplessness. Perhaps, she implies, fiction can do what science cannot: engender empathy and, subsequently, action. In “Wolves,” she does this by giving Inti the power to feel what wolves do and to notice how closely these resemble human feelings.

(Flatiron Books)

McConaghy’s new novel braids narratives that include the present wolf project, the story of the father’s disappearance, an earlier romance and the twins’ life with their mother. Revealed in this warp and weft is the overlap in the behavioral patterns of humans and wolves, as well as the limits of language. Many of us cling to the idea that changing another’s mind is simply a matter of explaining your point of view, that if we can just find the correct words, correct behavior will follow. (Writers are especially susceptible to this delusion.)

Inti discovers that her preternatural empathy is not enough to help her convince a scattered community of Scottish sheep farmers that wolves pose no threat to their flocks or their children. Despite assurances of close monitoring and immediate compensation for any stock lost to predation, she finds that their distrust is primal, their beliefs impenetrable to scientific knowledge and evidence.

Inti also discovers that this primal hatred is transferable — that threats to kill the wolves, delivered by physically dominant men, can put her at risk as well. “There are languages without words and violence is one of them,” she observes.

Advertisement

McConaghy also explores predatory behavior and its role in abuse. Between observations of lupine behavior, the mother’s investigations of domestic abuse and the daughter’s own memories of violence, McConaghy implies points of connection. In Inti’s visceral experiences, we begin to understand how animal our instincts can be even in the service of human evil — and conversely how human animals can be even at their most vicious.

Inti explains to Duncan, her love interest, how to observe a pack hunting prey in terms reminiscent of sexual predation: “They’re patient. They spend days following a herd and watching its deer. They pick the weaker animals. The slower ones. They watch those in particular and they learn their traits, their personalities. They will know a deer so well by the time they attack that they can predict what will happen. They won’t waste energy. They’ll wait until they know without doubt that they can kill.”

Inti’s flaw, her inability to separate her feelings from those of the wolves, will lead (as hubris often does) to tragedy. Despite her ability to feel what others feel, her anger short-circuits her ability to read her own species.

Advertisement

While McConaghy presents intelligent perspectives on the wisdom of rewilding, the book goes into deeper questions of epistemology. The understanding of how we know the things we know is under serious pressure in a world confronted by climate change and the need to adapt to the previously unthinkable. Despite evidence that we are making our world inhospitable to human life, we find ourselves still arguing over basic reality. We are confronted by the limits of language every day. And as McConaghy shows in this stunning book, the limits of language lead us to the limits of empathy.

Berry writes for a number of publications and tweets @BerryFLW.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On a sweltering July afternoon in South Gate, a sky blue freight truck emblazoned with Amazon Prime’s smiling arrow rolls out of the ReadySpaces loading zone. Moments later, Chris Capizzi, the 39-year-old co-founder of A Good Used Book, greets me in the parking lot of the storage facility. As we navigate the labyrinth of corrugated metal, forklifts race through the corridors like go-karts. Capizzi and his wife and business partner, Jenny Yang, 38, work quietly in a 400-square-foot space here — sorting, cleaning, cataloging, photographing, organizing and packaging as many books as two people can in a day.

“You can’t ever get away from Amazon,” Capizzi says later when the three of us convene in one of ReadySpaces’ conference rooms. It’s the lament of every bookseller, but no one has had a year as arduous, as anti-Bezosian, as A Good Used Book.

Capizzi and Yang’s business model actually emerged from a negative experience with Amazon. After failing to sell quality books through Amazon’s Fulfillment program, they conceived A Good Used Book as a roving pop-up store specializing in sharply packaged vintage paperbacks. By 2019 they had become a mainstay at several L.A. flea markets and downtown’s Grand Central Market, with wine crates full of vibrant, seldom-seen covers that readers could flip through like used records.

Some of the titles at A Good Used Book that are yet to be wrapped. (Myung J. Chun/Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

On July 30, A Good Used Book held its first pop-up since March 2020 at Verve Coffee in the Arts District, the beginning of an August residency every Friday through Monday. COVID cases are rising and indoor mask mandates have returned, but the books will be set up on Verve’s lush patio. It’s a modest but momentous reopening for a business that has been through the full pandemic wringer — plummeting sales, a hard digital pivot, unhelpful government programs, grand theft auto and even some industrial espionage.

As The Times reported in a profile last April, A Good Used Book was thriving before COVID. The couple’s rundown ’99 Chevy Astro van carried roughly 1,600 books to pop-ups around town, and they had plans to expand and purchase a second van. When it became clear that non-essential businesses wouldn’t reopen for months, however, they had to decide whether to quit or double down. Betting on their success was the hardest thing they’ve ever done.

The owners first switched to digital sales — three per week via Instagram (now scaled back to one) — trading the taxing labor of hauling thousands of books for the madness of competing in a virtual space dominated by Amazon.

“When you’re a small business, every little change is a big deal,” says Yang. “We would have to regroup, transition again. There were some days that it was really, really hard. But there were a lot of days where people came out and helped us and bought a lot of books.”

Now, as the Delta variant spreads, the future feels precarious. “The hardest part of the pandemic was not being able to see a week in advance, not being able to make plans,” Capizzi says. “Right now, right as we’re starting to feel like we can, it’s starting to look and feel a little scary.” Again.

At least now they have a fully loaded website. According to a June report from the American Booksellers Assn., sales revenue for bookstores using their proprietary e-commerce platforms were up 360% compared to the same week in 2019. Instead of using those platforms, A Good Used Book decided to go it alone.

Capizzi and Yang sold books from their backstock on Instagram at the height of the pandemic while they built the website on Shopify. But creating three sales a week on Instagram stories took days of double shifts — with copywriting and other assistance from their sole employee, Sarah Bofenkamp, who now works remotely from Washington State. Now that their website is functional, they’re still learning the best metadata and SEO practices.

Advertisement

Capizzi and Yang photograph their new stock of books to be placed for sale online in the South Gate storage space. (Jason Armond/Los Angeles Times)

“The physical is so much easier because you kind of understand that people are coming from the street or to get coffee or you’re already at the flea market,” Yang explains. “But with the internet … you’re constantly figuring out these little tiny problems.”

That wasn’t the worst of it. Capizzi and Yang tried and failed to get grants, loans and unemployment checks from the government. Then, in May, someone stole the Chevy Astro, which contained the tables and crates for their pop-ups. By that point, Instagram book sales weren’t enough to cover expenses. While several brick-and-mortar bookstores started GoFundMe campaigns to stay afloat, Capizzi and Yang turned to their parents for financial aid. This year, they finally secured a disaster loan from the Small Business Administration.

Advertisement

Even as they struggled financially, Capizzi and Yang needed to source books for future sales and maintain vendor relationships, which meant they still had to do plenty of physical hustling. In September, they drove through the flames and smoke of the El Dorado wildfire to a storage unit in Beaumont where they sorted through grocery bags and boxes brimming with books to separate the pristine from the warped and water-logged.

Late last year, A Good Used Book serendipitously reconnected with a San Diego source whose family runs a business selling books on — where else? — Amazon. That source briefly rented a ReadySpaces storage unit in Chatsworth, which inspired Capizzi and Yang to move from their cramped U-Haul storage sheds in Atwater.

But when they arrived in Chatsworth, new Amazon-affiliated booksellers set up shop on either side of A Good Used Book. One neighbor pestered Capizzi and Yang about their San Diego vendor. Eventually, they relented, and the vendor sold the neighbor some books. Shortly thereafter, the vendor found a tracker on his car, called the police on the Amazon sellers — fearing they wanted to steal their inventory — and moved out of Chatsworth. Capizzi and Yang followed suit, relocating overnight to South Gate.

The new headquarters are a vast improvement on their old digs in Atwater Village where they’d worked by daylight with no electricity or Wi-Fi. They have more and better shelving and spaces designated for shrink-wrapping books and photographing them for web sales. Several shelves also feature the latest addition to A Good Used Book’s inventory: new books.

Advertisement

The new product line emerged from the other major shift of 2020, the reckoning over racism after George Floyd’s murder and the rise in attacks against the AAPI community. Searching for used books to celebrate Black History Month and Asian Heritage Month, Capizzi and Yang, who are both Asian American, were faced with the publishing industry’s historic racial prejudices. The profit margins for new books are slimmer, and purchasing them puts the company in direct competition with Amazon, but they’re committed to selling diverse books.

“For us, it was really important to have different voices and different perspectives,” Yang says. “We realized we wouldn’t have to rely on the books that we find every week and would be able to say a little bit more.”

The deal with Verve Coffee was a godsend, but it only came after months of fruitless planning for another spot. This spring, the couple had extensive talks with Grand Central Market about creating a free-standing, semi-permanent pop-up. Capizzi drew up rough plans, consulted with an architect and found someone to fabricate the structure. Ultimately, Grand Central turned them down.

Advertisement

Fortunately, A Good Used Book had positive meetings with Verve’s regional manager, Alexis Bolter, as well as a strong “business-mentor type” relationship with Matt Moreno, the manager of Verve’s Arts District location. Moreno describes A Good Used Book’s pre-COVID pop-ups at Verve as “mutually beneficial.” If all goes well in August, Capizzi and Yang hope to rent the vacant showroom above Verve later in the year, move the South Gate operation there and even host events. Moreno is bullish on their plans.

Yang prepares crates of new books to be displayed when A Good Used Book resumes sales at Verve Coffee. (Jason Armond/Los Angeles Times)

“I dream of tearing down the wall that separates our space from the salon [that’s there] now and having A Good Used Book set up there to create a full-on showroom/storefront for them,” says Moreno, “so that both businesses can exist and thrive together. Who doesn’t love to sit down and read a good used book with a good cup of coffee?”

A couple of weeks before their Verve re-opening, Capizzi and Yang were cautiously optimistic. Finances and rent permitting, they’re considering a brick-and-mortar shop eventually. For now, they’re content to continue mapping the future for millennial independent booksellers.

“If we can get beaten up by COVID this much and still be optimistic coming out of the tail end-ish, I think we have a good chance of making it,” Capizzi says. “I don’t know if we’ve been through the worst, but we’ve been through some pretty bad s— …. We didn’t break up. We’re still finding books and selling them every week. And we’re still trying to make it better.”

Advertisement

Bell is a journalist and writer from Santa Monica.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the Shelf All's Well By Mona Awad

Simon & Schuster: 368 pages, $28



If you buy books linked on our site, The Times may earn a commission from Bookshop.org, whose fees support independent bookstores.

“I complained I had a pain in my legs,” Hilary Mantel writes in her memoir “Giving Up the Ghost,” “and I went to the doctor: and that was my big mistake.” The sharp jabs in her thighs and abdomen — and the sadness that grows in tandem — turn into a decade-long swirl of misery. Doctor after doctor probes her for mental imbalance: If they can’t see blood or blossoms of cancer, then a Valium ought to heal things.

Pain’s invisibility renders it mysterious — and suspect. Even the long-suffering protagonist in Mona Awad’s new novel, “All’s Well,” greets us with a dismissal of someone else’s aches. Miranda Fitch is lying on the floor of her office at a small Massachusetts college. She’s watching a commercial for a pain management drug called Eradica, with acting so hammy it makes you want to chide Big Pharma for its lack of ambition. The woman in the commercial “looks withered but desperate, pleading. She wants something from me. She is asking me to believe her about her pain. I don’t.”

Miranda, an assistant professor of drama, has her own troubles. It’s her back. Well, her back and her legs. And her hips. The pain is everywhere, really — her “foot being crushed by an invisible weight,” keeping one knee kinked and the other stiffened, turning her walk into a crone’s hobble. She sleeps on the floor in her “sad dress and cardigan,” downs handfuls of benzos and drags herself into rehearsals with the mutinous cast of a student club production of Shakespeare’s “All’s Well That Ends Well.”

Advertisement

The first half of “All’s Well” is her final swirl around the drain. Once a success on the small-time theater circuit, Miranda toppled off a stage and lost her career, her dignity and then her husband. Doctors, friends and her chorus of physical therapists — a biblical set named Matt, Mark, Luke and John — cock their heads at her gasps of agony, urge more exercise or less, tut-tut over her negativity. “To continue to insist like this, Ms. Fitch, would really be undignified, embarrassing for both of us, really,” one cruelly insists. Is her pain legitimate? they wonder — and so do we.

Fiction is the natural breeding ground for sad sacks. The disconsolate have teary backstories to draw you in and nowhere to go but forward. Heathcliff, Hamlet, Gatsby. As Martin Amis put it, “Who else but Tolstoy has made happiness really swing on the page?” Literature is built on misery.

Physical pain is harder to render and nearly impossible to contemplate, which is why you see it done so rarely. Hanya Yanagihara manages it in “A Little Life” with Jude St. Francis, the Job of contemporary literature and a victim of nearly every physical cruelty imaginable. The suffering is the character. But as Janet Maslin put it, the onslaught “adds up to almost more misery than one novel can contain.”

Closer in spirit to Awad’s more ambivalent treatment is Helen Garner’s perfectly grating novel “The Spare Room,” in which a terminally ill woman descends upon a friend’s house to ride out a few of her last weeks. The friend tends to her agonies with care and then rapidly approaches the edge of sympathy — which is much closer than you’d imagine.

(Simon & Schuster)

This is where I found myself in the first half of “All’s Well,” praying for some Eradica to turn down the volume on Miranda’s pity party. Am I as unsympathetic as her colleagues and friends, her exasperated ex? Or is Awad intentionally distorting Miranda into such a needy case that we’ll find her repellent despite ourselves? Discomfort and irritation are vital emotions for readers — but if the author is stage-managing us, she pushes a bit too far.

Then she pulls us back. Awad has a penchant for mixing dark humor and dark magic. In her last novel, the brilliant “Bunny,” a crew of twee MFA students in kitten-print dresses lure a cranky writer into their coven — where they regularly Frankenstein up handsome, doltish men and then dispose of them when the amusement wears off.

Advertisement

In “All’s Well,” Awad stirs in a heavy dose of Shakespearean enchantment. Bullied by Briana, a cocky student with mega-donor parents, Miranda sets to thwarting her. Briana wants “Macbeth,” not the tedious “All’s Well That Ends Well,” and the two plays form the scaffolding on which Awad props up her ideas. Here again we are tempted to side with Miranda’s enemies: “All’s Well That Ends Well” is a scrawny skeleton on which to drape a novel this expansive. “Macbeth” has more meat on its bones.

Forthwith, there are witches and brews, toil and trouble. Miranda meets three men in a bar — “the Weird Brethren” — who offer her a golden dram, serenade her with “C’Mon Get Happy” like late-stage Judy Garlands, stroke her cheek. The next morning her body begins to unkink itself.

The second half of “All’s Well” returns Miranda to herself — and supercharges her with a sensual charm. She slips on lace underwear, a clinging dress and heart-shaped heels. She stirs risotto, “Watched it bubble away. Watched the pearls of rice fatten and swell.” Without saying too much, the auditorium’s prop room is used for more illicit purposes than costume changes. She slips past joy straight into frenzy. Is it magic or mania?

Advertisement

I must confess a distaste for the continual onslaught of novels that position a woman as either supernaturally charged or dangerously unhinged — with men one doesn’t seem to invoke the other — so while Awad’s writing turns as cacklingly weird as I know it can be, I wish she’d embraced Shakespeare’s ethos and just cranked up the witchcraft without any ambiguity.

“All’s Well That Ends Well” is one of Shakespeare’s “problem plays,” neither a tragedy nor a comedy but a work addressing a social ill. Miranda clings to it like a drowning woman because of a star turn she took as low-born Helena, who tricks her way into the bed (and, perhaps, the affections) of aristocratic Bertram. Miranda isn’t above similar deception to get her old life (and old husband) back. It’s to Helena’s most famous line that she keeps returning: “Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie which we ascribe to heaven.” To what does Miranda owe her remedy? That’s intentionally kept under wraps, as baffling as her earlier lamentations.

Ultimately, “All’s Well” might have landed with more heft if it had abandoned the middle ground of the problem play and worn more boldly the smirking mask of comedy.

Advertisement

Kelly’s work has been published in New York Magazine, Vogue, the New York Times Book Review and elsewhere.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SoCal Bestsellers

Hardcover Fiction

1. The Midnight Library by Matt Haig (Viking: $26) A reader in an infinite library is torn between versions of the life she is leading and the life she could be leading.

2. Malibu Rising by Taylor Jenkins Reid (Ballantine: $28) In 1983, a Malibu party spirals out of control in this new novel from the author of “Daisy Jones & the Six” and “The Seven Husbands of Evelyn Hugo.”

3. Klara and the Sun by Kazuo Ishiguro (Knopf: $28) A view of a technologically advanced society from the perspective of a child’s artificial friend.

4. The Final Girl Support Group by Grady Hendrix (Berkley: $26) Five young women who survived horrifying attacks meet with a therapist, until they are targeted once again.

Advertisement

5. The Maidens by Alex Michaelides (Celadon: $28) A therapist investigates murders at her alma mater and a secret society that protects a suspect in this follow-up to “The Silent Patient.”

6. The Paper Palace by Miranda Cowley Heller (Riverhead: $27) A happily married woman on a summer vacation has a sexual encounter with a lifelong friend.

7. Project Hail Mary by Andy Weir (Ballantine: $29) A lone astronaut tries to complete a mission to save the sun and humanity.

8. The Cellist by Daniel Silva (Harper: $29) A wealthy Russian expat is assassinated in London in this political thriller.

9. The Vanishing Half by Brit Bennett (Riverhead: $27) Identical twin sisters run away from their small Black community in the South and live very different lives.

10. The Hill We Climb by Amanda Gorman (Viking: $16) A special edition of the poem Gorman delivered at President Biden’s inauguration.

Hardcover nonfiction

1. I Alone Can Fix It by Carol Leonnig, Philip Rucker (Penguin: $30) The authors of “A Very Stable Genius” provide an inside look at the catastrophic final year of the Trump presidency.

2. Crying in H Mart by Michelle Zauner (Knopf: $27) A memoir from the Korean-born singer-songwriter of the band Japanese Breakfast.

Advertisement

3. This Is Your Mind on Plants by Michael Pollan (Penguin: $28) The food writer studies three psychoactive plants — opium, caffeine and mescaline.

4. The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse by Charlie Mackesy (HarperOne: $23) A modern fable explores life’s universal lessons through four archetypes.

5. World Travel by Anthony Bourdain, Laurie Woolever (Ecco: $35) An irreverent guide to some of the late travel writer and TV personality’s favorite locales.

6. Breath by James Nestor (Riverhead: $28) New research yields breathtaking results.

Advertisement

7. American Marxism by Mark R. Levin (Threshold: $28) The Fox News personality raises the alarm over communism in American culture and institutions.

8. Landslide by Michael Wolff (Holt: $30) The author of “Fire and Fury” explores how President Trump managed to lose the 2020 election.

9. Inside Comedy by David Steinberg (Knopf: $30) The veteran comic celebrates the comedy and comedians of the last five decades.

10. Untamed by Glennon Doyle (Dial: $28) The activist explores the peace that comes when we stop striving to meet the world’s expectations.

Advertisement

Paperback fiction

1. The Song of Achilles by Madeline Miller (Ecco: $17)

2. People We Meet on Vacation by Emily Henry (Berkley: $16)

3. Mexican Gothic by Silvia Moreno-Garcia (Del Rey: $17)

4. On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous by Ocean Vuong (Penguin: $17)

Advertisement

5. Circe by Madeline Miller (Back Bay: $17)

6. Dune by Frank Herbert (Ace: $11)

7. Beach Read by Emily Henry (Berkley: $16)

8. The Alchemist by Paulo Coelho (HarperOne: $17)

Advertisement

9. Where the Crawdads Sing by Delia Owens (Putnam: $18)

10. Hamnet by Maggie O’Farrell (Vintage: $17)

Paperback nonfiction

1. The Body Keeps the Score by Bessel van der Kolk (Penguin: $19)

2. Braiding Sweetgrass by Robin Wall Kimmerer (Milkweed: $18)

Advertisement

3. Sapiens by Yuval Noah Harari (Harper: $25)

4. The Four Agreements by Don Miguel Ruiz (Amber-Allen: $13)

5. Kitchen Confidential by Anthony Bourdain (Ecco: $17)

6. The Untethered Soul by Michael A. Singer (New Harbinger: $19)

Advertisement

7. Entangled Life by Merlin Sheldrake (Random House: $18)

8. The Body by Bill Bryson (Anchor: $17)

9. The Art of Happiness by the Dalai Lama (Riverhead: $17)

10. Vesper Flights by Helen Macdonald (Grove: $17)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Find a flick with our weekly curated list of classic movies, cult favorites, film festivals, etc., streaming online or coming soon to a theater near you.

“Black Rain”

Two of the NYPD’s finest (Michael Douglas, Andy Garcia) find themselves in hot water with the Japanese mafia in Ridley Scott’s visually striking 1989 action thriller. Presented in 35mm. Hollywood Legion Drive-In at Post 43, 2035 N. Highland Ave., Hollywood. 8:30 p.m. Aug. 8. $25 per vehicle; advance purchase required. hollywoodlegiontheater.com

“The City of Lost Children”

Feast your eyes and ears on Marc Caro and Jean-Pierre Jeunet’s ravishing 1995 sci-fi/fantasy fable featuring costumes by fashion designer Jean Paul Gaultier and music by “Twin Peaks” composer Angelo Badalamenti. With Ron Perlman. Presented in 35mm. Secret Movie Club Theatre, 1917 Bay St., 2nd floor, downtown L.A. 8 p.m. Aug. 6. $16, $19. secretmovieclub.com

“Coming to America”

Eddie Murphy is an undercover African prince scoping out prospective queens in the New York City borough of Queens in this hit 1988 comedy directed by John Landis. With Arsenio Hall, John Amos and James Earl Jones. Street Food Cinema, Veterans Memorial Park, 4117 Overland Ave., Culver City. 8:30 p.m. Aug. 7. $18, $23. streetfoodcinema.com

Advertisement

“Destroy All Monsters”

There are more kaiju than you can shake a stick at — including Godzilla, Mothra, Rodan and King Ghidorah — in this 1968 sci-fi thriller directed by franchise co-creator Ishirō Honda. Brain Dead Studios at the Silent Movie Theater, 611 N. Fairfax Ave., L.A. $12; advance purchase required. 10:30 p.m. Aug. 6. studios.wearebraindead.com

“Drive”

Ryan Gosling has nerves of steel behind the wheel in director Nicolas Winding Refn’s atmospheric 2011 homage to 1980s crime thrillers. With Carey Mulligan, Bryan Cranston, Christina Hendricks, Ron Perlman, Oscar Isaac and Albert Brooks. Rooftop Cinema Club DTLA, Level, 4th floor, 888 S. Olive St., downtown L.A. 11 p.m. Aug. 6. $19.50-$23.40. rooftopcinemaclub.com

“42”

The late Chadwick Boseman portrays barrier-breaking African American baseball legend Jackie Robinson in this 2013 bio-drama. With Harrison Ford, Nicole Beharie and Christopher Meloni. Marina Drive-In, parking lot 2, 13477 Fiji Way, Marina del Rey. 8 p.m. Aug. 6. $20 per vehicle; advance purchase required. visitmarinadelrey.com

“The Great Muppet Caper”

Kermit and company find themselves in London in this 1981 franchise entry directed by Muppets creator Jim Henson and costarring John Cleese, Diana Rigg and the late Charles Grodin. Fathom Events, various local theaters (see website). 3 and 8 p.m. Aug. 8, 7 p.m. Aug. 11. $15. fathomevents.com

“L.A. Confidential”

Two of the LAPD’s finest (Guy Pearce, Russell Crowe) find corruption around every corner and curve in 1950s Los Angeles in director Curtis Hanson’s moody 1997 crime drama based on the James Ellroy novel. Kevin Spacey, Danny DeVito and Oscar winner Kim Basinger also star. Rooftop Cinema Club El Segundo, 1310 E. Franklin Ave., parking structure, El Segundo. 10:45 p.m. Aug. 7. $18.50-$22.50; advance purchase required. rooftopcinemaclub.com

“The Last Waltz”

The Band shares the stage with rock luminaries including Bob Dylan, Van Morrison, Neil Young and Joni Mitchell in director Martin Scorsese’s 1976 concert doc shot at San Francisco’s Winterland Ballroom. Presented in 35mm. New Beverly Cinema, 7165 Beverly Blvd., L.A. 11:59 p.m. Aug. 7. $10.thenewbev.com

Advertisement

“Lupin the 3rd: The Castle of Cagliostro”

A master thief and his crew try to pull off their latest caper and rescue a princess in the bargain in a new 4K restoration of legendary animation director Hayao Miyazaki’s 1979 feature-film debut; in Japanese with English subtitles. The Landmark Westwood, 1045 Broxton Ave., Westwood. 5:10, 7:20 and 9:30 p.m. Aug. 6-7, 5:10 and 7:20 p.m. Aug. 8. (310) 208-3250.landmarktheatres.com

“The Man Who Had Everything”

“Mi Vida Loca” director Allison Anders introduces a screening of this 1920 melodrama starring Jack Pickford, brother of silent-era icon Mary Pickford. Presented in 16mm, with live piano accompaniment. The evening also includes a pre-show 1920s-style musical revue. Retroformat Silent Films, Woman’s Club Of Hollywood, 1749 N. LaBrea Ave., Hollywood. 7:30 p.m. Aug. 7. $10, $15. eventbrite.com

“M*A*S*H”

A monthlong salute to Robert Altman kicks off with the filmmaker’s irreverent 1970 comedy about a pair of carousing combat surgeons at a U.S. Army field hospital during the Korean War. With Donald Sutherland, Elliott Gould, Tom Skerritt, Sally Kellerman and Robert Duvall. The Frida Cinema, Calle Cuatro Plaza, 305 E. 4th St., Santa Ana. $10.50. 7:30 p.m. Aug. 6-7, 1:15 and 7:45 p.m. Aug. 8, 7:45 p.m. Aug. 9. thefridacinema.org

Advertisement

“Never Too Late: The Doc Severinsen Story”

The trumpet player, former “Tonight Show” bandleader and all-around snazzy dresser is profiled in this 2021 documentary. The evening includes a pre-show concert and Q&A. The Muckenthaler Cultural Center, 1201 W. Malvern Ave., Fullerton. 8 p.m. Aug. 12. $50. themuck.org

“Slither”

A four-film salute to writer-director James Gunn (“Guardians of the Galaxy,” “The Suicide Squad”) includes this campy, creepy 2006 homage to classic B-movie sci-fi/horror flicks. With Nathan Fillion, Elizabeth Banks and Michael Rooker. Presented in 35mm. American Cinematheque at the Los Feliz 3, 1822 N. Vermont Ave., Los Feliz. 10 p.m. Aug. 8. $8, $13. americancinematheque.com

“Taxi Driver”

Robert De Niro is a Vietnam War veteran with PTSD who’s had just about enough of the mean streets of NYC in Martin Scorsese’s nightmarish 1976 drama. With Cybill Shepherd, Harvey Keitel, Peter Boyle, Albert Brooks and Jodie Foster. Presented in 35mm. New Beverly Cinema, 7165 Beverly Blvd., L.A. 7:30 p.m. Aug. 6-7, 6:30 p.m. Aug. 8. $10 (advance tickets are sold out, but some additional tickets will be available at the door).thenewbev.com

Newsletter Get our daily Entertainment newsletter Get the day's top stories on Hollywood, film, television, music, arts, culture and more. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Daniela Melchior’s first day of filming on “The Suicide Squad” took place on a beach constructed in a parking lot in Atlanta.

Warner Bros.’ blockbuster DC supervillain teamup, written and directed by James Gunn, marks the Portuguese actor’s first major studio role as well as her first English-language project. It’s now in theaters and streaming on HBO Max, but back during production Melchoir was, understandably, nervous. Her focus was on doing her best — she didn’t want this first Hollywood movie to also be her last.

And it wasn’t all smooth sailing: The rat she had perched on her shoulder for a scene pooped and peed on her.

“I think he was, like, marking [his] territory,” says Melchior while recalling the incident during a recent video call from Portugal. “And just getting to know me and getting to know my smell.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Still, she says “it was really fun” and that shooting those beach scenes were some of her favorite moments because it was “a new experience for everyone.”

In “The Suicide Squad,” Melchior, 24, plays Ratcatcher 2 — an original character created for the film who is the daughter of Ratcatcher, a DC comic book villain. Like her father, Ratcatcher 2, also known as Cleo Cazo, has an affinity for rats and can communicate with them using a special wand she inherited.

Daniela Melchior as Ratcatcher 2 in Warner Bros. Pictures’ superhero action adventure “The Suicide Squad.” (Warner Bros. Pictures / DC Comics)

But it’s not just her animal centric powers that make the character stand out among a team of outrageous and violent criminals including mercenaries and a giant, hungry, anthropomorphic shark. And a cast that includes such established stars as Margot Robbie, Idris Elba, John Cena, Viola Davis and the voice of Sylvester Stallone.

“She’s the heart of the film in so many ways,” says Gunn. “She’s not a killer. She’s not a murderer. She’s in prison for doing something stupid with rats, that probably any of us would do, if we had a rat and a [special] wand and were incredibly poor.”

Advertisement

Melchior, reflecting on Ratcatcher 2’s emotional arc and the backstory involving the character’s relationship with her father, says “she’s not the normal kind of supervillain” one might expect in a comic book tentpole.

Even over a video call, the natural charisma Gunn mentions when explaining why Melchior was right for the role shines through. She’s thoughtful and funny, and willing to admit she’s a bit nervous while pulling up a music playlist she made for Ratcatcher based on Gunn’s suggestions. It’s an eclectic mix ranging from Germany-based Korean DJ Peggy Gou to Brigitte Bardot and Jane Birkin and Serge Gainsbourg.

As could be expected after playing a person who’s best known for her affinity for rats, Melchior has a number of stories about working with the rodents, going back to before any film started rolling. Her audition included a chemistry test with actual rats, mostly to make sure she wasn’t afraid of them.

Ratcatcher 2 would rather take a nap than go on any missions. (Warner Bros. Pictures / DC Comics)

Presented with three rats in an open box but no specific instructions from Gunn or anyone from the production during this chemistry test, Melchior just picked them up.

“I had one in my hands, another in my hood, and suddenly I find myself with James taking pictures [of] me and the rats,” says Melchior.

It wasn’t until she flew to Atlanta for her costume fitting that she had an actual meeting with the rats who would be playing her faithful companion Sebastian. “It was really professional,” says Melchior.

Melchior traces the origins of her interest in acting back to drama classes she took while in school. She describes her younger self as “not very interesting” and says she had some problems concentrating on her school work.

“I used to read a lot, but just because we had obligatory books that we had to read for school,” says Melchior. “The thing that I loved the most was watching movies.”

Initially, her enjoyment of the stage came from the positive reaction she got from improvising and telling jokes. But she soon discovered a passion in the chance to live others’ lives and to try to figure out why certain characters behave the way they do.

Advertisement

“If I didn’t pursue acting, I would pursue psychology for sure,” says Melchior, “because I just love working with feelings and trying to understand them.”

After studying drama for three years in high school, Melchior booked her first professional role and hasn’t looked back since, working on Portuguese TV and film projects such as “Mulheres,” “Valor da Vida” and “Parque Mayer.”

“If I didn’t pursue acting, I would pursue psychology for sure,” says Daniela Melchior, “because I just love working with feelings and trying to understand them.” (Cam Camarena for Art Streiber/Warner Bros.)

To land the role of Ratcatcher 2, Melchior had to stand out among hundreds of people from around the world who also submitted auditions. Gunn remembers watching her audition video and thinking “there’s something about her,” and Melchior was eventually one of three actors that made it through to the screen test phase.

“She had a naturalism about the way she acted this,” says Gunn. “Everything was real. Everything was present and I believed her. And for my stuff, it’s really important, because the characters are so outrageous, that they’re also very present. If you’re doing outrageous material in a cartoony manner, that doesn’t work. It’s got to be you’re doing outrageous material in a way that we believe you’re actually a real human being saying something.”

Melchior says for her audition she was told to present her take on the character from the lines she was given. So she decided to play the character “really, really lazy.”

“Knowing that [Ratcatcher 2] was a millennial and the lazy millennial [idea], I really exaggerated that,” says Melchior. “James told me, ‘I can really believe that you don’t want to be here.’”

Rick Flag (Joel Kinnaman), far left, Ratcatcher 2 (Daniela Melchior), Bloodsport (Idris Elba) and Peacemaker with some allies in “The Suicide Squad.” (Warner Bros. Pictures / DC Comics)

Gunn describes Ratcatcher 2 as “sort of a secret protagonist” of “The Suicide Squad.” She’s a character that is both relatable because of her backstory, and is also one audiences can’t help but “love as a human being.”

And it’s a quality he also attributes to Melchior.

Advertisement

“She’s just a really sweet person,” says Gunn. “She’s just a really good human being. And I could see that in her and I said, ‘Daniela, I want you to promise me one thing. … Just promise me that you’ll remain a good person.’ There’s a lot of people that come into this industry seeming like good people and then changing. It’s important that good people keep working in this industry.”

While Ratcatcher 2’s future is unclear at the end of “The Suicide Squad,” Melchior sees the film as a good launching point for the character.

“She’s not a supervillain yet because she never killed anyone,” says Melchior. “This was a good opportunity to see her first mission and it’s a good starting point. Maybe in other things — if there are any other things — we can see her learning those skills. Learning how to kill someone if she has to, learning how to fight or learning how to deal with her daddy issues in a better way.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Prolific guitarist Carlos Santana is a regular in real estate headlines as of late. His latest move comes in the Bay Area, where his Tiburon Peninsula home of the last 14 years is on the market for $5.77 million.

The 10-time Grammy winner is spending more time in Hawaii these days, specifically on the island of Kauai. He dropped $20.5 million on a contemporary retreat there in July and listed his other property on the island for $12.9 million. A few months prior, he sold another Kauai home for $3 million.

Santana, who grew up in Mexico before his family moved to San Francisco in the 1960s, bought the Tiburon abode for $5.1 million in 2007. Perched in the hills on nearly an acre, it takes advantage of the coastal setting with walls of windows overlooking the bay and the Golden Gate Bridge.

1 / 11 The entry. (Jason Wells) 2 / 11 The foyer. (Jason Wells) 3 / 11 The living room. (Jason Wells) 4 / 11 The kitchen. (Jason Wells) 5 / 11 The dining room. (Jason Wells) 6 / 11 The office. (Jason Wells) 7 / 11 The bedroom. (Jason Wells) 8 / 11 The deck. (Jason Wells) 9 / 11 The view. (Jason Wells) 10 / 11 The patio. (Jason Wells) 11 / 11 The hillside home. (Jason Wells)

Advertisement

Fittingly, the foyer is topped by what the listing refers to as an “acoustic dome,” and the split-level floor plan also includes a step-down living room, open-concept kitchen and scenic dining area lined with windows.

Four bedrooms and 3.5 bathrooms are spread across 3,700 square feet. Out back, a deck and dining patio take in the surrounding hills.

A rock mainstay for decades, Santana, 74, formed his namesake band in the 1960s and gained fame in the decades that followed with hit records such as “Abraxas,” “Lotus” and “Amigos.” His 1990 album, “Supernatural,” won a Grammy for best album, while the single “Smooth” won awards for best record and best song of the year.

In 1998, he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.

Shana Rohde-Lynch of Compass holds the listing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If streaming were an Olympic event, NBC would have walked away with the gold.

Through the first 14 days of the Tokyo Games, NBC said viewers streamed 3.5 billion minutes of Olympic content over the company’s streaming platforms — including its nascent Peacock service — already exceeding the number achieved at the 2016 Games in Rio with three nights to go.

Another 1 billion minutes of Olympics video were viewed on social media platforms such as YouTube and TikTok. Even a stream with a live feed of the flickering Olympic flame on a bridge near Tokyo Bay has drawn 1.5 million views on Peacock.

But Nielsen ratings, which determine the bulk of the ad revenue taken in for the Games, are still the historic metric for a successful TV event, and that’s where it got rough for the network that entered Tokyo amid myriad challenges that only seemed to mount as the events went on.

Advertisement

The 14-day average of 16.5 million viewers through Wednesday is down a whopping 41% from the audience for the 2016 Games in Rio.

The obstacles NBC faced in the Tokyo Games were apparent from the start. There was a year-long postponement, and a threat of cancellation loomed as Japan continues to struggle with the COVID-19 pandemic.

Based on how sports ratings suffered in the U.S. when teams played in empty arenas and stadiums during 2020, the lack of fans in the stands in Tokyo could not have helped. Even under optimal circumstances, a 13-hour time zone difference makes it nearly impossible to avoid learning the results of events that happen while most of the U.S. is asleep.

The other unexpected setbacks became headlines. Sha’Karri Richardson, a charismatic American sprinter, lost her spot on the team after testing positive for marijuana. American gymnast star Simone Biles opted out of most of her events to deal with mental health issues. Tennis phenom and Olympic torch-bearer Naomi Osaka was eliminated early after losing in straight sets in the third round to Czech player Markéta Vondroušová.

Despite the humbling TV ratings, NBC Sports Group Chairman Pete Bevacqua told The Times in an interview from Tokyo that the company views the Games as a success, with 150 million people watching some portion on TV or online.

“We were anticipating that it might be difficult kind of coming out of the gate here because of all of these curveballs,” Bevacqua said. “I’ve been encouraged that we have actually maintained the numbers for the duration of our time here.” (Olympics ratings typically drop off in the second week.)

“The Olympics are one of the safest bets in the world when it comes to media,” Bevacqua added. “We wouldn’t trade places with anybody.”

Advertisement

Bevacqua acknowledged that NBC needs to improve its method of informing consumers where to find their favorite events among the 7,000 hours of coverage it offers. Many fans complained about being confused and overwhelmed by the process.

“I think one of the lessons that we have learned over the course of these Games is we need to do a better job of telling people where things are,” he said.

NBC said it was prepared for a ratings decline as the migration of viewers from traditional TV to streaming has upended nearly every major viewing event, with the exception of National Football League telecasts.

Since the last Summer Games were held five years ago, the U.S. has seen the launch of HBO Max, Disney+, Apple TV+, Paramount+ and scores of smaller players joining established behemoths Netflix and Amazon Prime Video, offering more options for the viewing public and making it difficult to amass the kind of mega-audiences the Olympics have drawn in the past.

Advertisement

Aware of the shifting landscape, NBC put aside a significant amount of unsold commercial inventory in the event of a major ratings shortfall. When ratings guarantees are not met, networks typically provide additional free commercials to make up the difference.

Bevacqua said nearly all of the advertisers who bought commercial time on the Games will reach the number of viewers they were guaranteed and no cash will have to be returned, the nightmare scenario for any network sales department.

“Over 99% of our advertisers will be made whole,” said Bevacqua, who reiterated that the Tokyo Games will be profitable for the company. NBC parent Comcast paid $1.3 billion for the rights to the Tokyo Games.

NBC is depending on the Olympics to give a boost to its Peacock streaming service, which was launched in July 2020 in anticipation of the Games. Although the company is not releasing any data, Bevacqua said the goal for Peacock sign-ups generated by the Olympics has been met.

Advertisement

The company said its research also showed that nearly half of Olympics viewers were switching away from other streaming services to watch live Olympics coverage.

Bevacqua noted that Peacock is capturing the younger viewers who are leaving traditional TV. According to NBC, the median age of the Tokyo Games viewer on Peacock is 36. Nielsen data shows the median age for the Olympics TV viewer is typically in the low to mid 50s.

While older TV viewers may have scratched their heads at the amount of skateboarding shown on the network, the first-time Olympic sport ranked as the fifth most popular among the streaming audience. Gymnastics ranked first, followed by volleyball, basketball and track and field.

Advertisement

The streaming data will be welcome news to Comcast. Wall Street is rewarding publicly held media companies for the progress they are making with their streaming endeavors. ViacomCBS and AMC Networks reported strong financial earnings this week, citing streaming subscriber growth as a factor.

Comcast reported July 29 that Peacock, which comes in a free, ad-supported and paid subscribers versions, has about 20 million monthly active accounts, up from about 14 million in April. Overall it has been viewed as lagging behind the streaming services launched by large media conglomerates.

Lee Berke, president of the consulting firm LHB Sports, Entertainment & Media Inc., believes the Olympics provided a major lift for NBC’s streaming business. But the network tends to frustrate fans with its focus on prime-time broadcasts.

Biles’ bronze medal-winning performance on the balance beam aired live on NBC’s streaming platforms in the early morning hours on Tuesday. But the replay was not available until NBC played it on prime time TV that night.

Advertisement

“The Olympics is a 24/7 sports festival and there is media in place to cover all of it whenever it takes place,” Berke said. “Establishing prime time as sort of the ultimate goal is moving to lesser importance. I think everybody needs to acknowledge that.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Careers in the entertainment industry can be mysterious for those just starting out, and even for those working in the business.

Actor Randall Park said that when he first decided he wanted to pursue Hollywood in the early 2000s, people would tell him to go to Samuel French Film & Theatre Bookshop.

“If you were an actor in Los Angeles, that was the place you went if you wanted to get any information,” he said.

The first Samuel French L.A. store was founded in 1929 downtown and moved to Hollywood in 1947. Until the 1970s, its L.A. operations sold and licensed plays in the region.

But eventually, the shop also offered resources for people interested in pursuing a Hollywood career. It sold books of plays that actors could use for audition monologues; biographies of entertainment figures; how-to guides on various aspects of moviemaking; and listings of agents and casting and production companies.

Former general manager Joyce Mehess, who worked at Samuel French off and on from 1991 until its closure two years ago, remembers Park coming into the store before he was famous. She said she feels so happy whenever she sees him on her television screen.

So many celebrities came through the bookshop, she said.

“A lot of people thought we were an agency,” said Mehess. “And we’d say, ‘No, we’re an information center. I can give you a listing. I can give you a play that might fit the type you are, and you can research it from there. You can certainly ask questions; I’ll be at my desk. And maybe a big star might walk by and inspire you.’”

Providing inspiration and community was Mehess’ mission for the store. It wasn’t just about selling books, it was about encouraging nervous newcomers to make those phone calls, take those chances.

But Samuel French closed in March 2019. Concord Music acquired it as part of the company’s foray into theater. At the time, a petition trying to save the bookstore collected almost 8,000 signatures. The space has been empty for the last two years.

“There really was a hole created when that bookstore closed,” Park said.

Though there are numerous resources online, he said sometimes it’s hard for newcomers to find the right ones.

Here at the Los Angeles Times, we want to be your new destination for that kind of information.

This guide provides explainers and advice for starting and building your career in the entertainment industry. And feel free to ask us your questions, and we’ll do our best to find an expert to answer them.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Actors talking about their process can be so f— tedious. You go, ‘Shut up. You’re just a f— actor.”

Coming from Kate Winslet, this is both a preface and a warning, a self-aware salvo telling you that she’s about to dig into how Mare Sheehan — the gruff, opinionated, vape-smoking, hoagie-eating detective she played so memorably in the HBO limited series “Mare of Easttown” — got under her skin in ways that made it hard to let go. Not just hard. Almost impossible.

When the show wrapped production last year, Winslet had no idea how she could go about being herself again. It genuinely freaked her out. And because she didn’t want to break the spell of what Mare had meant to her, Winslet didn’t want to see anyone who didn’t know Mare, which, as you can well imagine, ruled out a lot of people.

“It was f— weird, to be honest. I don’t know how else to explain it,” Winslet says by email, when I asked her about it a few weeks after we had initially talked. “I just kept crying a lot. I had to get it out of my system. I drank some decent coffee (and vodka) and spent time with my 82-year-old dad where we’d do the crossword together. I went on a million long walks alone. With the dog. The dog didn’t expect anything of me. The dog didn’t care that I was randomly crying. ... That was a good thing.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Kate Winslet in “Mare of Easttown.” (Sarah Shatz / HBO)

Eventually, Winslet broadened her circle, cooking vegetarian meals for her family, returning to domesticity and embracing the mundane. Mentioning Mare was discouraged, and gradually the character receded. “I had to let her quieten down by not giving her any air time in my own world,” Winslet says.

But that was last year. Now, all anyone wants to do is talk to Winslet about Mare. And not just journalists. As the series was airing this spring, strangers would approach Winslet on the street and stroke her arm and tell her it’s going to be OK, even if Mare did plant those drugs on that poor girl — what was she thinking? — and asking for some kind of reassurance that Mare would redeem herself.

Winslet reveled in this attention. She’s never experienced anything like it, not even with “Titanic,” which she couldn’t process at the time because she was 21 and suddenly famous and couldn’t fathom what was happening. With “Mare,” it wasn’t about Winslet ... mostly. It was about Mare, and Mare and her sarcastic mother, and Mare stuffing that duck liver pâté underneath the sofa cushion (“I’ve done it, more than once,” Winslet says, “but the plant pot is my go-to”), and grieving parents and every single person in Easttown, all adding up to what Winslet calls a “once-in-a-lifetime moment” (“and I’ve had some incredible moments,” she says, “incredible ones!”) that has her more than happy to talk about the character. At length. Even if it means discussing her bleeping process too.

These conversations aren’t limited to Zoom calls that begin in the early evening and wind their way through the night, with Winslet rising up at one point, pulling her hair into a ponytail and turning on a lamp because the house has gone dark. There are also discussions holding tantalizing ramifications. She and “Mare” creator Brad Ingelsby have talked and texted regularly about what a second chapter for Mare might look like, throwing ideas around and trying to crack a satisfying story.

Advertisement

Julianne Nicholson, left, and Kate Winslet in “Mare of Easttown.” (Sarah Shatz / HBO)

When I ask Ingelsby about this, he begins by saying that there’s “a lot more questions than answers” and then embarks on a 10-minute conversational journey that moves from wondering how they could possibly match the emotion of Season 1 (Mare’s trauma over the loss of her son to suicide) to admitting that he’d “love nothing more than to do it.”

So, yeah, you can pretty much count on a Season 2.

Winslet, 45, says she’s having fun imagining what another go-around might look like — she politely giggles when I suggest sending Mare and her mother, the ice cream-hiding Helen, played by Jean Smart, on a road trip to visit Siobhan at Berkeley — though part of her thinks the whole notion of a follow-up is foolish. “Quit while you’re ahead,” she says. “That’s always been my hunch in life. Just walk away and leave it alone.”

Kate Winslet finds the calm after the story that was “Mare of Easttown.” (Greg Williams / For The Times)

That kind of pragmatism informs how she views her career. Winslet began acting as a teenager — “never a showoff,” she says — and was routinely astonished that people were paying her to pursue a passion that she had watched her grandparents and father do out of love. “At 17, I got on a f— plane and flew to New Zealand and shot ‘Heavenly Creatures’ for f— sake,” Winslet says, still amazed at this break nearly three decades after it happened. Ang Lee’s “Sense and Sensibility” came next; “Titanic” followed two years later.

But after winning an Emmy for the HBO limited series “Mildred Pierce” and starring in Steven Soderbergh’s prophetic pandemic thriller “Contagion” a decade ago, most of Winslet’s projects haven’t really landed with audiences. She says she has no problem with that.

“I have been more surprised by the success of a project than I have been disappointed by one,” she says in another email. “Because I have learned never to expect too much. It’s how I was raised, I think. I’m a realist. And being a part of something that might just come and go quite quickly at the box office never negates the experience for me. It’s good to just knuckle under and do the job regardless of how well it’s likely to perform.”

“I love the job of acting,” she continues. “So it’s always been a somewhat abstract and separate experience for me, when these things are actually released into the world. I get nervous and try and detach myself. Which is a self-protection thing, I suppose.”

But with “Mare,” Winslet couldn’t detach herself, not with her 20-year-old daughter, Mia, running up to her, holding out her phone, saying, “Mom, you have got to read some of these tweets. ... They’re hilarious” and her husband, Ned, telling her, ‘Babe, it’s safe. Just read this one [review] and this one because you deserve to enjoy the cool things that people are responding to.’” And she did, because even though Winslet didn’t expect “Mare” to be a hit, she was really hoping, quietly — not telling anyone — that people would find it and enjoy it.

Advertisement

“The joy that she took making the show and now the response to it is so delightful,” says friend Julianne Nicholson, who plays Mare’s best friend, Lori, in the series. The two women have a long history — Nicholson’s husband is godfather to Winslet’s 17-year-old son, Joe, and Winslet held Nicholson’s son shortly after he was born — and so Nicholson is something of a Winslet expert, delighting in both her humility (“her gratitude is lovely”) and her way with profanity (“it’s admirable how well swears sound in her mouth”).

That latter gift partially explains why Winslet heard from so many friends as “Mare” was airing, with everyone telling her “Kate! It’s you! It’s the real you!” Or: “You haven’t been as you as this since that episode of ‘Extras,’” referencing Winslet’s guest turn on Ricky Gervais’ HBO comedy series playing a potty-mouthed version of herself offering tips on phone sex and musing about what kinds of acting roles win Oscars. (The “Extras” Winslet takes a role as a nun in a Holocaust historical drama; three years later she’d win her Oscar playing a woman who was a Nazi concentration camp guard in “The Reader.”)

Ingelsby can see the similarities between the actress and his creation, mostly in Winslet sharing Mare’s down-to-earth nature and connection to family. Winslet believes the general public still perceives her simply as the socialite Rose (“I would say that the vast majority of people may have only seen me in ‘Titanic,’”) and picture her “sipping dainty little glasses of wine” instead of pounding Rolling Rocks. (For the record, Winslet prefers another Pennsylvania lager, Yuengling, though she’s not particular. “I mean, I love a bottle of beer,” she says.)

“Perhaps watching ‘Mare,’ for a lot of people, they’re like, ‘Holy s—! That’s her?’” Winslet says laughing. “I haven’t done a lot of mainstream pieces. So after ‘Titanic,’ it stands to reason people may have thought, ‘Oh. I wonder whatever happened to her?’”

Then they see Winslet’s unglamorous image on the promo poster for “Mare” and think, to use one of Winslet’s favorite expressions, “bloody hell.”

“I was a little ... um ... a touch taken aback by just how much people did respond to this downtrodden look of Mare,” Winslet says. “All I could think was, ‘Well, hell, I guess I’ve aged.’”

She’s not complaining, mind you. She speaks passionately and at length about the pleasures of working with “Mare’s” young actors, wishing she had found more mentors when she was starting her career. And with age, Winslet feels like she knows what’s she doing now and can fold into her performance all that expertise — honing the accent and the character’s physicality (“Mare’s heart broke the day her son died, and as a result her posture is slightly inward, as though she is hiding her cracked heart from the people closest to her,” she notes).

And still, she says, she feels as though she has never prepared thoroughly enough and that on the first day of filming, everyone’s going to look at her and think, “Why the f— did they cast her, and her accent is for s—.”

“It’s the first day at school every time, every time,” Winslet says, laughing. “I get in such a panic. My husband and kids will be like” — and here Winslet affects a soothing tone — “‘It’s OK. You’re getting your knickers in a twist. Have a cup of tea.’” She pauses. “I suppose all that’s part of what keeps the job interesting, don’t you think?”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Joseph Arthur has just recorded a new protest song, and it’s unlike anything he’s done in his 25-year career.

Called “Stop the Shot,” it opens with Arthur repeatedly singing, “We will overcome” before adding, “what those fools have done.”



For the record: An earlier version of this article included Morrissey in a list of musicians who have gone public on anti-vaccination views. Although Morrissey has made negative statements about the pandemic, he hasn’t actually come out against the vaccine.

Accompanying himself on bass, guitar, drums and every other instrument, the indie-rock singer-songwriter in one verse name-checks the drug Ivermectin, an anti-parasitic that the FDA has publicly declared has not been approved to treat or prevent COVID-19, and in another makes a reference to a debunked vaccine conspiracy theory: “So take me uptown, baby / I don’t want to make a fuss / And keep your graphene oxide out of me / Baby, I don’t want to rust.”

The uptempo rocker — it’s “jokey,” Arthur says of the lyrics — sets to music his argument, made repeatedly on his Instagram, YouTube and Facebook accounts, that the COVID-19 vaccine represents a danger to humanity, despite all scientific evidence to the contrary.

Advertisement

The Brooklyn-based Arthur, 49, believes that a coordinated effort is afoot — “end-times type of stuff,” he calls it — by pharmaceutical companies, the medical-industrial complex and the government to silence those like him who are “questioning” the science behind the COVID-19 vaccines. Last year both he and his girlfriend, Anna Sophia, contracted COVID-19. Arthur said it was “like a three-day bad flu.” Both, he says, have fully recovered.

Being the relentless voice of what he considers a disaffected minority has cost him. This year his longtime music manager dropped him as a client, followed by his booking agent. Arthur’s newly formed band quit en masse and he says he lost a record deal that would have distributed a new double album to his fans. “I wish him the best,” said Arthur’s former manager, Keith Hagan, declining further comment. Arthur’s former longtime booking agent, Steve Ferguson of Paladin Artists, did not reply to multiple requests for comment.

“It’s a heavy thing to deal with right now,” Arthur tells me by telephone of the shake-up. “It’s not easy. It’s going to take me in a different direction, for sure.”

Arthur, who once counted such luminaries as Peter Gabriel, Lou Reed and R.E.M.'s Peter Buck as mentors and friends, is not only against receiving what he calls “the jab” but has taken to Instagram to declare, “If the clubs and venues force it, we’ll take it to the streets.”

In truth, the COVID-19 vaccines have proven to be remarkably effective against the virus, including the more communicable Delta variant that has overtaken the country. As of July 19, unvaccinated people in L.A. County accounted for 99.8% of COVID-19 deaths; and between Dec. 7 and June 7, 99.6% of the region’s coronavirus cases, 98.7% of COVID-19 hospitalizations and 99.8% of deaths were among unvaccinated people in L.A. County. As reported in The Times, L.A. County Health Services director Dr. Christina Ghaly told the county Board of Supervisors in July, “We have not admitted any single person for COVID who is fully vaccinated — with either the [Johnson & Johnson], Pfizer or Moderna vaccines.”

Public Health Director Barbara Ferrer told The Times that most fully vaccinated people who later tested positive “only experienced either no illness or very mild illness.”

She added, “These vaccines are — even with the Delta variant — are holding up really well.”

Advertisement

By going public with his anti-vaccination position, Arthur has aligned himself with a small group of like-minded musicians, including Eric Clapton, M.I.A. and Van Morrison. Last week, the Offspring’s drummer Pete Parada announced via Twitter that he’d been kicked out the band for being unwilling to get inoculated.

An advocate of fitness, wellness and homeopathic remedies — he recently documented a five-day water-only fast and a series of “dopamine fasts” — Arthur has gone so far as to use the term “segregation” while discussing the blowback that he and other vaccine-hesitant artists have been experiencing.

“If you say ‘segregation,’” Arthur says, “the woke crowd comes at you with knives out.”

Arthur, who’s tall and yogi-lean and wears his brown hair long, aligned the pro- and anti-vaccination camps with Nazis and Jews on a video on his Facebook page. He says forces are conspiring to muzzle questioners and “chastising them as evil or vile or below consideration — evil even worthy of total annihilation, disregard and disrespect. This is what Nazis did with the Jews when comparing them to vermin before rounding them up and taking them to camps.”

Advertisement

Joseph Arthur, left, performing in 2008 in New York. (Donna Ward / Getty Images)

Long before a pandemic divided the nation, Arthur was a well-regarded musician with some famous benefactors.

First earning attention in the 1990s as a key member of Peter Gabriel’s label Real World, Arthur has issued more than a dozen albums, most recently a 2018 collaboration, Arthur Buck, with R.E.M. guitarist Peter Buck, and 2019’s “Come Back World.” On another collaboration, the band Fistful of Mercy, Arthur teamed with Dhani Harrison and Ben Harper for a 2010 album. Arthur’s best-known song, 2000’s “In the Sun,” a sublime spiritual ballad with the refrain “May God’s love be with you,” was covered by R.E.M.'s Michael Stipe and Coldplay’s Chris Martin for a Hurricane Katrina benefit collection.

And he’s a critical favorite: Ken Tucker has praised the “searching, beseeching quality of Arthur‘s music.” NPR’s Ann Powers wrote in her review of “Arthur Buck”: “Joseph Arthur lands in the middle of whatever new project he takes on like a benevolent tempest, a lopsided grin forming below his third eye and an oil pastel pencil in his hand.”

A quest for enlightenment has long been Arthur’s thematic driver. “The Ballad of Boogie Christ Acts I and II” (2013), which he has described as “a fictionalized character loosely based on my own journey,” is a concept album on faith, ego and doubt. “I am here and I am humble / For I know not which way to go / I used to know how to walk on water / Now I sink in the dirt / No kind sun or holy laughter / Seems to reach beyond the hurt,” he sings on “I Used to Know How to Walk on Water.”

Advertisement

Though he considers himself a Christian, Arthur doesn’t like the word “religious,” he says, “because of the negative connotations.” He then cites a Bob Dylan lyric to explain his beliefs: “‘You’re gonna have to serve somebody.’”

Arthur’s solo career started when a demo landed in Gabriel’s hands via a mutual friend whom Arthur, who has struggled with alcoholism, knew from AA meetings. Not long after, Arthur played a show at the now-shuttered New York basement club the Fez. Gabriel’s plus-one was Lou Reed, who brought a digital recorder to capture the set.

“I remember going into the bathroom and locking the door behind me and literally praying,” Arthur recalled in a 2018 interview.

Advertisement

Born and raised in Akron, Ohio, Arthur went to the same high school as musicians including the Black Keys and Chrissie Hynde. His parents still live in the home where Arthur and his older sister grew up.

“We’re a dramatic bunch. We’re crazy,” Arthur told Marc Maron on Maron’s “WTF” podcast in 2016, adding later that he was “alive because of alcoholism. My parents met in a bar.” When Maron asked Arthur about his own sobriety, Arthur said, “I got the issues,” and noted, “I quit drinking again.” More recently, Arthur discussed “Come Back World” as a creative response to being on the receiving end of a family member who, he said, has narcissistic personality disorder.

For much of the 2000s, Arthur was a regular performer on the late-night talk show circuit. His visual art, which he began creating in his early 20s, earned him a Grammy nomination for the packaging of his 1999 EP, “Vacancy.”

“Joe’s not a virtuoso musician, but he has no fear when it comes to writing songs,” says Rene Lopez, a multi-instrumentalist and friend who played in Arthur’s band for more than a decade. He joined, Lopez adds, because “I loved Joe’s free spirit. I loved how creative he was.” He, Arthur and Wilco multi-instrumentalist Pat Sansone recorded a project as Holding the Void in the early ’00s.

Advertisement

“I was inspired by how much Joe was putting out there into the universe,” Lopez explains, “whether it was his music, art, poetry — constantly creating and having no fear. Just jumping into the ocean head-first.”

Lopez characterizes Arthur, whom he considers a friend, as an artist with “a good, good soul” who has struggled with extremes. “I saw the change happen right in the beginning because he started sending me videos of different dudes talking about conspiracy stuff,” Lopez recalls. “I’ve seen him go through so many phases. This phase is worrisome, of course. It’s just so uncomfortable. I feel like, ‘Man, where’s he going?’”

Arthur has always been an extremist in his actions, notes one former member of Arthur’s music team, who declined to be identified to protect their friendship. “He’s an addict, right? So he was either a full-on addict or full-on clean and very preachy. This is part of the extremes that he struggles with.”

Arthur sent the first of many posts against government masking mandates early in the pandemic. “Whose [sic] in control here? / Are we part of a social experiment? / Always and forever / Don’t listen to fear,” he wrote on April 17, 2020. Six weeks later, he went further, writing: “Dr. Anthony Fauci should go to prison not just be fired. I’d bet that’s where this is going.”

Advertisement

“I started speaking out when they talked about giving it to kids,” Arthur says when asked about the genesis of his opposition to the vaccines. “That’s when I finally said, ‘Nah, I think that’s wrong.’”

Joseph Arthur calls the pandemic “a well-orchestrated plan,” one that has “captured people’s minds.” (Michael Nagle / For The Times)

Helping Arthur spread the word is a publicist, Trevor FitzGibbon, who in 2015 closed his former PR firm, FitzGibbon Media, after a Huffington Post story reported on numerous sexual harassment accusations against him. He has denied the allegations.

Arthur and FitzGibbon announced an initiative called Artists United Against COVID, which Arthur said is “about the treatment for COVID-19 that is safe and effective.” Arthur and Dr. Peter McCullough, a Texas physician who has become a voice of the anti-vax movement and works with FitzGibbon, discussed the issue during an episode of “Come to Where I’m From,” Arthur’s podcast. On it, Arthur called the pandemic “a well-orchestrated plan,” one that has “captured people’s minds.”

Advertisement

One look at the comments on Arthur’s various declarations proves the extent to which his shift has alienated his music fans and endangered his touring career.

A poem that Arthur posted on Facebook included the lines, “Derangement jealous and hatred / Come with shining your inner light on the world,” to which one commenter replied: “Be brave enough not to disguise your anti-vaxx conspiracies in poetry. Be brave enough to respond to posts here asking why you’re peddling conspiracy perpetuating viral mutation, anti-scientific consensus and more deaths. You are an artist. Not a doctor.”

“Don’t get vaccinated if you don’t want to, but please stop spreading misinformation,” wrote @festivalfreak.

Earlier this year, Arthur and R.E.M.'s Buck finished recording the second Arthur Buck collaboration, but New West Records, which released the first album, did not pick it up. A representative for New West confirmed the album won’t be issued through the label but declined further comment. Through R.E.M.'s management, Buck declined to comment.

Advertisement

Arthur’s only upcoming in-person public concert is scheduled to occur on Aug. 21 at Jammin’ Java in Vienna, Va., a Washington, D.C., suburb. The 200-capacity venue does not require proof of vaccination to perform. He also will be performing at two private house concerts, he said.

Despite the certainty that has driven him to speak out against what he considers to be a historic scientific miscalculation, Arthur does confess to misgivings. Would it have been less professionally damaging to debate the efficacy of the vaccine in private? “That very well could prove to have been the smarter call,” he says, adding, “People warned me. People who were on my side told me, ‘Stop. This ain’t your fight.’ And they very well might be right.”

Just last week, Arthur’s girlfriend gave birth to their first child, Alessia. Asked whether their daughter will receive the recommended round of standard vaccinations that children get at 2 months, Arthur didn’t have an easy answer. “We’re looking into all that,” he says.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vote-counting machine maker Dominion Voting Systems filed defamation lawsuits Tuesday against right-wing broadcasters and a prominent Donald Trump ally over their baseless claims that the 2020 election was marred by fraud.

The lawsuits single out Newsmax, One America News, their executives and former Overstock.com Chief Executive Patrick Byrne. Dominion says their false claims that the company rigged the election for President Biden have cost it $1.6 billion in lost profits, company value and reputational damage.

“We are filing these three cases today because the defendants named show no remorse, nor any sign they intend to stop spreading disinformation,” Dominion CEO John Poulos said in a statement.

Advertisement

Dominion filed defamation lawsuits this year against Fox News and Trump allies Rudy Giuliani, Sidney Powell and Mike Lindell, CEO of MyPillow.

Dominion, one of the nation’s leading providers of vote-counting machines and software, has faced a barrage of claims by Trump allies and supporters, including that the company was created in Venezuela to rig elections for the late leader Hugo Chavez and that it has the ability to switch votes.

Dominion says One America News and Newsmax trumpeted those false claims to boost their own profits at Dominion’s expense.

Law enforcement and election efforts, including Trump’s attorney general, Bill Barr, have confirmed that there was no election fraud sufficient to sway the results.

One America News founder Charles Herring did not respond to a text message seeking comment.

Byrne responded to a request for comment by texting a graphic purportedly plotting election results from a Senate runoff in Georgia.

Brian Peterson, a spokesman for Newsmax, said the company’s 2020 election coverage was based on allegations made by the president, his advisors and members of Congress.

Advertisement

“Dominion’s action today is a clear attempt to squelch such reporting and undermine a free press,” Peterson said in a statement.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Viewership for the second and final full week of NBC’s prime-time coverage of the Tokyo Olympics dropped 46.5% from the same period for the 2016 Rio Games, but still drew the largest audiences for the week.

NBC averaged 10.62 million viewers for its 22 hours of prime-time programming between Aug. 2 and Sunday, which consisted of 21½ hours of Olympics programming and the premiere of the game show “Family Game Night,” according to live-plus-same-day figures released by Nielsen Tuesday.

The week’s highest ratings were on Tuesday, when an average of 14.309 million viewers watched coverage featuring American gymnast Simone Biles winning the bronze medal in the balance beam and gold medal runs by Americans Sydney McLaughlin and Athing Mu.

Sunday’s closing ceremony averaged 8.818 million viewers, sixth for the week, 48.2% less than the 17.03 million average for the 2016 closing ceremony.

Advertisement

USA Network, which featured Olympic programming, drew the second-largest prime-time cable audience for the second consecutive week, averaging 1.161 million viewers.

The week’s top-ranked non-Olympics prime-time program was Fox’s coverage of Thursday’s Pro Football Hall of Fame Game, with an average of 7.311 million viewers watching the Pittsburgh Steelers defeat the Dallas Cowboys 16-3 in a game the Cowboys led 3-0 at halftime.

Viewership was up 36.8% from when the game was last played, with NBC’s coverage of the Denver Broncos’ 14-10 victory over the Atlanta Falcons on Aug. 1, 2019, averaging 5.346 million viewers, 13th for its week. The NFL canceled all preseason games in 2020 in an attempt to reduce the spread of the coronavirus.

CBS finished a distant second for the week, averaging 2.29 million viewers, followed among the major English-language broadcast networks by Fox, averaging 2.08 million; ABC, 1.9 million; and The CW, 430,000.

Four episodes of the Fox News Channel political talk show “Tucker Carlson Tonight” topped the week’s prime-time cable programs, led by the Wednesday episode, which averaged 3.069 million viewers, 22nd for the week.

Fox News Channel was first among cable networks for the fifth consecutive week, averaging 2.062 million viewers.

MSNBC was third, averaging 1.041 million viewers. CNN was eighth, averaging 680,000, also trailing HGTV (980,000), TLC (910,000), Hallmark Channel (763,000) and History (713,000).

Advertisement

“Manifest” topped the list of the most-streamed programs for the fourth consecutive week, with viewers watching 1.811 billion minutes of its 29 episodes between July 5 and July 11, 3.1% less than the 1.869 billion minutes watched the previous week. The Netflix romantic drama “Virgin River” was second with 1.449 billion minutes of its 30 episodes.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Walter Yetnikoff, the combative, profane, licentious record company executive whose frequent feuds, unrestrained drug and alcohol consumption, and skillful management of superstar egos made him a powerful, feared but also beloved music man, died Sunday at age 87.

His wife, Lynda, said he died of cancer at a hospital in Bridgeport, Conn.

Yetnikoff was president/chief executive of CBS Records, which vied with Warner Bros. as the industry’s dominant label, from 1975 to 1990. The CBS artists he worked with included Michael Jackson, Bob Dylan, Bruce Springsteen, Barbra Streisand, Billy Joel, the Rolling Stones, Paul Simon, Cyndi Lauper, Elvis Costello, the Clash, Paul McCartney, Public Enemy, Julio Iglesias and Quiet Riot. Under his leadership, the New York-based label’s annual revenue grew from $485 million to more than $2 billion. He was richly compensated, including a reported $20-million bonus after he oversaw the sale of CBS Records to Sony for $2 billion in 1987. Soon after, Rolling Stone called him “the most powerful man in the record business.”

“Walter stuck by my side no matter what project I presented him with — ‘Nebraska,’ ‘Born in the U.S.A.,’ he was always there for me. Always,” Springsteen attested via email. “A wild man in the old school music business tradition, yup. But when the chips were down and the records were getting made and you were getting paid, he was there 100%. I loved Walter because he respected and shepherded my art through an often hostile and unfriendly music business. I considered him my friend.”

Advertisement

“Walter was a street fighter,” Joel told The Times by email, “a man who didn’t shy away from confrontation with other power players when it came to protecting his artist’s interests. I loved him as a dear friend and a mentor, in a business where real friendships don’t exist.”

CBS Records executive Dick Asher, left, George Clinton and Walter Yetnikoff. (Echoes/Redferns)

Yetnikoff reigned in an era before synergy- and accounting-driven business decisions, when personal relationships mattered and success justified unsavory means. For instance, he had no qualms about hiring independent promoters, who were accused of using payola and other illegal means to help create a hit record. “They get results,” he shrugged in 1986. In Yetnikoff’s day, a buccaneer didn’t have to explain himself to anyone.

“Walter was — how do I say this politely? — he was very meshuggah. Let’s say extraordinarily eccentric,” lawyer Alan Grubman said in an interview for the 2011 book “I Want My MTV” (co-authored by this writer and Times music editor Craig Marks). Yetnikoff freely acknowledged his excesses and outbursts. His life, he explained in “Howling at the Moon: Confessions of a Music Mogul in an Age of Excess,” a 2004 memoir written with David Ritz, consisted of three acts: “Act 1, I start to get crazy. Act 2, I get crazier. Act 3, craziest of all.”

Walter Roy Yetnikoff was born Aug. 11, 1933. He grew up in Brownsville, Brooklyn, in the era of pushcarts, street gangs and Leo Durocher. His father, Max, worked for the city, painting hospitals; his mother, Bella, was a bookkeeper. They shared a house with relatives and were a loud, quarrelsome family. Yetnikoff later said his father often hit and kicked him.

Walter attended Brooklyn Tech High School and then Brooklyn College, which he graduated in three years, then gained admission to Columbia Law School. Of the available career choices for smart, ambitious Jewish boys, “law seemed least taxing,” he later said. In 1957, he married June May Horowitz, and they soon had a son, Michael. A second son, Daniel, followed in 1962.

After law school, he was hired as a junior litigator at the august firm of Rosenman and Colin. He befriended a co-worker named Clive Davis, a Brooklyn Jew who’d lost his New York accent at Harvard, and after Davis took a job at CBS Records in the legal department, he persuaded Yetnikoff to join the company too, offering him a raise from $8,000 to $10,000. The biggest artists at CBS were Johnny Mathis and Andy Williams, but the company had also signed an odd folk singer named Bob Dylan, whose music would point the label toward a future guided by younger executives.

Advertisement

“As the Sixties came to an end,” Yetnikoff wrote in “Howling at the Moon,” “the paradigm of power was turned on its head. The artist no longer had to go to the label, hat in hand.” His schmoozing skills served him well, as did his observational prowess, and soon he was traveling the world and indulging in intoxicants and affairs.

Davis, who didn’t see why he should restrict himself to legal briefs, began signing a cavalcade of new-generation artists: Janis Joplin, Santana, Chicago, Simon & Garfunkel. He was promoted to president of Columbia Records, a CBS subsidiary, but in 1973 the company fired him for playing fast and loose with his expense accounts. (Davis denied any improprieties.) Yetnikoff kept rising in the company, and after the retirement of CBS Records President Goddard Lieberson, an elegant Brit who studied classical piano, he ascended to president of CBS Records. He celebrated by visiting his mistress, a married music-biz executive.

In “Howling at the Moon,” Yetnikoff gleefully recounts the decade and a half that followed, which began when he signed the Jacksons, bringing him into a fruitful relationship with Michael Jackson. His success and his indulgences, he came to understand, would feed off one another: “The more [money I made for CBS], the crazier I could afford to be.”

Springsteen’s third album, “Born to Run,” gave CBS a big hit in 1975, and Earth, Wind & Fire had its biggest album, the triple platinum “That’s the Way of the World.” Boston’s debut followed, eventually selling 11 million copies, and then came Meat Loaf’s “Bat Out of Hell,” which tallied 14 million, and Billy Joel’s “The Stranger,” which turned the cult artist into a superstar, selling 10 million units.

Advertisement

Yetnikoff was feeling his oats. He successfully poached James Taylor from Warner Bros., CBS’ Left Coast top-dog competitor, and when Warners replied by making an offer to Paul Simon, Yetnikoff said to the diminutive singer, “For a tiny little squirt, you’ve got a big mouth.” (Simon left and got minor revenge in the movie “One Trick Pony” by basing an evil record executive on Yetnikoff.) Yetnikoff played the good cop as well as the bad cop, creating what he called “a mutual balance of terror between me and my artists.”

Record sales began to nosedive in 1979, but CBS released Jackson’s “Thriller” in late 1982. It outsold every other record that had ever been released and solved CBS’ financial woes for a while, while also triggering the most contentious event of Yetnikoff’s career.

As he told the story, MTV refused to play the “Billie Jean” video because it didn’t fit the rock ‘n’ roll music format. Yetnikoff said he accused MTV of racism and threatened to pull every CBS video from the network if it didn’t support Jackson; MTV executives dismissed this as a self-serving lie. “That’s a typical Walter trick — make himself look important to his artists,” former MTV boss Bob Pittman scoffed in “I Want My MTV.” By the time the network played the “Billie Jean” video, the song was at No. 1 and it goosed MTV’s ratings so much that it was soon adding the 13-minute-long “Thriller” video, and playing it every hour.

The Bangles are awarded gold records from Walter Yetnikoff, kneeling, in 1987. (Lester Cohen / Getty Images)

Advertisement

In 1989, a doctor warned Yetnikoff he’d be dead in three months, and the executive went into rehab for alcoholism and drug addictions. But sobriety didn’t lessen his ego, and after CBS artists began complaining about him, his new Japanese bosses replaced him with his protégé, Tommy Mottola.

Yetnikoff later formed his own label, VelVel Records (“Velvel” was his Yiddish name), where he worked with the Kinks and Pulp. And he published his frank memoir, in which he both boasted and repented for his behavior. “I destroyed my family,” he wrote. “I made the choice and now live with the remorse.”

His first marriage ended in divorce, as did his second, to Cynthia Slamar. He is survived by Lynda Kady Yetnikoff, whom he married in 2007, his sons Michael and Daniel, a sister, Carol Goldstein, and four grandchildren.

Yetnikoff’s rock-star chutzpah earned him plenty of enmity but even more loyalty from artists he helped succeed. At the Grammy Awards in 1984, Jackson, in the midst of winning an unprecedented eight awards for “Thriller,” took the unusual step of calling Yetnikoff to the podium, describing him as “the best record company president in the world.”

Advertisement

“I went back to CBS, and I said, ‘Give me another $2 million for that,’” Yetnikoff said. It’s hard to know if he was joking.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If you look at a painting and smile, it is disconcerting to suddenly realize that the painting is smiling back.

Did one subconsciously induce the other?

This pleasantly perturbing exchange happens more than once in “Sanford Biggers: Codeswitch,” the fine traveling survey from the Bronx Museum of the Arts of paintings from the last decade by the Harlem-based artist, currently at the California African American Museum. Biggers’ skillful interactivity is one engaging leitmotif in the show.

The first big smile — more of a sly grin — is in the first room, painted in thick, textured black almost edge-to-edge across a surface not of canvas but an antique quilt. Like Faith Ringgold, who began fusions of quilting and painting in the 1980s, Biggers cross-references the two.

Advertisement

This hovering smile is not a riff on the famous Surrealist “floating lips” of Man Ray. Instead, it recalls the one that’s a focal point of “A Portrait of the Artist as a Shadow of His Former Self,” the little black-on-black painting of a gap-toothed smile that in 1980 launched Kerry James Marshall onto a productive revival of the long-dormant genre of history painting, which he centered on Black American life.

It’s also part Cheshire cat. The disembodied remnant of a now-you-see-it, now-you-don’t creature of elusive, discombobulating whimsy, the Cheshire grin represents unavoidable worldly madness.

On top of the grin, Biggers spray-painted a grid in light blue, visually stitching together a painted geometric pattern with the pieced squares of the domestic quilt. The contradictory use of a soft, drippy spray technique to render a firm, upright grid pattern suggests the public improvisations of graffiti.

The gesture is simple but determined: The relationship between the image of a grid and the quilt signals an artist in conversation with painting as a material object, one destined for a public rather than private life.

The same light blue paint is applied like spilled clouds of ethereal color in brushy, runny patches in the upper right corner. The baggy, flowing form runs counter to the grid’s brisk geometry. This loose, organic element underscores a quilt’s ordinary functional use as a bodily cover, different from the rectilinear convention of a squared painting meant for hanging on the wall.

Sanford Biggers uses antique quilts, rather than canvas, as the support for his paintings, on view at the California African American Museum. (Christopher Knight / Los Angeles Times)

One bracing aspect of Biggers’ art is its firm refusal of an unproductive hierarchy often attached to quilts. When the bold, brilliant quilts made by Black women in the tiny town of Gee’s Bend, Ala., took the art world by storm 15 years ago, it was often because of misguided claims about their similarity to Modern abstract paintings. Hanging the quilts on the wall, when they’re meant for a rumpled bed or neat folding in a drawer, easily obscures the lively, improvisational experience that yields the compositions’ actual power.

Biggers doesn’t make quilts that are “like paintings.” He makes paintings, and they are constructed from quilts.

Advertisement

The common bedding, almost 6½ feet square, is a size roughly repeated among a majority of the 40 paintings in the show. The scale makes a direct address to a viewer’s physical presence, body to body.

For “Hat & Beard,” Biggers also sewed red fabric rectangles onto the corner diagonally opposite the brushy blue, adding his own cloth pieces to an already pieced coverlet made by an unknown quilter sometime in an unmarked past. (His quilts are antiques, but nothing special.) Soon, you notice other added pieces of quilting — notably a scattering of six-petal geometric flowers that are a variation on a traditional pattern sometimes called a “Dresden bloom.”

One flower is a stark anomaly: Biggers designed an abstraction of a lotus, a single example of which he planted on the smile’s lip.

Advertisement

A lotus is a Buddhist symbol of purity and enlightenment able to emerge from murky waters. This one encompasses both illumination and gloom: Its radiating petals are formed from the notorious 1787 British drawing that shows the cross-section of the hold of a slave ship, filled to capacity with African bodies destined for the Americas.

Runny red paint sliding down through the smile can’t help but suggest blood.

The painting’s title, “Hat & Beard,” resonates with an admired 1964 tribute of that name to Thelonius Monk, recorded by jazz musician Eric Dolphy (born, like Biggers, in L.A.). The painter’s layered rumination is at once sorrowful and joyous.

Biggers also works in other media, including sculpture and projected video. A horizontal platform low to the floor in one gallery is the screen for a projection of fantastic break dancers on a brightly painted stage. Shot from above, the dancers’ thrilling windmills, head spins and hand hops seem otherworldly.

Advertisement

The format is like a hip-hop Buddhist mandala — an abstract landing strip for the earthly arrival of celestial deities.

Still, the show’s focus on quilt paintings is revealing. The original quilters’ race or ethnicity is likely unknown. But recycling found objects has been a hugely important tradition in Black art since the 1960s. Biggers approaches these antique quilts as tangible objects with authentic if anonymous histories, not simply as immaterial pictorial images.

He builds from there. Sometimes the result is a painting that becomes a wall relief.

Sanford Biggers, “Reconstruction,” 2019, mixed media. (RCH Photography)

Advertisement

The stacked, radiating square quilt pieces in “Kubrick’s Rube,” for example, are related to a traditional pineapple quilt pattern. The artist pushes the pattern all the way into three dimensions to become a stepped construction of stacked cubes jutting out from the wall. Think Frank Stella in the sewing room, rather than the industrial workshop.

Installed in a gallery corner, “Kubrick’s Rube” even recruits the adjoining walls as the next logical step in the cubic format — from quilt to painting to room. The architectural environment in which you’re standing gets surreptitiously enlisted in the aesthetic conversation.

“Reconstruction” is a wall relief made from cutting up more than one quilt, then sewing the pieces back together. They’re stretched within a gilt-edge structure whose angular, protruding shape is reminiscent of the folded planes of Japanese origami.

To make it, Biggers cut out linear strips of red and white fabric, plus white stars on a navy-blue field. He then reassembled the pieces, inserting pretty patches of floral motifs into the jagged bunting, to suggest fractured American flags.

Advertisement

The flag-waving design of “Reconstruction” is somewhere between a stylized origami landscape of peaks and valleys merged with ominous weaponry — a stealth bomber, say, or the sharp blades of a ninja star. The art object is sharply reconstructed quilting, with all the conflicted social ramifications of America’s failed 19th century history of Reconstruction.

Throughout the show, there’s a sense of these additive moves being made up as the artist went along, rather than following a predetermined design. They radiate pleasure in the making — a smile that reverberates in manifold ways.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mattel is owning up to its mistakes after Twitter users accused the toymaker of excluding Barbies of Asian descent from its new Tokyo Olympics play set.

In a statement provided Tuesday to the Los Angeles Times, the company clarified that a doll resembling an Olympic skateboarder was intended to “represent the Asian community” — but acknowledged that the collection ultimately failed to meet its goal.

“Fostering a more inclusive world is at the heart of our brand and we strive to reflect that in our Barbie product line,” the statement read. “With our Barbie Olympic Games Tokyo 2020 dolls, we celebrate a range of athletes to inspire kids to find their athlete within.

“However, our intention to represent the Asian community with the Skateboarder doll fell short and we fully receive and recognize the feedback. Moving forward, we will work to find more ways to champion all representation and celebrate the amazing achievements of all Olympic athletes, who are showing us that anything is possible.”

Advertisement

This week, Barbie began trending on social media after images of the brand’s Olympic Games Tokyo 2020 action figures ignited a sharp backlash on Twitter.

Though some were able to deduce that the fair-skinned, brunette skateboarder doll was modeled after a person of Asian descent, many argued that the collection was not nearly inclusive enough — especially when symbolizing a major global event held in Japan.

“Gosh you can’t make this up,” wrote one person. “It’s the TOKYO Olympics. Try for a single asian barbie?!”

“mattel forgetting to make an asian barbie for the TOKYO OLYMPICS collection is insane,” tweeted another.

The Tokyo Olympics concluded Sunday after two weeks of intense competition that saw several athletes of Asian descent medal across a variety of events. Among the champions was Minnesota gymnast Sunisa Lee, who emerged from the games a Hmong American hero after winning gold in the all-around tournament, as well as silver in the team final and bronze on uneven bars.

Before this year’s competition came to a close, Mattel released its Olympic Games Tokyo 2020 Barbie set — featuring five gold medalists in skateboarding, surfing, softball, rock climbing and karate. The dolls and their accessories are available to purchase for $19.99 on the Target website.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Even for a company like Legendary Entertainment, known for taking risky bets on franchises including the recent Godzilla and King Kong movies, making “Dune” is a gamble.

The 1960s Frank Herbert novel, beloved by science fiction fans but notoriously difficult to adapt, has vexed filmmakers as accomplished as Alejandro Jodorowsky and David Lynch.

While the recently released trailer for the new $165-million Denis Villeneuve-directed film dazzled viewers online, box office analysts have questioned its broad commercial appeal. Upping the stakes, Legendary also has a TV series titled “Dune: The Sisterhood” that is planned for HBO Max.

Yet, the success or failure of “Dune,” coming to theaters and HBO Max in October, is not the biggest question looming over Burbank-based Legendary, owned by Chinese conglomerate Dalian Wanda Group.

Advertisement

Newsletter Inside the business of entertainment The Wide Shot brings you news, analysis and insights on everything from streaming wars to production — and what it all means for the future. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Speculation is swirling that Legendary will soon be sold amid a larger gold rush for content. Sellers want to capitalize on the demand for more film and TV content to put on streaming services, which are spending billions of dollars a year to compete for subscribers.

Amazon is buying MGM Studios for $8.45 billion, pending regulatory approval. A24, Brian Grazer and Ron Howard’s Imagine Entertainment and LeBron James’ SpringHill have all been floated at lofty valuations.

Reese Witherspoon’s Hello Sunshine, known for “Big Little Lies,” sold at a value of $900 million to a Blackstone-backed media company run by former Walt Disney Co. executives Kevin Mayer and Tom Staggs. They also looked at Legendary, but talks didn’t go anywhere according to people familiar with the matter.

As one of the few remaining independent producers of movies and television shows, Legendary represents a potentially attractive asset for companies looking to bulk up their offerings.

Bloomberg first reported in April that Legendary has been working with investment bank LionTree LLC to explore options, including a merger with a publicly traded special purpose acquisition company, or SPAC. Financial sources questioned whether going public through a SPAC makes sense for Legendary, given the uncertain fortunes of the movie business.

A deal may not happen at all, people familiar with the matter said.

Company Town Reese Witherspoon’s Hello Sunshine sells in $900-million deal The production company behind ‘Big Little Lies’ will be majority owned by a new media company backed by ex-Disney executives Kevin Mayer and Tom Staggs and private equity giant Blackstone.

Advertisement

Legendary Chief Executive Josh Grode wouldn’t comment on specific talks.

“We get multiple inbound calls on a weekly basis, both from the actual parties and from bankers,” Grode said. “We always listen to what people have to say. My job running the company is to maximize value for my shareholder, which is Wanda, and that’s what I will always look to do.”

Grode advised Wanda on its 2016 purchase of Legendary for $3.5 billion. He had previously worked on financing deals for Marvel and indie studio A24, as well as the formation, financing and eventual sale of Summit Entertainment to Lionsgate.

With demand for content surging, Legendary is in a strong position to compete on its own by supplying movies and TV shows to streaming services fighting for global dominance, Grode said.

Advertisement

“We feel the wind is at our backs,” he said. “With the increasing competition among the streamers to increase mindshare among consumers, I think we’re in a terrific position.”

Founded in 2004 by billionaire investor Thomas Tull and armed with private equity money, Legendary gained a foothold in the industry by investing in films such as “Batman Begins” and the “Hangover” films. It weathered ups and downs with successful releases like “Pacific Rim” and “300" and flops such as “The Great Wall” and “Warcraft,” which were targeted at audiences in China. Tull left the company in 2017.

Today, Legendary is on an upswing. Recent successes include selling “Enola Holmes,” starring Millie Bobby Brown, to Netflix and the release of “Godzilla vs. Kong” by Warner Bros., which has grossed $467 million worldwide and drove signups for HBO Max, where it debuted at the same time as in theaters. Television shows such as “Carnival Row” on Amazon Prime Video have also fueled growth.

Advertisement

The company is expected to turn a profit of $100 million this year, more than doubling its net income from last year, according to people familiar with its finances who were not authorized to comment. It’s the first time the company has been profitable for two straight years since 2011. Legendary is now valued at more than $2 billion, these people said.

While Wanda may not get back what it shelled out for Legendary ($3.5 billion was widely considered overpaying), it still may be a good time to sell, analysts said. Over the last few years, Chinese companies such as Wanda have been exiting U.S.-based businesses amid government clampdowns on foreign investments. This year, Wanda sold its controlling stake in theater chain AMC Entertainment during a retail investor-fueled surge in AMC’s stock price.

“Legendary does have in its library several well-known titles that streaming services would want to have,” said Lindsay Conner, an entertainment industry lawyer at Manatt, Phelps & Phillips. “It does have a solid executive core, and it does have projects in its pipeline, which could jumpstart a buyer’s production pipeline.”

Advertisement

Grode stepped in as CEO in 2018 after trying to recruit respected former Fox film boss Jim Gianopulos, who ended up running Paramount Pictures. Grode cut excess spending and scuttled divisions, including a low-budget reality TV arm and an analytics business. The savings allowed it to more easily start production of movies and shows, even during the COVID-19 pandemic.

In TV, the company is making “Paper Girls,” based on Brian K. Vaughan’s graphic novel, and “Lightyears,” a drama series, for Amazon. Legendary has also expanded in animation, releasing the anime series “Pacific Rim: The Black” on Netflix in March. The company is making additional anime shows based on “Skull Island” and “Tomb Raider.”

Its film division, led by “The Revenant” producer Mary Parent since 2016, diversified its development slate with more modestly budgeted fare, including “Texas Chainsaw Massacre,” which recently wrapped production, and an upcoming reboot of the B-movie classic “Toxic Avenger.” A sequel to “Enola Holmes” begins shooting in the fall.

“I think we’ve done a good job of creating what I hope is an intimate production company on one level, with the perks of a global company on another,” Parent said. “You sleep better at night when you’ve got some tent poles, but at the same time, I don’t think people would think of us making a $12 million film, and that’s exciting.”

Advertisement

The company in March wrapped production on “Fresh,” a dark social thriller based on a spec script that producers Adam McKay and Kevin Messick brought to Parent.

A few years ago, Legendary was one of the last places a filmmaker would take a small-budget project with an edgy concept. McKay, director of best picture nominees “The Big Short” and “Vice,” credited Parent with seeing the dark, socially conscious creative vision of “Fresh,” helmed by first-time feature director Mimi Cave. Not everyone did.

“It’s very rare to find someone who can feel the direction of the breeze in the air, and she’s definitely got that,” he said. “If you get what that movie is about and you’re aware of the world at large, you get it. If you don’t, you’re terrified.”

In another key move, Legendary launched an international television arm in 2020 to take advantage of the growing appetite for local language production. Former HBO and Starz executive Chris Albrecht, who joined the company in 2019, leads its television division.

Advertisement

Grode wanted to make sure the TV and film sides of the business worked closely together when evaluating whether to take on certain potential franchises. When Legendary considers whether to take on a new piece of intellectual property, the company puts it through what Grode calls an “I.P. value sifter,” which is a process for determining whether an idea has the juice to work in both TV and film, no matter which comes first.

Take “Toxic Avenger,” a cult B-movie franchise launched by iconoclast Troma Entertainment in 1984. The company thought it made sense as a film property, given that the original spawned multiple sequels. Legendary also saw potential in an idea to build a show around “Nuke ‘Em High,” the high school based in the fictional town of Tromaville.

“It sifts out a lot of the stuff we should be staying away from,” Grode said of the company’s process. “That’s really one of the structural benefits that we put in place.”

Many entertainment companies say they do this. But Albrecht said the strategy goes beyond corporate happy talk.

Advertisement

“Legendary is the first place I’ve come where film and television are actually integrated from the ground up,” Albrecht said. “Having done this for a long time, I can tell you it’s not only unique, it’s exciting.”

Unlike the major studios, Legendary doesn’t control the distribution of its films and TV shows. Its movies for years were released by Warner Bros., where it had a co-financing and co-producing deal. It later went to Universal Pictures where Legendary invested in blockbusters such as “Jurassic World.” But after a run that included the disappointing Dwayne Johnson action flick “Skyscraper,” Legendary returned to Warner Bros. for a first-look pact.

Not having its own distribution can produce headaches. Legendary was among the creative partners thrown for a loop when WarnerMedia in December abruptly said it would debut its 2021 movies simultaneously in theaters and on HBO Max, including “Godzilla vs. Kong” and “Dune.” Especially upset about the simultaneous release plan was Villeneuve, who blasted the WarnerMedia decision in a Variety op-ed.

WarnerMedia CEO Jason Kilar has publicly acknowledged he should have given creative partners more of a heads-up. WarnerMedia ended up paying more than $200 million to top creators to make good with talent, avoiding a bigger public blowup like when Scarlett Johansson recently sued the Walt Disney Co. over “Black Widow’s” hybrid release in theaters and on Disney+.

Advertisement

Villeneuve, known for ambitious films such as “Arrival” and “Blade Runner 2049,” praised Legendary for supporting him through the ordeal.

“That was the true test of the relationship,” Villeneuve said. “I felt that we were a team and I felt that they were there to support me in that difficult moment of the distribution of the film. I felt the deep respect of Josh and Mary toward me. It just increased my appreciation and it increased my trust in them. They are warriors and they were there to support the movie big time.”

Parent recruited Villeneuve in 2016 after seeing a Variety Q&A with the French Canadian director in which he described “Dune” as his dream project. Parent had only recently joined the company, which had acquired the film rights to the sci-fi classic. After their first meeting, both sides were on board.

Advertisement

Company Town Theaters or HBO Max? Warner Bros. movie plans take shape as Discovery merger looms Warner Bros. angered Hollywood with its decision to put movies in theaters and on streaming service HBO Max simultaneously. It now faces a turning point as the studio’s parent company prepares its film strategy for the streaming age. In the background, a new owner: Discovery.

“He was one of just a handful of filmmakers at the tiptop of the list that you would go make this with,” Parent said.

While “Dune,” starring Timothée Chalamet, was in the works before Grode took over, the property brings out the sci-fi nerd in the attorney. He recalled joking to Villeneuve about the exacting attention to detail the auteur brought to the elaborate global production, which spanned Budapest, Jordan, Norway and Abu Dhabi.

“I said, ‘you actually went into the desert and pulled out the grains of sand if you didn’t like the way they looked,’ that’s how particular he was on this movie,” Grode said. “I’ve seen the movie now multiple times. Cinematically, it’s amazing, if there was ever a movie to be enjoyed on the big screen, this is the movie.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Here’s a story to melt that “Frozen” heart: Jennifer Lee, director of the Disney franchise, has married actor Alfred Molina, and it was ice hunter Kristoff who brought them together.

Molina, 68, and Lee, 49, announced their marriage Monday in photos she posted on Instagram. Present at the ceremony was mutual friend Jonathan Groff, the actor who voiced the animated outdoorsman who becomes Princess Anna’s love interest and ultimately her fiancé. In pictures, Groff appears to have officiated.

“We did. We do,” Lee wrote, captioning a series of photos from the ceremony, including one of herself in a sequined, short-sleeve, tea-length dress.

In another photo, Molina appears to shed tears of joy, holding his hands to his face in one shot from the sunny, garden wedding.

Advertisement

Of a photo showing herself and Groff chatting at a table surrounded by flowers, Lee said, “This beautiful, generous soul is the reason Fred and I met. We owe him the world.”

Molina, known for “Spider-Man 2,” “Frida” and myriad other projects, voiced King Agnarr, father to Anna and Elsa and ruler of Arendelle, in “Frozen II.”

He was previously wed for 34 years to British actress and novelist Jill Gascoine, who died in April 2020 at 83 after announcing in 2013 that she had Alzheimer’s disease. Molina told the Guardian in 2016 that his first marriage was “in a strange place” at that time because Gascoine was in a “very advanced” stage of the disease and had been in a home providing specialized care since 2014.

“It has been tough, but no tougher than what a lot of others go through,” he said at the time. “I went to a support group and to therapy for people in my situation; the stories I heard of sacrifice and hardship made me realize I had nothing to complain about.”

Lee, who is also a prolific screenwriter, is divorced from Robert Monn, with whom she shares a daughter, Agatha.

Lee discussed her relationship with the man she calls “Fred” in a 2019 New York Times article, saying, “I’m very happy in my family life and he’s very caring and very good to my daughter. And so I feel lucky.”

Advertisement

Prior to that, during her first awards season run in 2014, Lee ‘fessed up to her biggest challenge on the way to the Oscars.

“The hardest part about being a female director has had nothing to do with the film production at all,” she wrote in an amusing essay for the Los Angeles Times. “For me, at least, it all comes down to the red carpet.

“I’m a newbie to cameras, fancy dresses, strappy heels and makeup (I normally wear jeans to work and shoes I can kick off easily and leave beneath my chair),” she continued. “Going into all this, I didn’t know my measurements (I preferred to think that I didn’t have any).”

In her wedding pictures, however, Lee looks perfectly comfortable. What a difference a few years — and a new love affair — make.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Spain’s leading group of female filmmakers Tuesday condemned the San Sebastian film festival’s decision to award Johnny Depp its highest honor for acting, saying that it gave the international event a bad name after a British judge ruled last year that allegations of domestic violence against him were “substantially correct”.

Cristina Andreu, president of Spain’s Assn. of Female Filmmakers and Audiovisual Media, said she was “very surprised” by the decision, which was announced Monday, to award Depp the Donostia Award at the festival’s 69th edition next month. The award is the event’s top prize and aims to honor lifetime achievement.

“This speaks very badly of the festival and its leadership, and transmits a terrible message to the public: ‘It doesn’t matter if you are an abuser as long as you are a good actor,’” Andreu told the Associated Press.

The association, which has close links to the San Sebastian festival, was “studying next steps,” she added.

Advertisement

The San Sebastian International Film Festival, held in northern Spain, takes place Sept. 17-25 this year. Depp is expected to receive the award in person Sept. 22, in what will be his third appearance at the event.

A request for comment from Depp’s publicist in Los Angeles has not yet received a response.

Last year, Depp lost a libel case against a British newspaper that accused him of domestic violence, with a judge ruling that the allegations were “substantially correct.” In March, a British court refused Depp permission to appeal the ruling that he assaulted his former wife, Amber Heard, saying his attempt to overturn the decision had “no real prospect of success.”

Depp also is suing Heard for $50 million in Virginia over a Washington Post opinion piece that she wrote about domestic violence. The trial in that case was recently delayed until April 2022.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pack your bags and make sure you’re booked in the Pineapple Suite, because there’s more of “The White Lotus” on the way.

HBO announced Tuesday that a second installment of the series from writer-director Mike White is in the works.

A murder mystery-social satire skewering the 1%, “The White Lotus” follows the entitled guests and beleaguered staff at an exclusive Hawaiian resort over the course of an eventful and at times excruciatingly awkward week.

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Advertisement

The cast includes Connie Britton as a Sheryl Sandberg-esque tech executive, Jennifer Coolidge as a woman messily grieving the death of her mother and Murray Bartlett as the tightly wound manager of the resort.

In Season 2, the show will leave Hawaii and follow “a different group of vacationers as they jet to another White Lotus property and settle in temporarily amongst its inhabitants,” said the network in a press statement.

HBO did not disclose any further details about Season 2 — including where it will be set, when it might begin filming, and whether Coolidge’s character might make a return visit.

As White told The Times, HBO originally ordered “The White Lotus” because they needed a COVID-friendly show that could safely film in a single location. It now appears the network has developed an anthology series that could outlast the ongoing pandemic.

Since it debuted last month, “The White Lotus” has earned generally — though not exclusively — favorable reviews, praised for performances by Coolidge and Bartlett and for its hypnotic score. It is currently the No. 1 series on HBO Max, according to the network.

“The White Lotus” is the latest seemingly limited HBO series to get a second season, following “Big Little Lies.” The hit “Mare of Easttown” also seems likely to return for a second installment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After a heated three-hour finale, several self-eliminations and an arduous 10-week journey, Katie Thurston has found her happily ever after on “The Bachelorette.”

But fans aren’t exactly convinced she’s really happy.

Despite Season 17 contestant Greg Grippo’s status as longtime frontrunner, his shocking departure in Week 9 left two men standing in the race to win Thurston’s heart on the reality dating competition.

While she sent Justin Glaze home, Thurston gave her final rose to Canadian wildlife manager Blake Moynes, who proposed to her during Monday night’s finale.

Advertisement

The latest season of “The Bachelorette” premiered in June, following a tumultuous racial reckoning within the “Bachelor” franchise. With new hosts at the helm and a fresh outlook, Thurston, who was a contestant on Season 25 of “The Bachelor,” stepped into the spotlight.

On Monday’s “After the Final Rose” special, where the new couple make their first public appearance and the two finalists tell all, Thurston said: “I did everything I could. I was literally on my knees begging this man [Greg] to stay. I gave him validation every single week, and he had the nerve to look down on me and say, ‘I deserve more.’”

As “Bachelorette” alums Tayshia Adams and Kaitlyn Bristowe prepare to host Michelle Young’s season of “The Bachelorette,” the “After the Final Rose” special also gave a sneak peek of “Bachelor in Paradise,” featuring rotating guests David Spade, Lil Jon and others.

Thurston and Grippo reunited on “After the Final Rose,” prompting a contentious conversation in which Thurston accused him of “gaslighting” her and using her for exposure and “acting practice.”

From watching Thurston’s confrontation with Grippo, fans were unsure of whether Thurston is as happily engaged as she said she was.

Why is Katie harbouring so much anger when she’s “happily engaged” #bachelorette — nina rorabaugh (@NinaRorabaugh) August 10, 2021

THAT BEING SAID.



Katie is 1000% allowed to be happily engaged and also confront Greg for hurting her. She had to keep her season locked down for months and it's fresh for everyone. I don't agree w/ her behavior tonight. But I definitely understand it. #TheBachelorette — LIV :) (@Liv_Strong93) August 10, 2021

One fan tweeted, “Katie is 1000% allowed to be happily engaged and also confront Greg for hurting her. She had to keep her season locked down for months and it’s fresh for everyone.” Another wrote that they were “really disappointed” in Thurston’s treatment of Grippo.

Really disappointed in how Katie is treating Greg..



Especially when she’s happily engaged #TheBacheloretteFinale — Payton Ruel (@paytonruel) August 10, 2021

Katie is valid to express her anger. She never got to address her side after she had time to process. You can be happily engaged & express other feelings at the same time LOL #TheBachelorette — Moriah Smith (@riahsmith) August 10, 2021

However, Thurston seemed unbothered, posting a photo on Instagram on Monday night to celebrate her new fiancé's birthday with a pic of them kissing.

Moynes, or “honey bear,” as Thurston calls him, posted a photo dedicated to Thurston with the caption, “cheers to last rose & last huju! poppin bottles to new beginnings with @thekatiethurston! So excited to start our best f— life...I love you buggy...”

Advertisement

Now that the lovebirds have gone public with their relationship, the next contestants in the “Bachelor” franchise are vying for their own soulmates. Set in the Mexican town of Sayulita, Season 7 of “Bachelor in Paradise” premieres Aug. 16 at 8 p.m. Pacific on ABC.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two years after purchasing a billboard in a last-ditch effort to capture the attention of mega-producer Tyler Perry, actor Racquel Palmer has finally landed her dream job.

On Monday, the “Night Of” alum sat down with TMZ to discuss her latest project, “All the Queen’s Men,” a BET+ series produced by Tyler Perry Studios and featuring Palmer (formerly known as Racquel Bailey) in a lead role.

The nightclub drama marks a career milestone for Palmer, who previously drew sharp criticism from Perry after buying a billboard in Atlanta in hopes of starring in one of his productions.

This isn’t the first time Palmer has collaborated with Perry. Before securing a key part in “All the Queen’s Men,” Palmer appeared in a handful of episodes of Perry’s “Sistas,” another BET series, which premiered in 2019.

Advertisement

“We’ve never spoke of the billboard,” Palmer, who recently developed an “actor-director” relationship with Perry while filming at his Atlanta production facility, told TMZ. “It’s just like it never happened.”

In 2019, Perry publicly disapproved of Palmer’s billboard stunt on Instagram where he posted a lengthy statement discouraging others from following her example. In giant, all-caps letters, the sign read, “ATTENTION MR. PERRY ... RACQUEL [PALMER] IS YOUR NEXT LEADING LADY,” alongside Palmer’s headshot and contact info.

“This is not the way to get my attention if you’re looking for a role in one of my shows,” Perry wrote at the time. “Please DON’T DO THIS, SAVE YOUR MONEY!! This is the third time that someone has done this. PLEASE STOP! To audition is FREE!! I’m sure you can use that money for a better purpose.

“I love that you want to work with me, and I love that you invest in yourself. But when you do things like this it puts my team on high alert and makes me look at you sideways. I know the message that you want to send is a positive one, but this comes across as the opposite.”

After making his point, the “Madea” franchise mastermind softened the lecture with some words of encouragement for Palmer, whose work he had already noticed by the time he spotted her skyward plea.

“Again, the best way to work for me is to AUDITION and it’s FREE! We post breakdowns all the time for actors. JUST COME AND AUDITION,” he continued.

Advertisement

“And by the way, you were great in THE NIGHT OF! It was my favorite show a couple years ago. I ALREADY SAW YOU!! So just audition and keep your money!! Again, I appreciate your effort, but that’s not the way to work for me. God bless you dreamer. I have no doubt you will make it one day!!”

It appears that day has arrived for Palmer, who stars as Blue, head of security, opposite Eva Marcille’s Marilyn “Madam” DeVille in “All the Queen’s Men,” which centers on a successful strip club manager and her trusted staff navigating the nightlife industry.

“It is hot. It is steamy ... and all about her scandalous dealings in between,” Palmer told TMZ this week. “And [my character picks up] any loose ends. I’m extremely loyal to Madam and anything that she needs to be done. So, I take care of the nasty stuff.”

Advertisement

Though things ended up working out for her, Palmer told TMZ she would not recommend the billboard method to her fellow performers.

“I wanted to be known for my talents, not my tactics,” she said. “I wanted to show my kids that I wasn’t going to give up on my dream. I was at a point where I wanted to. I didn’t want them to see me give up. I was just going for my last ride, so ... even if it didn’t work out, they could say, ‘Mommy went for it.’

“I’m in favor of always having faith in anything that you do,” she added. “As actors, we have to believe in ourselves. You have to believe in this industry. ... faith is all throughout for me.”

“All the Queen’s Men,” created by Christian Keyes, debuts Sept. 9 on BET+.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The prime-time TV grid is on hiatus in print. You can find more TV coverage at latimes.com/whats-on-tv.

SERIES

Money Court Entrepreneur Kevin O’Leary presides over a diverse docket of financial disputes including business partners at odds over a deal gone sour and siblings falling out over a family business venture in this new unscripted TV courtroom series. 7 and 10 p.m. CNBC

Expedition Unknown: Unearthed Josh Gates follows new evidence in the DB Cooper case that includes a deathbed confession and cutting-edge forensics. 7 p.m. Discovery

Big Brother (N) 8 p.m. CBS

Advertisement

America’s Got Talent Seven acts from the previous show move on to the semifinals and viewers have one last chance to vote their favorite act to the next round. With host Terry Crews, Simon Cowell, Sofia Vergara, Heidi Klum and Howie Mandel. 8 p.m. NBC

Riverdale In last March’s midseason finale, Hiram Lodge (Mark Consuelos) unleashed chaos on the town after his mining operation released dangerous criminals from the local prison. Now, Jughead (Cole Sprouse) is missing and someone with a gun may pose a threat to Archie (K.J. Apa) as the dark soap returns with new episodes. Charles Melton and Madelaine Petsch also star. 8 p.m. the CW



Press Your Luck (N) 8 p.m. ABC

MasterChef Roy Choi, an L.A. chef who helped pioneer the food truck revolution, challenges the home cooks to make a street food dish worthy of a Michelin-star restaurant. 8 p.m. Fox

The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills (N) 8 p.m. Bravo

The Challenge (season premiere) 8 p.m. MTV

Advertisement



Love Island (N) 9 p.m. CBS

Family Game Fight! (N) 9 p.m. NBC

In the Dark Murphy’s (Perry Mattfeld) attempt to save Jess (Brooke Markham) lands her in deeper trouble while Gene and Josh (Matt Murray, Theodore Bhat) have a disagreement in this new episode. 9 p.m. the CW

Advertisement

The $100,000 Pyramid Ryan Eggold versus Elizabeth Marvel and Joe Tessitore versus Tiki Barber. 9 p.m. ABC

Tyler Perry’s Sistas (N) 9 p.m. BET

The Bradshaw Bunch Terry Bradshaw leads a play-by-play of the unscripted show’s funniest moments from its first season, ahead of the season premiere. 9 p.m. E!

MTV Cribs (season premiere) (N) 9:30 p.m. MTV

Advertisement

Superstar This new documentary miniseries profiles major celebrities who shaped American culture. Each episode spotlights a different superstar. Tonight’s premiere is devoted to Whitney Houston, who died in 2012. 10 p.m. ABC

The Encore The final performance has arrived and the ladies work hard to ensure they are ready in the season finale. Shamari Fears, Fallon King, Felisha King, Pamela Long and Kiely Williams are featured. 10 p.m. BET

Good Trouble Alice (Sherry Cola) hosts a Lunar New Year celebration at the Coterie in this new episode. Maia Mitchell, Tommy Martinez and Emma Hunton also star. 10 p.m. Freeform

Advertisement

Dave In the season finale, Dave (Dave Burd) releases his debut album. Taylor Misiak, Andrew Santino and GaTa also star. 10 p.m. FXX

Younger After one of Empirical’s authors dies, Charles (Peter Hermann) reconnects with the late writer’s widow (guest star Joanna Cassidy), who also was the real-life inspiration for Charles’ novel. Debi Mazar, Sutton Foster and Hilary Duff also star. 10 p.m. TV Land

SPORTS

Little League Baseball Southwest Regional, Final: Teams TBA, 9 and 11 a.m. ESPN

Advertisement

Baseball Regional coverage, 11 a.m. and 7 p.m. MLB; the Dodgers visit the Philadelphia Phillies, 4 p.m. ESPN and 4 p.m. SportsNetLA; the Toronto Blue Jays visit the Angels, 6:30 p.m. BSW

CONCACAF Champions League Soccer Monterrey versus Cruz Azul, 7 p.m. FS1

TALK SHOWS

CBS This Morning Dermatologist Jeanine Downie. (N) 7 a.m. KCBS

Today Katie Ledecky. Fashion: Zanna Roberts Rassi; Katie Lee Gifford. (N) 7 a.m. KNBC

Advertisement

KTLA Morning News (N) 7 a.m. KTLA

Good Morning America Marlon Wayans; Rebecca Hall; Sebastián Yatra performs. (N) 7 a.m. KABC

Good Day L.A. (N) 7 a.m. KTTV

Live With Kelly and Ryan Sanaa Lathan (“Hit & Run”); guest cohost Ali Wentworth. (N) 9 a.m. KABC

Advertisement

The View Daveed Diggs (“Blindspotting”). 10 a.m. KABC

Amanpour and Company 11 p.m. KCET

The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon Billy Crystal; Katie Ledecky; Jackie Fabulous. (N) 11:34 p.m. KNBC

The Late Show With Stephen Colbert Alan Alda; Gabriel Iglesias. (N) 11:35 p.m. KCBS

Advertisement

Jimmy Kimmel Live! Sarah Silverman; James McAvoy; Taika Waititi; Max performs. (N) 11:35 p.m. KABC

Late Night With Seth Meyers Andy Samberg; Hannah Waddingham; Tom Odell performs. (N) 12:36 a.m. KNBC

The Late Late Show With James Corden Regina Hall; Moby performs. 12:37 a.m. KCBS

Nightline (N) 12:37 a.m. KABC

Advertisement

MOVIES

Everest (2015) 8 a.m. FXX

Two Sisters From Boston (1946) 8:30 a.m. TCM

A Bronx Tale (1993) 9 a.m. AMC

School Ties (1992) 9 a.m. Showtime

Advertisement

Star Trek Beyond (2016) 9:40 a.m. Epix

Scarface (1983) 10:21 a.m. Encore

Clueless (1995) 10:30 a.m. HBO

Boiler Room (2000) 11 a.m. Showtime

Advertisement

The Godfather (1972) 11:30 a.m. AMC

The Avengers (2012) 11:45 a.m. Epix

Once (2006) 1:25 p.m. Cinemax

War for the Planet of the Apes (2017) 1:30 p.m. FXX

Advertisement

Get Him to the Greek (2010) 2:01 p.m. Starz

The Peanut Butter Falcon (2019) 2:10 p.m. Epix

Anchors Aweigh (1945) 2:30 p.m. TCM

Parenthood (1989) 2:45 p.m. Encore

Advertisement

Half Nelson (2006) 2:53 p.m. Cinemax

The Princess and the Frog (2009) 3 p.m. Freeform

The Godfather, Part II (1974) 3:30 p.m. AMC

Kingdom of Heaven (2005) 3:53 p.m. Starz

Advertisement

For Your Eyes Only (1981) 4 p.m. Ovation

Mission: Impossible — Fallout (2018) 4:30 p.m. FXX

Say Anything... (1989) 4:41 p.m. Cinemax

Brave (2012) 5 p.m. Freeform

Advertisement

Bohemian Rhapsody (2018) 5 p.m. FX

Kiss Me Kate (1953) 5 p.m. TCM

Signs (2002) 5:33 p.m. Syfy

Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn) (2020) 6:10 p.m. HBO

Advertisement

Despicable Me 2 (2013) 6:15 p.m. Disney

Beauty and the Beast (2017) 7 p.m. Freeform

Munich (2005) 7 p.m. Showtime

Show Boat (1951) 7 p.m. TCM

Advertisement

Bumblebee (2018) 7:30 p.m. FXX

The Shawshank Redemption (1994) 8 p.m. AMC

Trolls (2016) 8 p.m. Disney

Rudy (1993) 8 p.m. Epix

Advertisement

Furious 7 (2015) 8 and 11 p.m. FX

American Honey (2016) 8 p.m. TMC

I, Tonya (2017) 9:45 p.m. Showtime

The Legend of Bagger Vance (2000) 10 p.m. Epix

Advertisement

Nightcrawler (2014) 11 p.m. AMC

Movies on TV the week of Aug. 8 - 14 in interactive PDF format Movies on TV for the entire week, Aug. 8 - 14 in interactive PDF format for easy downloading and printing



Advertisement

TV Grids for the week of Aug. 8 - 14 in PDF format TV Grids for the entire week of Aug. 8 - 14 as PDF files you can download and print



Television What’s on TV: Television listings Looking for what to watch on TV? Here are the television listings from the Los Angeles Times in printable PDF files.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the Shelf The Republic of False Truths By Alaa Al Aswany

Translated by S.R. Fellowes

Knopf: 416 pages, $29



If you buy books linked on our site, The Times may earn a commission from Bookshop.org, whose fees support independent bookstores.

When Egypt erupted in revolution in 2011, Alaa Al Aswany was among the hundreds of thousands protesting every day in Cairo’s Tahrir Square until President Hosni Mubarak was finally forced from office. Al Aswany stood out among the throngs, and not just because at 53 he was decades older than most.

He was a successful dentist, but he was also an outspoken leader of the pro-democracy movement, writing political columns, holding salons and starting the group Kefaya (“Enough”). Oh, and in his spare time he was among Egypt’s most successful novelists. He had followed up “The Yacoubian Building,” his 2002 bestseller, with “Chicago” in 2007.

The success of the revolution was short-lived: The hard-line Muslim Brotherhood won power in an election only to have it seized by the military, which implemented a new dictatorship under Abdel Fattah Sisi. Al Aswany’s columns and public seminars were soon quashed and he was forced to leave the country for his safety.

Advertisement

“I was probably too hopeful,” Al Aswany says on a video call from his home in Brooklyn while discussing his novel “The Republic of False Truths.” “I made a big mistake. I thought the revolution was representing all Egyptians, but we were the minority and, at some point, people turned against us. This novel is a way to understand what happened.”

“The Republic of False Truths” was published in Lebanon in 2018 — banned in Egypt but widely read as samizdat. Though it is being released here in English only this week, the book was written partly in the U.S. while Al Aswany taught writing at Bard College in New York.

“I wrote easily there because I felt secure,” he says.

Nobelist’s Fiction Brought to Life His Beloved Cairo Naguib Mahfouz, the cafe denizen who became the first Arab author to be awarded the Nobel Prize in literature -- for novels that evoked the scent, color and texture of life in the streets of his native Cairo -- died Wednesday.

The novel is filled with drama both historical and intimate, shifting perspectives among a wide array of characters in the lead-up to the protests and their immediate aftermath. Some are archetypal: an outwardly pious general who oversees torture and murder; a sheikh who twists religious law to justify both government corruption and his procurement of young virgins; passionate young revolutionaries (including the general’s daughter) putting their lives on the line.

But there are also characters as full of surprises as the middle-aged dentist-revolutionary who created them. Nouran is a rising star in TV news who becomes a full-on state propagandist while accumulating wealth and power. Ashraf Wissa is a wealthy stoner constantly at odds with his wife, which prompts him to seduce their beautiful young housekeeper — only to fall in love with her and, newly awakened, to discover a passion for the unfolding revolution.

The book is funny and even sweet in parts, but increasingly violent and grim as women are abused by soldiers, the body count grows — even major characters are not spared — and hopes for a democratic future start to fade in the face of the power-hungry Islamists and an implacable military.

(Knopf)

Advertisement

The gap between the events and the book’s publication is deliberate. Al Aswany waited four years to begin writing so that he could see events more clearly and allow them to spark his imagination. Although “Republic” covers only a handful of days surrounding the protests, it is informed by all that came after.

“I thought if I present what happened in 2011 then people could better understand what has happened since then,” he says.

Al Aswany says he is deeply saddened by Egypt’s last decade, though at peace with himself and his convictions. He wants the novel’s readers here and in the Middle East to understand why the revolutionaries failed. “You have thousands of Egyptians in jail now because they were defending the rights of the people,” he says, “but those people either don’t care or attack the revolutionary youth and say they were traitors.”

Totalitarian regimes gradually twist the souls of even ordinary citizens, he explains. “You learn how to survive by being a hypocrite. When your kid comes to you and says, ‘For homework I will write about the great achievements of our president,’ if you say, ‘No, this president has no achievements, and you should write what I’ve told you,’ he will get in trouble and you will too. But if you tell him to write what he learned in class then you will be a hypocrite. That’s how it begins.”

Advertisement

The novel captures the dizzying rush of hope the protesters felt but also exposes the cynical machinations of the military in shaping public opinion. Older people were overwhelmed by the youthful revolution’s stridency and chaos, Al Aswany says, and were primed to believe propaganda that claimed the election held no promise of true democracy.

“An old man told me, ‘When I grew up the elections were rigged; when I fell in love and got married the elections were rigged; we had kids and the elections were rigged. Give me one single reason why I should join you now, why I should be angry that the elections are rigged.’” In fact, Al Aswany argues, this posture of resignation became a self-fulfilling prophecy.

What the author sees now, however, is hardly a return to the status quo. He describes Mubarak as a tiger who brimmed with confidence and thus didn’t always need to lash out. Sisi, by contrast, is a “wounded tiger,” living in terror of suffering his predecessor’s fate. (In 2019, he stifled a protest by jailing more than 4,000 people in a month, the largest number in years.)

Advertisement

“He has said many times that what happened in 2011 will never happen again, but it sounds as if he was talking to himself,” Al Aswany says. “A wounded tiger is very dangerous. His fear makes him cruel.”

Though the author is not counting on a large-scale revolution anytime soon, he allows himself to hope Sisi’s iron rule is unsustainable. He tells the story of the Mexican dictator Porfirio Díaz, who ruled for 30 years with a philosophy of offering citizens bread and a stick. “He said, ‘The bread is for everybody but anyone who asks for more than what we offer will get the stick,’” Al Aswany says. “The problem in Egypt is that you just see two sticks with no bread. I’m not quite sure this formula will last.”

The timing of the novel’s U.S. publication could not be better, he says: America after Trump, and after Jan. 6, increasingly resembles a republic of false truths.

“This book could be useful here because people must understand that you need to defend the idea of democracy,” Al Aswany says. “People don’t realize how demagogues and fascists can say things that appeal to normal people even if the ideas are very dangerous. If you trust a demagogue or a fascist, even if he’s elected, he could ruin the democracy.”

Advertisement

As Al Aswany well knows, once an autocrat has power, he will destroy the truth, and his country, to maintain it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Near the foothills of Griffith Park, Oscar-winning actor Leonardo DiCaprio is asking $5.75 million for a 95-year-old home he bought from musician Moby three years ago.

It’s not his main house; that’s found on the coast of Malibu, where he paid $23 million for a 1.8-acre estate in 2016. The “Once Upon a Time ... in Hollywood” star bought the stately Los Feliz retreat for a family member in 2018, The Times previously reported.

Moby dramatically renovated the English traditional-style spot during his stay, and it looks about the same as it did then, with custom millwork, groin-vault ceilings and three elaborate fireplaces. Hidden behind gates and towering hedges, the two-story home holds five bedrooms and seven bathrooms across 4,644 square feet.

1 / 14 The living room. (Tyler Hogan) 2 / 14 The front door. (Tyler Hogan) 3 / 14 The fireplace. (Tyler Hogan) 4 / 14 The kitchen. (Tyler Hogan) 5 / 14 The dining room. (Tyler Hogan) 6 / 14 The media room. (Tyler Hogan) 7 / 14 The bedroom. (Tyler Hogan) 8 / 14 The bathroom. (Tyler Hogan) 9 / 14 The gym. (Tyler Hogan) 10 / 14 The steam room. (Tyler Hogan) 11 / 14 The outdoor living room. (Tyler Hogan) 12 / 14 The pool. (Tyler Hogan) 13 / 14 The outdoor dining area. (Tyler Hogan) 14 / 14 The 1920s home. (Tyler Hogan)

Advertisement

White walls and hardwood floors keep things clean in the common spaces, but the house holds a few surprises, including a lofted study and a gym with whitewashed brick. Down below, a secret entrance accesses a guest suite with its own steam room.

Out back, an outdoor living room descends to a leafy space with a swimming pool, spa and patio.

DiCaprio, 46, won an Academy Award for his leading role in the 2015 epic “The Revenant.” Before that, he garnered Oscar consideration for his work in “What’s Eating Gilbert Grape,” “The Aviator,” “Blood Diamond” and “The Wolf of Wall Street.” Next year, the L.A. native is set to star in Martin Scorsese’s latest film, “Killers of the Flower Moon.”

Brett Lawyer of Hilton & Hyland holds the listing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@With audiences more attuned to smart storytelling and deeper meaning, directing episodic television takes more thought and vision than ever. Directors now must be in tune with recurring thematic elements, characters’ POVs and a story’s emotional texture.

This year’s crop of Emmy-nominated directors in the drama category — Julie Anne Robinson (“Bridgerton”), Liz Garbus (“The Handmaid’s Tale”), Benjamin Caron (“The Crown”), Jessica Hobbs (“The Crown”), Steven Canals (“Pose”) and Jon Favreau (“The Mandalorian”) — bring together a mix of showrunners and series regulars who know the intricacies of each show, giving them a leg up in melding subtext to story arcs.

We talk to several of them about how they approached their nominated episodes.

Julie Anne Robinson

“Bridgerton”

(“Diamond of the First Water”)

Advertisement

Phoebe Dynevor as Daphne Bridgerton and Rege-Jean Page as Simon Basset in the debut episode of “Bridgerton.” (Liam Daniel/Netflix)

In directing the debut episode of steamy period drama “Bridgerton,” Robinson wanted the piece to feel relevant and contemporary — including the music — yet remain true to its 1813 setting. “Everything we attempted in the pilot could have been achieved in the period in which the show was set,” Robinson notes.

“For example, Chris Van Dusen [the show’s creator] and I wanted to create a truly magical experience when the hundreds of lights came on in Vauxhall Gardens. This is the first time that these people would have seen lighting on this scale, and it’s based on a true event. [Production designer] Will Hughes-Jones took great pains to create an experience that in many ways would have been accessible to the 1813 audience but still remains magical to our audience today.”

While lighting schemes were designed to feel organic, Robinson, who was a theater director before working in film and television, leaned into telling the emotional stories of the characters first and let the spectacle of each scene be second to that. “I like to rehearse as much as possible with the actors and, together with Chris, we built the shape of the scenes, having in-depth conversations about the characters and scenes before the cameras even start to roll.”

Liz Garbus

“The Handmaid’s Tale”

(“The Wilderness”)

Elisabeth Moss as June in “The Wilderness” episode of “The Handmaid’s Tale.” (Sophie Giraud/HULU)

The Season 4 finale, Garbus notes, was “an extraordinary episode to direct,” one that “centered around thematic questions about control and abandonment” as June (Elisabeth Moss) eyes revenge against her former captor, Fred Waterford (Joseph Fiennes).

Advertisement

“The tone and cinematography both reflected and helped augment those themes,” says Garbus. “I also wanted certain scenes and shots to refer back to earlier turning points in June’s journey — the first salvaging, her failed escape attempt with Hannah and so forth. At the end of the day, it’s about the centrality of June’s point-of-view in exploring those questions.”

For the episode’s more poignant moments, Garbus let the actors dig in and explore new things. “For Joe and Lizzie, this episode was such an important milestone in their relationship. She is such a remarkable actor, capable of the minutest calibrations that, from take to take, we could alter the tone just a hair and have a completely alternate meaning for the scene, and play with the different versions in the edit room. Joe and Lizzie did really deep work on their key scene when June visits Fred in his cell.”

Benjamin Caron

“The Crown”

(“Fairytale”)

Advertisement

Emma Corrin as Princess Diana in the “Fairtytale” episode of season 4 of “The Crown.” (Des Willie/Netflix)

The episode that has Diana (Emma Corrin) moving into Buckingham Palace to become princess is grounded in the “emotional weather of the script,” Caron says.

“As a guiding principle, I like to focus on the anthropological weirdness of these people and this cold, often lonely, institution. I focus on the uncomfortable stuff, the piece of gravel in the shoe, the emotional texture of the story that I can amplify through the visuals,” says the director.

In the scene in which the royal family greets Diana at the palace, Caron used a revolving camera to magnify awkwardness and a sense of events slipping out of control. In other scenes, the framing reflects the palace’s claustrophobic restraint. By using different visual motifs, Caron was able to highlight Diana’s emotional arc through camera movements as a subconscious way to “reflect the emotional tenor of the moment.”

Advertisement

Jessica Hobbs

“The Crown”

(“War”)

Gillian Anderson as Margaret Thatcher in “The Crown.” (Des Willie/Netflix)

To close out Season 4 of “The Crown,” Hobbs went to “War” in an episode in which Margaret Thatcher (Gillian Anderson) is ousted as prime minister and the separation of Princess Diana and Prince Charles (Josh O’Connor) is beyond palpable.

“This was the culmination of the two challenging females that the Queen (Olivia Colman) comes up against — Thatcher and Diana,” says Hobbs. “In the finale, one was going to exit permanently, and the other was preparing to start a personal war.”

Advertisement

The biggest challenge for Hobbs was figuring out how to balance and combine the story threads of Thatcher’s career demise and Diana’s public rise while keeping the queen seesawing between these two mighty female forces. In preparing for the climactic scenes, the director wanted to truthfully reflect the queen’s discomfort in saying goodbye to Thatcher, and for Diana, she wanted to isolate her so viewers realize how she felt in that moment.

“I was very proud and happy about where we finally landed in the edit structure with the marriage of these two quite separate stories intertwining,” Hobbs says.

Steven Canals

“Pose”

(“Series Finale”)

Mj Rodriguez as Blanca, Billy Porter as Pray Tell in the series finale of “Pose.” (Eric Liebowitz/FX)

Advertisement

For “Pose” director Steven Canals, who co-created the series that shines a light on New York’s underground ball culture during the 1980s, there was some hesitancy in helming the two-part series finale. “I love these characters and the show so much I didn’t want to f— it up,” he says.

The 80-page script was shot over 20 days, with Canals attempting a visual grammar that parallels the heartbreaking tone. Shots in expansive hallways represent the characters’ long journey, and a red, black and white color palette is used with intention.

Canals also sought to honor historical events, including the public pouring of ashes of people who’d died of AIDS complications. “That’s based on a real event in Washington, D.C., during the height of the AIDS epidemic where the ashes of individuals who died of AIDS were dumped on the White House lawn,” Canals says.

“I spent a lot of time thinking about those moments and how I wanted to represent them. While our story is fictional, we are lifting from real events. To me, the show has all been about telling the rich history of queer and trans people, but also honoring the lives of all those people who came before us, who made a lot of sacrifices.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When the news leaked last week that “Jeopardy!” executive producer Mike Richards was circling one of the most coveted jobs in television — the venerable quiz show’s host — the reaction was swift and largely disappointed. After a months-long stretch of rotating guest hosts pitched as a kind of open call to replace the late Alex Trebek, many questioned the decision by Sony Pictures Television, which produces the syndicated series, to tap an internal candidate over a number of higher-profile celebrities.

Then the controversy deepened: The attention brought new scrutiny to his being named in three discrimination lawsuits filed by “The Price Is Right” employees between 2008 and 2011 when Richards was an executive producer on the game show. (Richards was dismissed as a defendant in one of the suits; another suit was dismissed altogether; and the third was settled out of court.)

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

“These were allegations made in employment disputes against the show,” Richards responded to the claims in a memo to “Jeopardy!” staff obtained by The Times. “I want you all to know that the way in which my comments and actions have been characterized in these complaints does not reflect the reality of who I am or how we worked together on ‘The Price Is Right.’”

Advertisement

With Wednesday’s news that Richards will in fact be the next host of “Jeopardy!” — alongside “The Big Bang Theory” star Mayim Bialik, who will helm specials and a possible spinoff — Times TV critic Robert Lloyd and TV editor Matt Brennan break down what it could mean for one of TV’s most beloved shows.

Robert Lloyd, TV critic: And so the Great “Jeopardy!” Host Hunt has come to its end, with “Who’s that now?” executive producer Richards stepping into Trebek’s giant shoes to host the daily version and Bialik behind the podium for prime time specials, whenever and how often they come.

I am chiming in from a position of, not ignorance, exactly, but inexperience, having seen their work, and that of sentimental favorite LeVar Burton (“Reading Rainbow,” people) and “Jeopardy!” GOAT Ken Jennings only in clips. Fans and even casual viewers of such a long-running, truly beloved television institution were bound to have both considered opinions and gut reactions about whoever was named — this double-hosting solution does seem designed to soften a blow — regarding this as some sort of self-appointment that completely ignored the audience as well as a missed opportunity to significantly change the face of the show while placing it in the hands of someone lovable who clearly loved it. (I am happy that Bialik is involved.)

Richards’ election feels controversial, not just because of allegations of workplace discrimination at “The Price is Right,” but because, on the face of it, he seems the dullest, most corporate choice possible. Yet actually looking back to media and social media reaction at the time of his stint, reportedly to plug a COVID-shaped hole in the guest-host rotation and before anyone considered him an actual candidate, Richards seems to have done quite well — a “Good Morning, America” segment deemed him an “overnight sensation” — and his ratings were second only to Jennings’. (Full disclosure: I am related by marriage to “Jeopardy!” creator Merv Griffin. I just enjoy mentioning that.)

Matt Brennan, TV editor: I think your assessment is correct, Robert, that the upset around Richards’ selection is as much about the process as it is about his ability to step into the role — and what that process says about how Hollywood has and has not changed after years of conversation about white male privilege in the industry on the one hand, and a serious lack of diversity on the other.

Richards, handsome and trim, affable and plainspoken, is indistinguishable in his charcoal suit from most every other game or quiz show host in the history of the medium, not to mention most news anchors, weathermen and late-night hosts; he is practically a factory-made copy of the messenger Hollywood has imagined Americans want beamed into their homes since pretty much the advent of TV itself — making him at once a safe bet for Sony, which has a lot riding on “Jeopardy!'s” sustained success, and a frustrating choice for the many observers who saw the passing of the baton as a chance to cast a trailblazer like Burton in a programming powerhouse. I’m not sure it reaches the level of Dick Cheney choosing himself as George W. Bush’s running mate, but it does all have a slightly unpleasant taste to it.

Advertisement

Plus, after that news cycle over the lawsuits, all filed by women, Bialik’s selection does have the feel of... a consolation prize? A backup plan? A cop-out? It seems unlikely to quell critics of Richards as host, and presents the potential for Jay Leno/Conan O’Brien-style shenanigans down the line — especially if “Jeopardy!” becomes more of a fixture in prime time, where the “Greatest of All Time” tournament, hosted by Trebek, turned into a rare broadcast sensation in early 2020.

You have written — rather movingly, in my view — about what Trebek brought to the “Jeopardy!” gig, and also about the fraught nature of handing off a TV institution like a game show or a late-night show. Let’s accept that the Richards/Bialik assumption of the throne is happening. What sorts of challenges do they face?

Lloyd: I think there’s a natural impulse to warily regard anyone who comes in to helm a television institution, especially when replacing someone as identified with the program as Trebek was with “Jeopardy!” They felt inextricable, the host and his show, although, clearly, they were not. Alex is gone and “Jeopardy!” goes on; viewers have seemed genuinely excited over and anxious about the question of who would come next.

Advertisement

By the same token, I’m guessing that among the Sony brass there’s a sense not so much of crisis but that the show can take care of itself as long as the host is not actually getting in the way of its well-established rituals and rhythms — in which case Richards does make a kind of sense. He’s not at all a bold choice, but he won’t mess it up. From the little I’ve seen of her hosting — and apart from whatever academic nerd credentials she brings to the only game show that prizes more than superficial knowledge of a range of subjects — Bialik does lead with her personality; her evident joy in being there underscores the fact that “Jeopardy!” is itself a happy place, without the noisy drama of shows like “Who Wants To Be a Millionaire?” You could meditate to the “Final Jeopardy” theme. Was it a consolation prize? Not for Bialik, to whom the show owes nothing, but I’m sure someone in this decision-making process must have considered the optics.

I’m in no rush to judge Richards as a host (and in no place to judge the “Price Is Right” allegations). But to return to my earlier point, and thinking specifically about changes in late-night talk shows — where hosts typically remain in place for years before moving on, happily (David Letterman) or reluctantly (Jay Leno) — viewers habitually underestimate the new guy. And yes, it’s always a guy.

Jimmy Fallon, Trevor Noah, Craig Ferguson: No one really knew what to make of them at first, and the fact is they all needed time to find their way in the job. Eventually, if you stick with a show, you stop thinking about Johnny Carson or Letterman or Jon Stewart or whoever it was you loved and the “Tonight Show” becomes Fallon’s and “The Daily Show” Noah’s. Of course, Richards will not be altering “Jeopardy!” to suit his talents, whatever they prove to be — the show is elegant in its simplicity, rarely changing and even then in the most minor ways. But it is also tough, and, as the recent parade of guest hosts has demonstrated, can accommodate a range of tones. Barring some late-landing bombshell, or unlikely mass defection, Richards will become The Host of “Jeopardy!” — or at any rate A Host of “Jeopardy!” — in the public mind.

Brennan: The length of the host’s usual tenure on a series like this is, I think, why the missed opportunity aspect smarts so acutely: What comes to mind, since you mention it, are the years-long gulfs between late-night pioneers like Joan Rivers, Wanda Sykes and Samantha Bee, or Arsenio Hall and Larry Wilmore. These seats don’t open often, and failing to diversify such roles when they do is one of the reasons for Hollywood’s ongoing representation problems.

Advertisement

Still, as you say, I will be eagerly tuning in to both Richards’ and Bialik’s first appearances at the lectern, largely to see how they do. It’s a very different thing to take on a long-term sinecure at a stalwart series like “Jeopardy!” than it is to fill in on the fly, and I suspect the anticipation and pressure will mean sky-high ratings that neither Sony nor the affiliates that air the show will sniff at. The very point of institutions — democratic, televisual — is that they are meant to outlive their leaders, and “Jeopardy!” is as tightly run an institution as any. I suppose now we’ll just have to wait and see. In the meantime, I’ll be worrying about who’ll take over “Jeopardy!” spoofing from Kenan Thompson if he ever decides to retire from “Saturday Night Live.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Do you like competition? Amazing stunts? Nasty scheming, drunken indiscretions and long-term character development most professional writers couldn’t dream of conjuring?

If you answered “yes,” it might be time to step up to “The Challenge.”

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

MTV’s highest-rated program, the reality competition series, which debuted in 1998 as a crossover between “The Real World” and “Road Rules,” is entering its 37th season; its 500th episode will air during “The Challenge: Spies, Lies and Allies,” premiering Wednesday. The show has shot in 27 countries and this season’s competitors represent 10 nations.

Advertisement

Of all its qualities — imaginative stunts supervised by the coordinator behind “Mad Max: Fury Road” and “The Suicide Squad”; gorgeous people falling in love (or lust); idiotic, inebriated conflicts — one sets “The Challenge” apart from other entries in the genre: the “Boyhood"-like phenomenon of watching people change over time.

‘That’s the scariest human alive’

Who is worthy? Players break it down in one of the daily competitions on MTV’s “The Challenge: Spies, Lies and Allies.” Center, with hammer: fan favorite Kyle Christie. (Archi Vienot / MTV)

Clips of the stunts and fights on “The Challenge” amass millions of views, but the relationship viewers forge with veteran competitors — some have appeared on more than 15 seasons — is what gives it unexpected depth. Some have gone from callow, arrogant twentysomethings to centered parents while still competing at high levels against the new breed. Some, of course, never seem to change. Bless ‘em.

This season brings back a number of old hands. English roué Kyle Christie hasn’t won a title but is the sound-bite gold medalist. Devin Walker-Molaghan, another dependably hilarious interview, is an IT guy trying to prove brains can eventually overcome brawn. The physically and mentally tough Kaycee Clark played tackle football for the San Diego Surge; pot-stirrer Amanda Garcia seems to have embraced her nickname, “Spawn of Satan.”. And Cory Wharton, who in the past gleefully accepted the crown of “Challenge” hookup king, now appears to have settled down with controversial reality star Taylor Selfridge.

Aneesa Ferreira is the show’s elder stateswoman, and while she’s not expected to beat out the younger competition, one of the series showrunners, Emer Harkin, describes Ferreira as among the series’ most thoughtful players.

And as a bisexual woman of color on a popular reality series, Ferreira has herself been both an advocate for and an emblem of more diverse representation on other shows like “The Challenge.” While she’s been open in the past about the pressure that comes with that role, she’s also praised the series for being ahead of the curve. “This show is awesome because it’s a smorgasbord of people of color,” she told Hollywood Life in December. “I’d never seen anything like it. It was full-on representation. We talked about a lot of important things and I was happy to be part of that.”

In 14 previous seasons, Ferreira has seen and done it all — except win a final.

Advertisement

Aneesa Ferreira is one of the most respected presences on “The Challenge”; “Spies, Lies and Allies” marks her 15th season, but she has yet to win a final. (Archi Vienot / MTV)

Then there’s Chris “CT” Tamburello. As Harkin says of perhaps the best-known returning player, “CT is the famous bad boy. We’ve seen him in every bad situation: all of the highs, the lows. To see the renaissance of his character, see him evolve into who he is today and be one of the most-loved reality stars of all time is something.”

Tamburello debuted on MTV’s “The Real World: Paris” (2003) as a charming Boston bruiser with a penchant for disturbing drunken brawls. After joining “The Challenge” in 2004, he cemented that reputation, especially in one Hulk-like rage in which his bloodlust couldn’t be restrained by numerous bulked-up cast mates.

“He was like a big gorilla going after [cast mate] Adam [King] in a onesie. I was like, ‘That’s the scariest human alive,’” says BMX star and musician Lavin, who has hosted 29 seasons of the series and its spinoffs.

Advertisement

Over the years, however, Tamburello has matured before our eyes. His ill-fated love affair with contestant Diem Brown, who was diagnosed with ovarian cancer in her 20s, visibly changed him. Now in his 40s, he’s calmer, funnier. He’s a father who went from Greek god to “dad bod” (his words) yet remains a dangerous competitor, a four-time champion constantly revealing new sides. He has gone from the gamma-irradiated bull in the China shop to the jovial, even cuddly figure castmates call a “teddy bear.”

“The complexity of these characters, it’s real,” says Harkin. “You can’t contrive that for such a long period. You can relate to that, when somebody’s going through a really rough time, when you’re madly in love, when you’re at your lowest low.”

Dad bod no more: Chris “CT” Tamburello, one of “The Challenge’s” most storied competitors, is back — and back in fighting trim — for “The Challenge: Spies, Lies and Allies.” Over the years, he has become known as not just one of the show’s best athletes, but one of its smartest players. (Archi Vienot/MTV)

Advertisement

‘The heaviest story in “Challenge” history’

Episodes of “The Challenge” devote time to interpersonal drama , competitive politicking, daily challenges, and climactic head-to-head eliminations — and at times the focus on playing a “scared game” to dodge elimination, in the series’ parlance, can become tiresome.

But none of those power moves and own goals can match the real-life drama to which the series sometimes bears witness. The winding tale of Tamburello and Brown, captured by MTV in a moving compilation video, is Exhibit A.

“That’s the heaviest story in ‘Challenge’ history,” says Lavin.

Harkin said, “Diem, oh God, it’s very emotional to even talk about it. She’s one of our most beloved cast members.”

In one indelible scene early in her “Challenge” career, Brown, who had recently been through chemotherapy, had to remove her wig for a muddy, water-based race.

Advertisement

“It was just after her treatment, and her hair was just growing back, and she looked so beautiful. And she took it off. And she started to embrace what she was going through,” said Harkin. “What a moment. What a woman. She was just amazing.”

Brown kept private that her cancer had recurred as she began filming her eighth season; she collapsed on set and died a few months later. She was 34.

“Diem spent some of her last weeks with us, very close to her passing,” Harkin said. “She wanted to be with us, doing what she had loved for so long, with the people that she loved the most.”

Advertisement

Although Brown’s story is unique in the series’ annals, Harkin notes that major life changes are commonplace: Challengers have explored their sexual orientation on the show, like Ferreira. Some have gone through marriages and divorces. Recently, Jordan Wiseley, one of the show’s most agile players, and bubbly-but-rugged Tori Deal got engaged on the show, only to break up later.

“We’re really going through life and death with these people,” says Harkin. Thinking of the journeys of the show and the grueling finals, she says, “T.J. and I will stand at the finish line; they’ve accomplished something that’s really remarkable. And you’ll always hear them —" in the panting relief of a finisher — “‘This is the best game in the world.’”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The “daily challenges” on MTV’s “The Challenge” are the bedrock of the show, and in 36 seasons and counting have run from the supine to the ridiculous. They’ve involved teams melting blocks of ice by rubbing players’ bodies back and forth across them or wiping honey off teammates’ scantily clad (and often impressively sculpted) forms. But they’ve also increasingly involved setups bordering on the cinematic, becoming more challenging as competitors’ athleticism has spiked.

Australian Guy Norris, the feature film stunt coordinator whose credits include “Mad Max: Fury Road,” has been working on “The Challenge’s” set pieces for about 15 years — back when the goal was “what normal people could just go out and do.” Things have changed.

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Players have run along narrow beams suspended high above water, performed difficult tasks underwater and tried to throw each other off the top of a moving truck (with giant nets attached). In one competition, challengers hung outside the window of a car while a stunt driver burned rubber, but only on two wheels: The car was being driven with only one side’s wheels on the ground.

Advertisement

“We are basically bringing all the elements of a $200 million- or $300 million-film, the same rigging crew, the same equipment,” says Norris.

“The plane gag that we did in Namibia — we had a full-sized plane suspended by two cranes,” he explains, referring to a challenge in which players solved a puzzle while on a plane being rolled to simulate airborne distress, then leapt out and plunged into water.

“There were some ‘Mad Max'-based ones with the two tankers with people transferring along; we did that in the exact location we did ‘Fury Road.’ We go to the highest buildings they have, like in Panama.”

Emer Harkin, one of the series’ showrunners, recalls that nighttime Panamanian rooftop: “It was like a hundred-story skyscraper; they were descending these long ropes. They had to step off the edge of the building and transfer from rope to rope. If you didn’t make the transfer, you could hear the rope; they were plunging, like, 60 stories. I will live with that noise forever.”

Competitor Josh Martinez (and teammate) are in a for a roof ride in one of the increasingly cinematic stunts on MTV’s “The Challenge: Spies, Lies and Allies.” (Archi Vienot/MTV)

Norris says the series is “constantly adjusting the complexity” of the challenges to meet the competitors’ evolving skill set. That also means challenges with mental components, such as puzzles, so the likes of Faysal “Fessy” Shafaat (a former Division I football player) and Jennifer West (a fitness expert) don’t dominate.

“When [host] TJ [Lavin] and I talk about the ultimate Challenger, we’ll say we want someone to win who has excelled in every single facet of this game: socially; overcoming their fears; physical prowess; endurance; and eating,” Harkin said.” “The mental element of our game is the most critical to us. But not everybody can nail that.”

It’s not just the Challengers on whom the show’s physical requirements take a toll.

Advertisement

Harkin says, “We just finished in Iceland; at the end of ‘Double Agents,’ they were in the eye of a hurricane, a real hurricane. TJ was delivering lines like the windswept weatherman, unable to stand up straight: ‘I’m TJ Lavin!’”

Contestants on “The Challenge: Spies, Lies and Allies” contemplate a suspended platform on which they’ll be competing. (Archi Vienot/MTV)

They had to change “major beats of the final” because of the danger, she says: “We couldn’t put them on the water the way we wanted to. They were meant to ascend to the top of a mountain; they only went halfway and we had to move the set down because we had 100 people on the side of the mountain; they were scaling cliffs.”

Norris says, “There was a really cool one, leaping off a waterfall literally in the middle of the jungle in Panama, and we had to basically hand-carry all the equipment in a couple of miles through the jungle and build an entire scaffold rig. We had a local [guide] to help us bring everything in. So that’s satisfying — you’re on a beautiful location that is absolutely remote, looks fantastic and you’ve got the competitors leaping off into space over this beautiful jungle environment. That’s a nice memory.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Ted Lasso’s” second season launched last month, with new episodes rolling out every Friday during the voting window when television academy members are mulling their final choices and filling out their ballots.

It’s the best Emmy campaign Apple TV+ could possibly ask for.

The show’s new season is just as sunny and endearing as its first and adds a few interesting wrinkles that examine why the relentlessly optimistic title character might be going heavy on the good cheer to avoid some healthy introspection. The supporting ensemble is as good as ever and given even more room to shine. There’s even a Christmas episode loaded with glad tidings ... that’ll be airing in August. Because who doesn’t want to hear Bing Crosby crooning “Mele Kalikimaka” when it’s 1,000 degrees outside?

(That was a rhetorical question. But then, I’m OK with yuletide carols being sung even when chestnuts could be roasting out on the pavement .)

Advertisement

Any momentum HBO Max’s thoughtful and funny “Hacks” might have picked up in the spring has now been smothered by “Ted Lasso’s” warm embrace. But that doesn’t mean “Hacks” won’t be winning a prize or two as you’ll see here as we look at predictions for the 73rd Emmys comedy categories, which will be presented on Sept. 19.

COMEDY SERIES

“black-ish”

“Cobra Kai”

“Emily in Paris”

“The Flight Attendant”

“Hacks”

“The Kominsky Method”

“PEN15"

“Ted Lasso”

Jason Sudeikis in “Ted Lasso,” now streaming on Apple TV+. (Apple TV+)

Should win: “Ted Lasso”

Will win: “Ted Lasso”

It appears the year after the unprecedented “Schitt’s Creek” Emmy sweep, voters will be casting their lot with another heartwarming comedy populated with likable characters and a generous view of humanity. And why not? When you’re confronted with grim news and ignorant displays of selfishness on a daily basis, it’s comforting to escape to a place where characters treat each other with kindness and refuse to indulge their worst impulses. “Ted Lasso” won’t pull off a sweep — its women are both nominated in supporting — but it’s going to win a good many Emmys from its 20 nominations. No complaints here. Unlike a lot of television series labeled as “comedies,” “Ted Lasso” is actually funny. I’ll probably watch its second season again at some point (maybe around the holidays, so that Christmas episode really lands), and I doubt I’ll be the only one.

COMEDY ACTRESS

Aidy Bryant, “Shrill”

Kaley Cuoco, “The Flight Attendant”

Allison Janney, “Mom”

Tracee Ellis Ross, “black-ish”

Jean Smart, “Hacks”

Advertisement

Should win: Smart

Will win: Smart

This category also feels a bit like a callback to 2020 when Catherine O’Hara, at the age of 66, won her first acting Emmy for playing the indestructible Moira Rose on “Schitt’s Creek.” Smart, 69, has three Emmys — two for guesting on “Frasier” and another for a supporting turn on “Samantha Who?” But winning for her star turn on “Hacks” would be the culmination of a late-career renaissance that includes “Fargo,” “Legion” and “Watchmen,” plus, of course, her delightful Emmy-nominated work opposite Kate Winslet on “Mare of Easttown.” “Hacks” offered her a long overdue showcase, and it’ll be wonderful to see her take the stage at the Emmys.

Jean Smart in “Hacks” on HBO. (Jake Giles Netter/HBO)

COMEDY ACTOR

Advertisement

Anthony Anderson, “black-ish”

Michael Douglas, “The Kominsky Method”

William H. Macy, “Shameless”

Jason Sudeikis, “Ted Lasso”

Kenan Thompson, “Kenan”

Should win: Sudeikis

Will win: Sudeikis

Sudeikis nails the nuances of Ted Lasso with such little apparent effort that the work is taken for granted. Every episode is a tonal tightrope walk: Coach Lasso is so gosh darn affable that outsiders think he’s a rube or, worse, a phony, but he doesn’t let that pervading cynicism defeat him. And in this second season, Sudeikis has added a bit more desperation to the character’s desire to please. What is he hiding? Sudeikis’ comic timing remains absolutely perfect, nailing each and every pun and unlikely pop culture reference. (I never thought I’d hear a sitcom riff on Paul Thomas Anderson’s “Magnolia.”) But he has also settled into the dramatic scenes in ways that display continued growth as an actor.

COMEDY SUPPORTING ACTRESS

Advertisement

Aidy Bryant, “Saturday Night Live”

Hannah Einbinder, “Hacks”

Kate McKinnon, “Saturday Night Live”

Rosie Perez, “The Flight Attendant”

Cecily Strong, “Saturday Night Live”

Juno Temple, “Ted Lasso”

Hannah Waddingham, “Ted Lasso”

Should win: Waddingham

Will win: Waddingham

Waddingham had quite the character arc in “Ted Lasso’s” first season, playing Rebecca, the revenge-minded owner who initially hires the soccer novice coach to “burn the team to the ground” and then finds the strength to move past her history and her insecurities and open her heart again. She’s the favorite, but I could see voters wanting to honor both the women of “Hacks” and going with Einbinder, a standup comic who’d never acted much before this show but more than held her own as Smart’s frequent sparring partner.

“The minute you meet [her], you want to be friends with her,” says Temple of Hannah Waddingham (left, pictured with Jason Sudeikis). (Apple TV+)

Advertisement

COMEDY SUPPORTING ACTOR

Carl Clemons-Hopkins, “Hacks”

Brett Goldstein, “Ted Lasso”

Brendan Hunt, “Ted Lasso”

Nick Mohammed, “Ted Lasso”

Paul Reiser, “The Kominsky Method”

Jeremy Swift, “Ted Lasso”

Kenan Thompson, “Saturday Night Live”

Bowen Yang, “Saturday Night Live”

SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE -- “Daniel Craig” Episode 1782 -- Pictured: (l-r) Bowen Yang as Bottle Boy and anchor Colin Jost during Weekend Update on Saturday, March 7, 2020 -- (Photo by: Will Heath/NBC) (Will Heath/NBC)

Should win: Goldstein

Will win: Yang

Advertisement

Four “Ted Lasso” cast members earned nominations. Goldstein, to me, is the clear choice, but maybe that’s just because I have a bad knee and bottle up my emotions. Maybe you root for the underdog and relate to Mohammed’s shy kit man or appreciate Swift, a bootlicker who develops a spine, or you’re a taciturn beardo and claim Hunt as your favorite (though you’d never admit it to anyone). My point: There’s a lot of choices for “Ted Lasso” supporters — too many. That could mean Thompson finally wins his first acting Emmy, a real possibility as voters liked him enough to also nominate him for “Kenan.” Or it might be Yang, the center of many of “SNL’s” most viral moments, including one that decried anti-Asian hate. The veteran Thompson is the headliner, but I’m leaning toward Yang, the cast member making the headlines.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The envelope please ...

The six veteran TV journalists who make up our BuzzMeter panel have picked the winners in 14 Emmy categories. In Round 1, they listed shows and performers they thought would get attention from the academy, as well as others they thought deserved it (collectively, what was getting “buzz”). In Round 2, they guessed what actually would be nominated — with considerable success. They were correct in 76% of their predictions, an impressive number which would have been considerably higher if not for some category hiccups with “Hamilton” and “Small Axe.” In Round 3 of the BuzzMeter: Our fearless panel’s predictions for who and what will actually win the statuettes.

Your 2021 Emmy BuzzMeter panel: Lorraine Ali (The Los Angeles Times), Kristen Baldwin (Entertainment Weekly), Tom O’Neil (Gold Derby), Matt Roush (TV Guide), Sonia Saraiya (Vanity Fair), Glenn Whipp (The Los Angeles Times) (The Los Angeles Times, Kristen Baldwin, Tom O’Neil, Matt Roush, Tanya Saraiya, The Los Angeles Times)

Not only can you check out all the BuzzMeter Emmy musings below; you can vote for your favorites in the polls for each week’s featured category. This week, a category that seemed to be a lock this time last year, then had a new frontrunner a few months later, and has yet another frontrunner now: Lead actress in a drama series.

Advertisement

Emma Corrin’s portrayal of Princess Diana in “The Crown” has the BuzzMeter panel predicting an Emmy crown for her. (Netflix)

Several of our panelists continue to assess the race as a dead heat between Emma Corrin as Princess Diana and the Queen Mum herself, Corrin’s “Crown” costar, Oscar winner Olivia Colman. In the voting, those two came out well ahead of the pack, though they’re close to each other’s total. Panelist Matt Roush said, “The voters will likely favor the unhappy princess, much like in real life.”

On the other hand, both Aduba and Elisabeth Moss have won before — Aduba three times, including last year, Moss twice (once as producer) — and Moss’ arc on “Handmaid’s Tale” is bending more and more extremely.

The panel went an impressive six-for-six in Round 2 when picking the eventual nominees, with Uzo Aduba making the cut though her show, “In Treatment,” missed out on a series nod. As predicted, Mj Rodriguez made history as the first trans performer to score a lead acting nod.

Emma Corrin, “The Crown”

Olivia Colman, “The Crown”

Mj Rodriguez, “Pose”

Uzo Aduba, “In Treatment”

Elisabeth Moss, “The Handmaid’s Tale”

Jurnee Smollett, “Lovecraft Country”

Advertisement

Lorraine Ali

Los Angeles Times



Uzo Aduba (“In Treatment”)

Emma Corrin (“The Crown”)

Olivia Colman (“The Crown”)

Mj Rodriguez (“Pose”)

Jurnee Smollett (“Lovecraft Country”)

Elisabeth Moss (“The Handmaid’s Tale”) Kristen Baldwin

Entertainment Weekly



Emma Corrin (“The Crown”)

Mj Rodriguez (“Pose”)

Olivia Colman (“The Crown”)

Elisabeth Moss (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Uzo Aduba (“In Treatment”)

Jurnee Smollett (“Lovecraft Country”)



“While I’m thrilled for Mj Rodriguez, truly the heart and soul of ‘Pose,’ Emma Corrin was astonishing as Diana. Hey, maybe there’ll be a tie and they can both win!” Tom O’Neil

Gold Derby



Emma Corrin (“The Crown”)

Elisabeth Moss (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Mj Rodriguez (“Pose”)

Olivia Colman (“The Crown”)

Uzo Aduba (“In Treatment”)

Jurnee Smollett (“Lovecraft Country”)

Matt Roush

TV Guide



Emma Corrin (“The Crown”)

Olivia Colman (“The Crown”)

Uzo Aduba (“In Treatment”)

Elisabeth Moss (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Mj Rodriguez (“Pose”)

Jurnee Smollett (“Lovecraft Country”)



“It’s a toss-up between Emma Corrin’s vulnerable Princess Di and Olivia Colman’s majestic restraint as the conflicted Queen. (She’d get my vote.) The voters will likely favor the unhappy princess, much like in real life.” Sonia Saraiya

Vanity Fair



Olivia Colman (“The Crown”)

Mj Rodriguez (“Pose”)

Jurnee Smollett (“Lovecraft Country”)

Elisabeth Moss (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Uzo Aduba (“In Treatment”)

Emma Corrin (“The Crown”)



“The academy loves Uzo.” Glenn Whipp

Los Angeles Times



Emma Corrin (“The Crown”)

Olivia Colman (“The Crown”)

Mj Rodriguez (“Pose”)

Elisabeth Moss (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Uzo Aduba (“In Treatment”)

Jurnee Smollett (“Lovecraft Country”)



“I’d vote for Corrin just for that scene where she roller skated through the palace with her Walkman playing Duran Duran.”

Advertisement

Season 4 of “The Crown” largely concerns the tortured marriage of Prince Charles (Josh O’Connor) and Princess Diana (Emma Corrin). (Netflix)

“The Crown” continues to rule. It was one of only four consensus top picks in Round 2 of the BuzzMeter and is one of the only consensus picks in Round 3. It’s far out in front of its closest competitors, the late-surging “Pose” and the suddenly resurgent “The Handmaid’s Tale.” Perennial contender “The Handmaid’s Tale” scored 21 noms, including an amazing 10 for its actors.

But “The Crown” tied with “The Mandalorian” for most Emmy nominations overall, with 24.

Advertisement

The panel flexed its muscles in this category in Round 2, correctly picking eight of the nine nominees. The only one to miss the cut: HBO’s “In Treatment.” Kudos to the BuzzMetricians for correctly picking two previously un-nominated sci-fi/fantasy shows: The lone season of “Lovecraft Country” and the audacious second season of the superhero deconstruction “The Boys” (“The Mandalorian” was also nominated last year).

“The Crown”

“Pose”

“The Handmaid’s Tale”

“The Mandalorian”

“Lovecraft Country”

“The Boys”

“Bridgerton”

“This Is Us”

Lorraine Ali

Los Angeles Times



“The Crown”

“Pose”

“The Handmaid’s Tale”

“Lovecraft Country”

“The Boys”

“Bridgerton”

“The Mandalorian”

“This Is Us” Kristen Baldwin

Entertainment Weekly



“The Crown”

“Pose”

“Lovecraft Country”

“The Handmaid’s Tale”

“The Boys”

“The Mandalorian”

“Bridgerton”

“This Is Us”



“Gonna give it to ‘The Crown,’ which has been nominated every season but has never won. Season 4 — the sad saga of Charles and Diana, plus Gillian Anderson’s sublime Thatcher wig — is arguably the best and should take home the win.” Tom O’Neil

Gold Derby



“The Crown”

“The Handmaid’s Tale”

“The Mandalorian”

“This Is Us”

“Pose”

“The Boys”

“Bridgerton”

“Lovecraft Country”

Matt Roush

TV Guide



“The Crown”

“Pose”

“The Handmaid’s Tale”

“The Mandalorian”

“Bridgerton”

“The Boys”

“Lovecraft Country”

“This Is Us”



“It’s time for ‘The Crown’ to finally get its Emmy coronation. The one-two punch of Margaret Thatcher and Princess Diana should put this over the top. (Plus: no ‘Succession’ this year.)” Sonia Saraiya

Vanity Fair



“The Crown”

“The Mandalorian”

“Pose”

“The Handmaid’s Tale”

“Lovecraft Country”

“This Is Us”

“The Boys”

“Bridgerton”



“Hard to imagine anything beating ‘The Crown.’” Glenn Whipp

Los Angeles Times



“The Crown”

“Pose”

“The Mandalorian”

“The Handmaid’s Tale”

“The Boys”

“Lovecraft Country”

“Bridgerton”

“This Is Us”



“Eight years after ‘House of Cards’ earned Netflix its first series nom, the streamer will finally take its first win with ‘The Crown.’ ”

Advertisement

“Pose” has left the building, but the BuzzMeter thinks the Television Academy might have a nice going-away present for lead actor Billy Porter (here with fellow nominee Mj Rodriguez) — his second Emmy. (Eric Liebowitz/FX)

Advertisement

Pray Tell has strolled right up and snatched the lead from Prince Charles.

Previous winner Billy Porter has overtaken Josh O’Connor‘s portrayal of a tortured, spineless Prince Charles as the BuzzMeter favorite to win the Emmy, perhaps indicative of “Pose’s” general momentum.

In Round 2, panelist Matt Roush pondered a “Schitt’s Creek”-like sweep. But in Round 3, some Buzzers think the likability of the characters involved could play a part in the academy’s voting. Panelist Glenn Whipp said, “Charles is such a loathsome twit that I think voters will hold it against [O’Connor].”

It’s the academy’s last chance to honor three of the contenders, including Regé-Jean Page for “Bridgerton” and Jonathan Majors for “Lovecraft Country.”

Advertisement

Again the panel went six-for-six in predicting the nominees in Round 2.

Billy Porter, “Pose”

Josh O’Connor, “The Crown”

Matthew Rhys, “Perry Mason”

Regé-Jean Page, “Bridgerton”

Sterling K. Brown, “This Is Us”

Jonathan Majors, “Lovecraft Country”

Lorraine Ali

Los Angeles Times



Billy Porter (“Pose”)

Josh O’Connor (“The Crown”)

Jonathan Majors (“Lovecraft Country”)

Regé-Jean Page (“Bridgerton”)

Matthew Rhys (“Perry Mason”)

Sterling K. Brown (“This Is Us”) Kristen Baldwin

Entertainment Weekly



Josh O’Connor (“The Crown”)

Billy Porter (“Pose”)

Matthew Rhys (“Perry Mason”)

Regé-Jean Page (“Bridgerton”)

Sterling K. Brown (“This Is Us”)

Jonathan Majors (“Lovecraft Country”)



“This category is really a race between Billy Porter, the 2019 winner, and first-time nominee Josh O’Connor. Though Porter has a slight edge — his final turn as Pray Tell was a tragic tour de force — I’d like to manifest a win for O’Connor, who was heartbreaking and infuriating as Prince Charles.” Tom O’Neil

Gold Derby



Billy Porter (“Pose”)

Josh O’Connor (“The Crown”)

Matthew Rhys (“Perry Mason”)

Regé-Jean Page (“Bridgerton”)

Sterling K. Brown (“This Is Us”)

Jonathan Majors (“Lovecraft Country”)

Matt Roush

TV Guide



Billy Porter (“Pose”)

Josh O’Connor (“The Crown”)

Matthew Rhys (“Perry Mason”)

Regé-Jean Page (“Bridgerton”)

Sterling K. Brown (“This Is Us”)

Jonathan Majors (“Lovecraft Country”)



“A tough call. Billy Porter has won before, but his swan song as Pray Tell was so emotionally fierce I give him the edge over Josh O’Connor’s petulant prince.” Sonia Saraiya

Vanity Fair



Billy Porter (“Pose”)

Josh O’Connor (“The Crown”)

Matthew Rhys (“Perry Mason”)

Sterling K. Brown (“This Is Us”)

Jonathan Majors (“Lovecraft Country”)

Regé-Jean Page (“Bridgerton”) Glenn Whipp

Los Angeles Times



Billy Porter (“Pose”)

Josh O’Connor (“The Crown”)

Matthew Rhys (“Perry Mason”)

Regé-Jean Page (“Bridgerton”)

Sterling K. Brown (“This Is Us”)

Jonathan Majors (“Lovecraft Country”)



“O’Connor could win. But Charles is such a loathsome twit that I think voters will hold it against him. All hail Billy Porter!”

Advertisement

Gillian Anderson is an Emmy favorite for her portrayal of former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in a season of “The Crown” that sometimes found her pitted against the queen herself. (Des Willie/Des Willie/Netflix)

Advertisement

In a category populated almost entirely by performers from just two shows, Gillian Anderson stayed on top in Round 3. She has already won the SAG and the Critics’ Choice Award for her turn as Margaret Thatcher. Meryl Streep, of course, won an Oscar as the “Iron Lady.” Might there be an echo here after John Lithgow won the supporting-actor Emmy as Winston Churchill in Season 1 of “The Crown,” then Gary Oldman won the Oscar as Churchill for “Darkest Hour”? Or might Oscar-winning castmate Emerald Fennell (as Camilla Parker-Bowles), Aunjanue Ellis, or any from the “Handmaid’s” army get to say “Stand Down Margaret?”

Interestingly, while some Buzzards wondered aloud if voters’ dislike of Prince Charles as a character might lead to an Emmy disadvantage, panelist Kristen Baldwin said, “Gillian Anderson made me hate Thatcher a little less. That’s acting.”

The Buzzers went a not-bad six-for-eight in Round 2. Their near-miss contender Aunjanue Ellis took the slot the panel had for Ellis’ “Lovecraft Country” castmate, Wunmi Mosaku. And Madeline Brewer of “The Handmaid’s Tale” got the nod instead of the panel’s prediction of Tatiana Maslany (“Perry Mason”). Oh well, Maslany is a previous winner and her consolation prize will be joining the MCU to lead the upcoming Disney+ series, “She-Hulk.”

Ellis was the only non-"Crown” or “Handmaid’s” contenders to make the nominees list. “The Crown” placed three and “The Handmaid’s Tale” dominated with four.

Advertisement

Gillian Anderson, “The Crown”

Helena Bonham Carter, “The Crown”

Ann Dowd, “The Handmaid’s Tale”

Yvonne Strahovski, “The Handmaid’s Tale”

Madeline Brewer, “The Handmaid’s Tale”

Aunjanue Ellis, “Lovecraft Country”

Emerald Fennell, “The Crown”

Samira Wiley, “The Handmaid’s Tale”

Lorraine Ali

Los Angeles Times



Helena Bonham Carter (“The Crown”)

Gillian Anderson (“The Crown”)

Ann Dowd (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Samira Wiley (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Aunjanue Ellis (“Lovecraft Country”)

Madeline Brewer (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Emerald Fennell (“The Crown”)

Yvonne Strahovski (“The Handmaid’s Tale”) Kristen Baldwin

Entertainment Weekly



Gillian Anderson (“The Crown”)

Helena Bonham Carter (“The Crown”)

Ann Dowd (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Yvonne Strahovski (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Madeline Brewer (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Aunjanue Ellis (“Lovecraft Country”)

Samira Wiley (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Emerald Fennell (“The Crown”)



“Gillian Anderson made me hate Thatcher a little less. That’s acting.” Tom O’Neil

Gold Derby



Gillian Anderson (“The Crown”)

Helena Bonham Carter (“The Crown”)

Yvonne Strahovski (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Ann Dowd (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Madeline Brewer (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Samira Wiley (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Emerald Fennell (“The Crown”)

Aunjanue Ellis (“Lovecraft Country”)

Matt Roush

TV Guide



Gillian Anderson (“The Crown”)

Emerald Fennell (“The Crown”)

Wunmi Mosaku (“Lovecraft Country”)

Tatiana Maslany (“Perry Mason”)

Yvonne Strahovski (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Helena Bonham Carter (“The Crown”)

Nicola Coughlan (“Bridgerton”)

Ann Dowd (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)



“Gillian Anderson’s impersonation of Margaret Thatcher is right up there with Meryl Streep’s—and her wobbling on the moors in inappropriate footwear may even have outdone La Streep.” Sonia Saraiya

Vanity Fair



Gillian Anderson (“The Crown”)

Helena Bonham Carter (“The Crown”)

Emerald Fennell (“The Crown”)

Yvonne Strahovski (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Wunmi Mosaku (“Lovecraft Country”)

Ann Dowd (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Tatiana Maslany (“Perry Mason”)

Cynthia Nixon (“Ratched”)



“As I was saying, ‘The Crown’ ...” Glenn Whipp

Los Angeles Times



Gillian Anderson (“The Crown”)

Helena Bonham Carter (“The Crown”)

Emerald Fennell (“The Crown”)

Wunmi Mosaku (“Lovecraft Country”)

Samira Wiley (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Ann Dowd (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Cynthia Nixon (“Ratched”)

Tatiana Maslany (“Perry Mason”)



“If you are on ‘The Crown,’ you are nominated!”

Advertisement

Michael K. Williams’ turn as the complicated father in “Lovecraft Country” might earn the veteran actor his first Emmy. (Eli Joshua Ade/HBO)

Michael Kenneth Williams, who, surprisingly, has yet to win an Emmy, not only holds at No. 1, having been No. 1 for all three rounds of the BuzzMeter, but came within a hair of being a consensus pick for his work in “Lovecraft Country.”

The panel regarded this as an evenly matched and unpredictable race, supporting 13 candidates for the eight slots in Round 2. The panel ended up getting only five right in that round, as “The Handmaid’s Tale” surprisingly dominated with three actor nominees.

Advertisement

Michael Kenneth Williams, “Lovecraft Country”

Tobias Menzies, “The Crown”

John Lithgow, “Perry Mason”

Giancarlo Esposito, “The Mandalorian”

Bradley Whitford, “The Handmaid’s Tale”

Chris Sullivan, “This Is Us”

O-T Fagbenle, “The Handmaid’s Tale”

Max Minghella, “The Handmaid’s Tale”

Lorraine Ali

Los Angeles Times



Michael Kenneth Williams (“Lovecraft Country”)

Bradley Whitford (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Giancarlo Esposito (“Mandalorian”)

John Lithgow (“Perry Mason”)

Tobias Menzies (“The Crown”)

O-T Fagbenle (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Max Minghella (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Chris Sullivan (“This Is Us”) Kristen Baldwin

Entertainment Weekly



Michael Kenneth Williams (“Lovecraft Country”)

Tobias Menzies (“The Crown”)

Giancarlo Esposito (“Mandalorian”)

John Lithgow (“Perry Mason”)

Bradley Whitford (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

O-T Fagbenle (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Chris Sullivan (“This Is Us”)

Max Minghella (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)



“Oh, how I loved Tobias Menzies as the petulant and pompous Prince Phillip! But Michael Kenneth Williams has the momentum, and that’s fine — he’s still owed an Emmy for his turn as Omar on ‘The Wire.’ ” Tom O’Neil

Gold Derby



Michael Kenneth Williams (“Lovecraft Country”)

Tobias Menzies (“The Crown”)

John Lithgow (“Perry Mason”)

Bradley Whitford (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Giancarlo Esposito (“Mandalorian”)

Chris Sullivan (“This Is Us”)

O-T Fagbenle (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Max Minghella (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Matt Roush

TV Guide



Michael Kenneth Williams (“Lovecraft Country”)

Tobias Menzies (“The Crown”)

John Lithgow (“Perry Mason”)

Chris Sullivan (“This Is Us”)

Giancarlo Esposito (“Mandalorian”)

Bradley Whitford (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

O-T Fagbenle (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Max Minghella (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)



“Long overdue a win, Michael Kenneth Williams should finally triumph, representing ‘Lovecraft’s’ mighty cast in the winner’s circle.” Sonia Saraiya

Vanity Fair



Tobias Menzies (“The Crown”)

Michael Kenneth Williams (“Lovecraft Country”)

Giancarlo Esposito (“Mandalorian”)

John Lithgow (“Perry Mason”)

Bradley Whitford (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Max Minghella (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

O-T Fagbenle (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Chris Sullivan (“This Is Us”)



“Could be an opportunity for Michael Kenneth Williams.” Glenn Whipp

Los Angeles Times



Michael Kenneth Williams (“Lovecraft Country”)

Tobias Menzies (“The Crown”)

John Lithgow (“Perry Mason”)

Giancarlo Esposito (“Mandalorian”)

Bradley Whitford (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Chris Sullivan (“This Is Us”)

O-T Fagbenle (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)

Max Minghella (“The Handmaid’s Tale”)



“Michael Kenneth Williams is a national treasure and should have won an Emmy for ‘The Wire.’ Better late than never.”

Advertisement

Emmy nominees Nick Mohammed, Jason Sudeikis and Brendan Hunt in a scene from the heavily favored “Ted Lasso.” (Pop TV)

The gentle “Ted Lasso” received 20 nominations. But while it has been No. 1 for every round of the BuzzMeter, it is somewhat surprisingly no longer a consensus pick.

Advertisement

The Jean Smart comedy “Hacks” received several top noms (including for three of its actors) and is solidly in second place in Round 3. Glenn Whipp said, “‘Hacks’ made this a little more interesting than it would have been a few months ago. But ‘Ted Lasso’ still wins.”

The mixed-genre hit “The Flight Attendant” has fallen far behind those top two. Some quirky shows made the list (“PEN15,” “Dickinson”, “Search Party”), with “black-ish” the lone representative of the broadcast networks. The clever “Karate Kid” sequel series “Cobra Kai” became the first show originating on YouTube Red/YouTube Premium to get a series nod, to the delight of several panelists.

Only “Emily in Paris” surprised the panel in Round 2 (seven-for-eight predicting nominees), as the academy didn’t acknowledge the existence of the wickedly fun but late-dropping “Girls5Eva.”

“Ted Lasso”

“Hacks”

“The Flight Attendant”

“PEN15"

“Cobra Kai”

“The Kominsky Method”

“black-ish”

“Emily in Paris”

Advertisement

Lorraine Ali

Los Angeles Times



“Hacks”

“Ted Lasso”

“The Flight Attendant”

“PEN15"

“Cobra Kai”

“black-ish”

“The Kominsky Method”

“Emily in Paris” Kristen Baldwin

Entertainment Weekly



“Ted Lasso”

“Hacks”

“The Flight Attendant”

“Cobra Kai”

“The Kominsky Method”

“PEN15"

“black-ish”

“Emily in Paris”



“Hooray for ‘Cobra Kai’! Still, ‘Lasso’ is basically a lock.” Tom O’Neil

Gold Derby



“Ted Lasso”

“Hacks”

“The Flight Attendant”

“Cobra Kai”

“PEN15"

“The Kominsky Method”

“black-ish”

“Emily in Paris”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dead & Company have become the highest-profile musical act to announce new vaccine protocols for concertgoers in advance of its upcoming tour dates.

When former Grateful Dead members Bob Weir, Mickey Hart and Bill Kreutzmann team with guitarist John Mayer and others on the road next week, they’ll require that fans consider their fellow Deadheads’ well-being before joining them.

“We care so much about everyone involved in making this tour happen & all of you attending, so we will be requiring proof of full COVID-19 vaccination or negative test result within 48 hrs of your event to attend select dates of the tour,” the band announced on social media on Wednesday.

Additionally, all Deadheads wanting to flop around in the pit near the stage must be fully vaccinated.

Advertisement

With the announcement, Dead & Company joins a growing list of artists, including Americana singer-songwriter Jason Isbell, super-producer Jack Antonoff’s band Bleachers and Southern rockers Widespread Panic, who are requiring proof of vaccine or a negative test result before entering their concert. The move comes as the Delta variant has upended what was supposed to be a busy summer and fall for musicians eager to reconnect with audiences.

In recent weeks, Stevie Nicks, Limp Bizkit, James Taylor and Bonnie Raitt have all postponed 2021 tour dates. “While I’m vaccinated,” wrote Nicks in a statement, “at my age, I am still being extremely cautious and for that reason have decided to skip the 5 performances I had planned for 2021.” Last week, country superstar Garth Brooks said that he was going to be reassessing whether or not to continue his current tour.

Live Nation, the world’s largest concert promoter, announced in early August that it would allow artists to make the final determination on vaccine protocols in states where no law is in place to address the issue. “We believe this is a great model, and we have already implemented this successfully at many major shows including Lollapalooza,” Live Nation chief executive Michael Rapino wrote in a note to his staff. “We know people are eager to return to live events and we hope these measures encourage even more people to get vaccinated.”

This week, the annual Bonnaroo festival, which takes place Sept. 2-5 in Manchester, Tenn., announced that it will require proof of vaccine or a negative test result from within 48 hours in order to attend. The New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival, canceled in 2020, was supposed to begin on Oct. 8, but with the Delta variant tearing through Louisiana, it was postponed until 2022.

Dead & Company will open its tour on Monday in Raleigh, N.C., and conclude two-and-a-half months later at the Hollywood Bowl, where they’ll play three nights, Oct. 29-31.

Because vaccine requirements vary by state, the band noted that protocols for tour dates in Texas, Florida, Virginia and Pennsylvania “will be announced shortly.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Patricia Hitchcock O’Connell, the only child of famed filmmaker Alfred Hitchcock and an actor herself who made a memorable appearance in her father’s “Strangers on a Train” and championed his work in the decades following his death, has died at age 93.

She died Monday of natural causes in her sleep at home in Thousand Oaks, her daughter Tere Carrubba said Wednesday.

“She was always really good at protecting the legacy of my grandparents and making sure they were always remembered,” said Carrubba, one of her three daughters. “It’s sort of an end of an era now that they’re all gone.”

Known to many as Pat Hitchcock, she was born in London to Alfred Hitchcock and Alma Reville Hitchcock in 1928 and spent much of her life in and around the family business.

Advertisement

During her childhood, Alfred Hitchcock directed such classics as “The 39 Steps,” “The Lady Vanishes” and “Shadow of a Doubt,” moved to California after signing a multipicture deal with producer David O. Selznick and rose to global fame as the “Master of Suspense.”

Alma was his indispensable advisor, a former film editor through whom he vetted story ideas and screenplay treatments.

“My mother had much more to do with the films than she has ever been given credit for — he depended on her for everything, absolutely everything,” Pat Hitchcock told the Guardian in 1999.

She would visit her father’s movie sets and by her teens was acting in school plays and appearing on stage, including the Broadway productions “Solitaire” and “Violet.” She was admitted to London’s Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in 1947 and was about to graduate when her father contacted her and said he had a role for her in his new film, “Strangers on a Train,” adapted from the Patricia Highsmith novel.

The 1951 production starred Robert Walker and Farley Granger as strangers who meet on a train and agree — at least Walker thinks they agree — to a double murder: Walker will kill Granger’s wife, and Granger will kill Walker’s father. Pat Hitchcock plays the sister of a woman with whom Granger is in love.

Walker duly carries out his side, strangling Granger’s wife at an amusement park, and pressures Granger to honor the bargain. He turns up at a party attended by Granger and chats up an elderly woman about the best way to kill someone — strangulation. He has placed his hands on her neck when he looks up and sees Pat Hitchcock’s character staring back in horror. Unnerved by her resemblance to his murder victim — they wear similar glasses — he nearly chokes the guest to death.

Hitchcock’s character later sobs that she felt as if she was the one he might have killed, leading to suspicions about the murder of Granger’s wife.

“I think he was using her as the audience,” Pat Hitchcock said of her character in an interview for a 1997 BBC special on her father. “I think he was having her go through what the audience went through.”

Advertisement

A lively, witty actor whose TV credits included the sitcoms “My Little Margie” and “The Life of Riley” and several roles in the series “Alfred Hitchcock Presents,” Pat Hitchcock also had parts in her father’s “Stage Fright” and his horror masterpiece “Psycho” — in which she plays an office colleague of Janet Leigh‘s character, who later in the film is famously stabbed to death in a motel shower.

Later, she worked for Alfred Hitchcock’s Mystery Magazine, appeared at numerous film festivals and in Hitchcock documentaries, and contributed photographs and a foreword to “Footsteps in the Fog: Alfred Hitchcock’s San Francisco,” by Jeff Kraft and Aaron Leventhal. She also co-authored a book on her mother, who died in 1982: “Alma Hitchcock: The Woman Behind the Man.” Alfred Hitchcock died in 1980.

Pat Hitchcock was married for more than 40 years to Joseph O’Connell, who died in 1994. They had three children.

She would insist that her childhood was happy and that her parents were normal, but she wasn’t spared her father’s distant, controlling nature and his skewed and sometimes cruel sense of humor. As a girl, she often ate alone, was sent to boarding school and deprived of a college education when her father decided she should instead return to England. She would express regret that he didn’t cast her in more of his films.

Advertisement

“I certainly wish he’d believed in nepotism,” she liked to say.

At home, the director once painted a clown face on her while she was sleeping, anticipating her shock when she awoke the next morning and first looked in a mirror. During the filming of “Strangers on a Train,” knowing her fear of heights, he bet her $100 that she wouldn’t ride a Ferris wheel on the set. She disputed a story from Donald Spoto’s 1983 biography “The Dark Side of Genius” that he left her stranded and terrified for an hour.

“What happened is they turned off the lights and pretended they were going away — for all of what I’d say were 35 seconds — and put the lights on and we came down,” she told the Chicago Tribune in 1993. “The only ‘sadistic’ part is that I never got the hundred dollars.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@America’s sweetheart keeps on giving. Dolly Parton has written thousands of songs and donated $1 million to help develop the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine — but she isn’t done. On March 7, 2022, the country-music icon will publish her first novel, “Run, Rose, Run,” co-written with bestselling author James Patterson.

Parton will simultaneously release a new 12-song original album of the same name, meant to accompany the book. Set in Nashville, “Run, Rose, Run” tells the story of a young woman who journeys to Music City to pursue her country music-making dreams, drawing inspiration for her songwriting from a brutal secret in her past — a secret that won’t stay hidden.

In an announcement today, Little, Brown, the division of Hachette Book Group that will publish the novel, promised “Run, Rose, Run” would combine “James Patterson’s brilliant character-building and dramatic skills with Dolly Parton’s unparalleled insight into the music world’s star-making machinery.”

Advertisement

“It’s been an honor — and a hell of a lot of fun — to work with the inimitable Dolly Parton, whom I’ve long admired for her music, her storytelling, and her enormous generosity,” Patterson said in the Little, Brown release. “The mind-blowing thing about this project is that reading the novel is enhanced by listening to the album and vice versa. It’s a really unique experience that I know readers (and listeners) will love.”

The album, produced by Richard Dennison and Tom Rutledge, will be released by Parton’s Butterfly Records in partnership with another record label to be named later.

(Little, Brown and Company)

Though Patterson has frequently collaborated with other writers, ranging from regular co-author Maxine Paetro to two-time partner and former President Bill Clinton, none of them have sold more than 100 million albums.

Parton’s last book collaboration, with Robert K. Oermann, produced the music-focused memoir, “Dolly Parton, Songteller: My Life in Lyrics,” a look behind 175 of her songs.

“I cannot be more excited about the release of my very first novel,” said Parton in the statement, adding, “I hope you enjoy the book and the songs as much as we’ve enjoyed putting it all together!”

“Run, Rose, Run” will be published simultaneously in hardcover, ebook and audiobook.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Three years after going public with her own multiple sclerosis journey, Selma Blair had some kind words for fellow actor Christina Applegate, who recently announced she had been diagnosed with the same condition.

On Tuesday, Blair offered a message of love and support to Applegate, who starred opposite her and Cameron Diaz in the 2002 romantic comedy “The Sweetest Thing.” Blair and Applegate, both 49, each has a child around 10 years old.

“Loving you always,” Blair tweeted in response to Applegate’s announcement. “Always here. As are our kids. Beating us up with love.”

“Love you sister,” Applegate replied. “Our kids are so weird.”

Advertisement

Love you sister. Our kids are so weird — christina applegate (@1capplegate) August 11, 2021

On Monday, Applegate revealed on social media that she learned of her MS diagnosis “a few months ago,” calling the experience “a strange journey” and requesting privacy as she focuses on her health.

MS is a condition that affects the central nervous system and can alter one’s physical and mental abilities.

“I have been so supported by people that I know who also have this condition,” the Emmy winner tweeted.

“It’s been a tough road. But as we all know, the road keeps going. Unless some a— blocks it. ... As one of my friends that has MS said ‘we wake up and take the indicated action’. And that’s what I do.”

As one of my friends that has MS said “ we wake up and take the indicated action”. And that’s what I do. So now I ask for privacy. As I go through this thing. Thank you xo — christina applegate (@1capplegate) August 10, 2021

In 2018, Blair released a similar statement detailing some of the challenges she has faced as a result of MS: “I am disabled. I fall sometimes. I drop things. My memory is foggy. And my left side is asking for directions from a broken GPS.”

“But we are doing it,” said the “Cruel Intentions” star, who has since used her platform to share her progress and educate others about MS. “I laugh and I don’t know exactly what I will do precisely but I will do my best.”

Among the many others who sent well wishes to Applegate this week are actors Rosario Dawson, Jamie Lee Curtis, Poorna Jagannathan, Tara Strong and Natalie Morales, who stars alongside Applegate and Linda Cardellini in the hit Netflix comedy “Dead to Me.”

Advertisement

“Thank you, Christina, for your courage in opening up about living with MS,” read a tweet from the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.

“We all appreciate the awareness that you are bringing to the disease. Please know that we at the MS Society are here to help in whatever way that we can.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Looks like it’s Double Jeopardy! time for Mike Richards and Mayim Bialik, who have been named as host of the syndicated “Jeopardy!” program and host of its prime-time shows and spinoffs, respectively.

Amid online controversy about Richards taking the role, Sony Pictures Television, which distributes the top-rated quiz show, announced the news Wednesday.

Richards, who was an executive producer for years on “The Price Is Right” before joining the “Jeopardy!” team in 2018, will take over the position that opened in November after legendary host Alex Trebek died from pancreatic cancer.

Richards, 46, has also been a producer on shows including “Wheel of Fortune” and “Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,” and will continue as a “Jeopardy!” producer.

Advertisement

When speculation surfaced last week about Richards getting the job, his past workplace behavior came under scrutiny, including three lawsuits alleging discrimination and gender-based harassment when he was at “The Price Is Right.”

Richards addressed the old suits, which were filed by former “Price Is Right” models, in a recent memo to “Jeopardy!” staff.

“These were allegations made in employment disputes against the show,” he said in the memo, which was obtained by The Times. “I want you all to know that the way in which my comments and actions have been characterized in these complaints does not reflect the reality of who I am or how we worked together on ‘The Price Is Right.’”

Sony Pictures Television made the final casting call after it “pored over” footage from every episode, reviewed research from multiple panels and focus groups, and got input from viewers and corporate partners, said Ravi Ahuja, chairman of Global Television Studios and Corporate Development for Sony Pictures, in a statement.

Ahuja said they knew early on they wanted to split the hosting duties, and “it became very clear that Mike and Mayim were the undeniable choices. They were both at the top of our research and analysis.”

Bialik, an actor with a neuroscience PhD, will lead efforts including the all-new “Jeopardy! National College Championship,” set to air in 2022 on ABC and featuring 15 colleges from across the country going head-to-head for two weeks of competition.

First known as a child star with roles in the movie “Beaches” and the TV show “Blossom,” the 45-year-old has more recently been seen in CBS’ long-running hit sitcom “The Big Bang Theory” and Fox’s “Call Me Kat,” which she executive produces.

Advertisement

“We took this decision incredibly seriously,” Ahuja said in Wednesday’s statement. “A tremendous amount of work and deliberation has gone into it, perhaps more than has ever gone into the selection of hosts for a show — deservedly so because it’s ‘Jeopardy!’ and we are following the incomparable Alex Trebek.”

“Never in my wildest dreams could I have imagined being chosen to step into a role of this magnitude,” Richards said in a statement. He has previously hosted a handful of shows, including “Beauty and the Geek” for the WB and the CW and “The Pyramid” for the Game Show Network.

Bialik was similarly thrilled.

Advertisement

“What started out with my 15-year-old repeating a rumor from Instagram that I should guest host the show has turned into one of the most exciting and surreal opportunities of my life!” she said in a statement, noting she’s “just so ready to get started” and excited to work with Richards.

Meanwhile, former “Jeopardy!” winner James Holzhauer joked on social media Wednesday, “Also new for next season: contestants can submit two Final Jeopardy responses in case the first one causes public backlash.”

Others on Twitter lamented that fan-backed guest host LeVar Burton had been passed over, while some criticized Richards’ lawsuit history and Bialik’s past statements that she delayed vaccinations for her kids. (She has since said she’d be getting the COVID-19 jab and a flu vaccine, and was never anti-vax.)

Advertisement

Before Richards and Bialik were locked in, “Jeopardy!” had featured a rotation of celebrity guest hosts, including Burton, Anderson Cooper, Katie Couric, Robin Roberts, Joe Buck, Dr. Sanjay Gupta and NFL star Aaron Rodgers, among others.

And Trebek clearly was not forgotten amid Wednesday’s announcement.

“Alex believed the game itself and the contestants are the most important aspects of the show,” Richards said. “I was fortunate to witness his professionalism, intensity and kindness up close and that will serve as the ultimate blueprint as we continue to produce the show we love.”

Advertisement

The 38th season of “Jeopardy!” will begin production this month, with new episodes coming Sept. 13.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“CBS This Morning” is shaking up its co-host lineup with the hiring of NFL analyst Nate Burleson.

CBS News announced Wednesday that Burleson is joining the morning show’s table alongside current co-hosts Gayle King and Tony Dokoupil starting next month when the program moves to its new studio in New York’s Times Square.

Burleson, a former NFL wide receiver, will replace CBS News veteran Anthony Mason, who becomes a culture correspondent reporting across the network’s programs and digital platforms. Mason, who joined the network in 1986, is known for his coverage of music and art, and will continue to appear on “CBS This Morning” in his new role.

The moves are the first major on-air personnel decisions by Neeraj Khemlani, who was named co-head of the division in May, succeeding Susan Zirinsky.

Advertisement

Burleson, 39, who played for the Minnesota Vikings, Seattle Seahawks and Detroit Lions, is a studio analyst on “NFL Today,” the CBS Sports pregame show during football season. He is also co-host on the daily NFL Network program “Good Morning Football,” and a New York correspondent for the syndicated entertainment news program “Extra.”

Burleson will leave “Extra,” but will remain in his role at CBS Sports and become a contributor at the NFL Network.

Nate Burleson, from left, Bill Cowher and Boomer Esiason attend the CBS Network 2018 Upfront in 2018

(Andy Kropa/Andy Kropa/Invision/AP)

Burleson first gained the attention of CBS News in June, when “CBS This Morning” used several guest hosts while Dokoupil was on paternity leave. His high-energy performances impressed the program’s executive producer, Shawna Thomas, leading to discussions about him joining on a full-time basis.

“CBS This Morning” co-hosts Gayle King, Anthony Mason and Tony Dokoupil interview Patricia Heaton (far left) in 2019. (CBS via Getty Images)

Burleson also earned positive reviews for his work as color analyst for the Nickelodeon telecast of an NFL Wild Card game between the New Orleans Saints and the Chicago Bears in January.

Burleson will be the second retired NFL player to become a network morning show co-host. Former New York Giants star Michael Strahan has been a part of ABC’s “Good Morning America” since 2014. Strahan left the syndicated “Live with Kelly and Michael” to join “GMA” full time in 2016.

Advertisement

While CBS has tended to stick to morning co-hosts with news backgrounds, Burleson will not be the first non-journalist in the role. Actress Mariette Hartley briefly served as a morning co-host for the network in 1987. Susan Molinari, a former member of Congress with no TV experience, got the job in 1997 and lasted nine months.

“CBS This Morning” became the network’s most successful attempt at morning television when it gained viewers in the first five years after its 2012 launch. But it has seen its ratings slide since Charlie Rose, one of its founding anchors, was fired from the program in Nov. 2017 over allegations of sexual harassment from women who worked on his eponymous talk show that aired for many years on PBS stations and Bloomberg Television.

There has also been an overall decline in traditional TV viewing, which has led to audience erosion for “Good Morning America” and NBC’s “Today” as well as “CBS This Morning.”

While it trails “GMA” and “Today” in the ratings, “CBS This Morning” has been getting accolades for its journalism, most recently on its exclusive interview with Brittany Commisso, the executive assistant for New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo.

Advertisement

Commisso alleged that Cuomo groped her while they worked together in the governor’s mansion. Cuomo, who faces allegations from 11 current and former state employees, announced Tuesday that he will step down.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@MTV is closing out hot girl summer 2021 with plenty of Video Music Award nominations for rap sensation Megan Thee Stallion and pop musician Justin Bieber.

Bieber leads the nominations with seven, while Megan Thee Stallion racked up six, according to MTV’s announcement Wednesday morning.

Bieber received nominations for video of the year (“Popstar”); artist of the year; pop song (“Peaches”); collaboration (“Peaches”); direction (“Popstar”); cinematography (“Holy”); and editing (“Peaches”).

Megan Thee Stallion scored nods for video of the year (“WAP”); artist of the year; song of the year (“WAP”); collaboration (“WAP”); and two for hip-hop song (“WAP” and the remix of “On Me”).

Advertisement

Other top contenders include Billie Eilish, BTS, Doja Cat, Drake, Giveon, Lil Nas X and 2021 breakout star Olivia Rodrigo — all of whom landed five nods apiece.

In the running for the coveted video of the year prize are DJ Khaled and Drake (“Popstar,” starring Bieber); Doja Cat and SZA (“Kiss Me More”); Ed Sheeran (“Bad Habits”); Lil Nas X (“Montero”); The Weeknd (“Save Your Tears”); and Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion for their sex-positive summer anthem, “WAP.”

Among the nominees for artist of the year are Ariana Grande, Doja Cat, Taylor Swift and Rodrigo — who recently catapulted onto the music scene with her viral hit single “Drivers License,” which became the first song of 2021 to surpass a billion streams on Spotify as of this week, according to Billboard.

A first-time VMA nominee, singer-songwriter Rodrigo is also up for song of the year (“Drivers License”), Push performance of the year (“Drivers License”), pop song (“Good 4 U”) and best new artist.

Ahead of his highly anticipated debut album, rapper and singer Lil Nas X earned all five of his nominations for “Montero (Call Me by Your Name”), the sexy smash that nearly broke the internet in March upon its buzzy release.

The 2021 VMAs will take place Sept. 12 at New York City’s Barclays Center and will be broadcast on MTV at 8 p.m. Eastern and Pacific.

Advertisement

Olivia Rodrigo scored five VMA nominations Wednesday. (MTV Push)

Here are the nominees in the top categories. (To view the full list of nominations and vote for your favorite artists, go to the MTV website.)

VIDEO OF THE YEAR



Cardi B ft. Megan Thee Stallion – “WAP”

DJ Khaled ft. Drake – “Popstar” (starring Justin Bieber)

Doja Cat ft. SZA – “Kiss Me More”

Ed Sheeran – “Bad Habits”

Lil Nas X – “Montero (Call Me By Your Name)”

The Weeknd – “Save Your Tears”

ARTIST OF THE YEAR



Ariana Grande

Doja Cat

Justin Bieber

Megan Thee Stallion

Olivia Rodrigo

Taylor Swift

SONG OF THE YEAR



24kGoldn ft. iann dior – “Mood”

Bruno Mars, Anderson .Paak, Silk Sonic – “Leave the Door Open”

BTS – “Dynamite”

Cardi B ft. Megan Thee Stallion – “WAP”

Dua Lipa – “Levitating”

Olivia Rodrigo – “Drivers License”



BEST NEW ARTIST



24kGoldn

Giveon

The Kid Laroi

Olivia Rodrigo

Polo G

Saweetie

BEST COLLABORATION



24kGoldn ft. iann dior – “Mood”

Cardi B ft. Megan Thee Stallion – “WAP”

Doja Cat ft. SZA – “Kiss Me More”

Drake ft. Lil Durk – “Laugh Now Cry Later”

Justin Bieber ft. Daniel Caesar, Giveon – “Peaches”

Miley Cyrus ft. Dua Lipa – “Prisoner”

BEST POP



Ariana Grande – “Positions”

Billie Eilish – “Therefore I Am”

BTS – “Butter”

Harry Styles – “Treat People With Kindness”

Justin Bieber ft. Daniel Caesar, Giveon – “Peaches”

Olivia Rodrigo – “Good 4 U”

Shawn Mendes – “Wonder”

Taylor Swift – “Willow”

BEST HIP-HOP



Cardi B ft. Megan Thee Stallion – “WAP”

Drake ft. Lil Durk – “Laugh Now Cry Later”

Lil Baby ft. Megan Thee Stallion – “On Me (remix)”

Moneybagg Yo – “Said Sum”

Polo G – “Rapstar”

Travis Scott ft. Young Thug and M.I.A. – “Franchise”

BEST ROCK



Evanescence – “Use My Voice”

Foo Fighters – “Shame Shame”

John Mayer – “Last Train Home”

The Killers – “My Own Soul’s Warning”

Kings of Leon – “The Bandit”

Lenny Kravitz – “Raise Vibration”



BEST ALTERNATIVE



Bleachers – “Stop Making This Hurt”

Glass Animals – “Heat Waves”

Imagine Dragons – “Follow You”

Machine Gun Kelly ft. blackbear – “My Ex’s Best Friend”

Twenty One Pilots – “Shy Away”

Willow ft. Travis Barker – “Transparent Soul”

BEST LATIN



Bad Bunny x Jhay Cortez – “Dákiti”

Billie Eilish & Rosalía – “Lo Vas a Olvidar”

Black Eyed Peas and Shakira – “Girl Like Me”

J. Balvin, Dua Lipa, Bad Bunny, Tainy – “Un Día (One Day)”

Karol G – “Bichota”

Maluma – “Hawái”

BEST R&B



Beyoncé, Blue Ivy, Saint Jhn, WizKid – “Brown Skin Girl”

Bruno Mars, Anderson .Paak, Silk Sonic – “Leave the Door Open”

Chris Brown and Young Thug – “Go Crazy”

Giveon – “Heartbreak Anniversary”

H.E.R. ft. Chris Brown – “Come Through”

SZA – “Good Days”

BEST K-POP



(G)I-DLE – “Dumdi Dumdi”

Blackpink and Selena Gomez – “Ice Cream”

BTS – “Butter”

Monsta X – “Gambler”

Seventeen – “Ready to Love”

Twice – “Alcohol-Free”

VIDEO FOR GOOD


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lil Wayne admits it’s been a rough couple of weeks in the Carter household for sports fandom.

First, the 38-year-old rapper, born Dwayne Michael Carter Jr., watched in courtside agony as his good pal Chris Paul’s Phoenix Suns lost in the NBA Finals to the Milwaukee Bucks. “We talked after every game. It hurt to see them go down like that,” Wayne said.

But he also had tough words for the United States skateboarding team at the Tokyo Olympics.

“I am so surprised, bro. We didn’t take nothing,” said Wayne, a serious and lifelong skateboarding fan. He touted the bravura performances of gold-winning Yuto Horigome of Japan and Brazil’s silver medalist Pedro Barros (though U.S. men did win a pair of bronzes).

Advertisement

“We didn’t win street? Man, that’s some bulls—,” he laughed.

Lil Wayne performs in 2018. (Owen Sweeney/Invision/AP)

Wayne spoke, shrouded in smoke rings, from the living room of his new Hidden Hills mansion around the corner from The Weeknd and Kylie Jenner, which he bought for $15.4 million in April. Like many of us, he’s navigating a complicated return to live shows and life back outside.

After breaking out of New Orleans as a teen member of the Hot Boys in the late ‘90s, Wayne has charted 25 Top 10 singles and five Billboard 200 No. 1 albums (including last year’s “Funeral”). He can take at least partial credit for making Drake and Nicki Minaj stars; dipped into fields from sports management to weed; and infamously met with then-President Donald Trump during the 2020 campaign.

His one-off Uproar Festival will land at the L.A. Coliseum on Friday, one of the bigger concerts to hit L.A. since the pandemic. It’s not his first show since the Delta variant emerged as a concern, but the concert (with rising stars Polo G, Latto and his Young Money label crew in tow) will be one of his most prominent sets in a year and a half, right as L.A. reassesses how to handle festival crowds. According to a representative, the fest will abide by state and local guidelines for outdoor shows that recommend but do not mandate vaccination or a recent negative COVID test.

Wayne talked about all of that, along with reflections on the spate of veteran rappers dying young, and learning in real time just what DaBaby said to blow up his career.

It must be a complicated time to headline and organize a big festival.

It’s pretty exciting, bro. The show I had probably a month ago in Miami, that was the first time I’d been onstage in so long, I actually had to rehearse the songs. I love performing so much that there’s no usually no real prep for me. It’s just totally ‘What time should I be there.’

But with [Uproar], it changes every day. I always like to give people a peek at everything we’ve got going on with Young Money, but yes, there are a bunch of difficult things going on too. It’d be impossible not to think about that. So we asked what’s the best approach [to safety] we can take?

Advertisement

Is it hard to know what the right things are to do about the Delta variant and concerts right now?

We’re doing all the things we’re supposed to do. At the end of the day, if we can provide a safe and productive show, then it’s a success.

You’ve always been known as someone who put a lot of care into his albums, but in hip-hop right now, it’s all about the individual streaming track or even the Tik Tok clip. Is the album a lost art ?

It is. Music lacks some creativity. But I like the real calm, cool flow of Pooh Shiesty. It gives me an old Fabolous vibe. LPB Poody, I did the remix for a song called “Batman.” One of the lines whacked me in the face and I said, “OK, you got bars, you’ll probably be around for a minute.” And Polo G, I think he’s real genuine.

But it’s the pace that music’s coming out today, the speed of popularity and how that comes with such minimal product. I remember when my first solo album went platinum and I still was little among the big dogs. I still had a lot to learn and a lot to prove. Whereas nowadays, you just sell a few, get a few follows and it kinda seems like the same success. It was not easy for me. I don’t want to say that it’s easier now, or that it’s easy for them. I just don’t want them to think that it gets any easier.

Speaking of which, have you kept up with what DaBaby said?

Oh? No.

Advertisement

He said some homophobic things, and almost every summer festival dropped him immediately after social media turned on him.

You know how it does. The spotlight on artists and celebrities is absolutely crazy. You don’t even have to be a celebrity. Even normal people can feel like they’re wrong because their 200 followers said something. But that’s the power of social media today.

This year, hip-hop lost legends like DMX and Biz Markie. I know you’ve had some close calls yourself over the years with health issues. What can the industry do to better look after its veteran artists?

I may surprise you with my answer. My answer is “absolutely nothing.” The industry has nothing to do with your life and your productivity. It’s not what the industry should be doing for us. It’s about what we can do for ourselves.

I don’t work out, but my main thing is I haven’t eaten fast food in about 20 years. My mom’s a chef, so that’s always been vital to me, to eat a home-cooked meal every night. She makes the best gumbo, but I have a chef and they make sure I eat vegetables every day.

Advertisement

You’ve rapped a lot about Lean and there’s a lot of imagery from that in your lyrics. So many rappers, young and old, have struggled with that kind of thing. Have you found ways to taper off or understand how that stuff fits into a stable life?

It’s life. You do what you do with it. I guess with the Lean or whatever, it could be Lean but it could be coloring books. You don’t make it your thing, you try not to make it the fixture in your life, whatever it is.

You met with President Trump to talk about criminal justice and Black business. Was that a complicated decision? Did you feel like progress was actually possible with him?

Progress is always possible.

Did you get a lot of pushback for taking that meeting?

Nah, not at all.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Of course Jennifer Aniston and David Schwimmer are not dating, no matter how hard a British gossip magazine and super-fans on social media are trying to make that manifest.

Isn’t Bennifer 2.0 enough for you folks? Yeesh.

Schwimmer revealed on HBO Max’s “Friends” reunion special in late May that during the first season of the sitcom in 1994 he “had a major crush on Jen,” with Aniston later adding that the feelings were reciprocated.

“At some point we were both crushing hard on each other, but it was like two ships passing because one of us was always in a relationship,” he said. “And we never crossed that boundary. We respected that.”

Advertisement

The two would occasionally cuddle on the couch during breaks from rehearsal, spooning and falling asleep — and letting the whole rest of the cast know they were crushing on each other. That was the true part, from the mouths of Ross and Rachel.

But a U.K. tabloid mag took it a step further Tuesday with a headline that screamed, “Jennifer Aniston and David Schwimmer are together! Cosy dinners, long walks and ‘a spark’ after 20 years of buried feelings.”

Closer magazine, whose U.S. cousin folks may recognize from grocery checkout lines, quoted an unnamed “insider” as saying, “After the [‘Friends’] reunion, it became clear that reminiscing over the past had stirred up feelings for both of them and that chemistry they’d always had to bury was still there. They began texting immediately after filming and, just last month, David flew from his home in New York to see Jen in L.A.”

They supposedly hung out at Aniston’s SoCal home and were spotted at a winery in Santa Barbara — all of which very well might have happened. But if it did happen, it didn’t mean what fans hoped it meant.

Let’s be clear: Aniston (who split from Justin Theroux in 2018) and Schwimmer (who divorced Zoe Buckman in 2017) are not “together.” Nobody is anybody’s lobster.

Publicists for the actors shot the rumor down overnight, telling various publications that the story wasn’t true.

And it’s not as if Aniston didn’t lay the groundwork for that denial a while back when she expanded on what had been said at the reunion, which was taped in April.

Advertisement

“The beauty of that was that whatever feelings we had we just literally channeled everything into Ross and Rachel and I think that’s maybe why it resonated the way it did. But no, we never — on my life, and Courteney [Cox] and Lisa [Kudrow] would know and can vouch for me,” Aniston told Howard Stern on his satellite radio show in late June before giving up the goods about whether they had or hadn’t.

“No. I would proudly say I banged Schwimmer if that happened,” she said. “But no.”

So turn your attention back to Ben Affleck and Jennifer Lopez, please. They’re house-hunting again, you know.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Late-night TV hosts Stephen Colbert, Seth Meyers and Jimmy Fallon were among the many New Yorkers who welcomed the resignation of Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Tuesday after an investigation concluded that the disgraced politician sexually harassed several women.

The comedians, all of whom tape their shows in the Big Apple, promptly skewered Cuomo upon his impending exit, which will take effect 14 days after Tuesday’s announcement.

“I’m sorry, but is this really a two-week-notice type of situation?” Fallon quipped on “The Tonight Show.” “It’s gonna be tough for Cuomo. With a track record like this, his only future is either president or Supreme Court justice.”

Advertisement

Cuomo’s departure comes one week after a damning probe conducted by the state’s attorney general accused the outgoing governor of subjecting women to unwanted advances — including groping, kissing and lewd comments — as well as retaliation.

Shortly after the attorney general released the report, Cuomo denied the allegations and claimed he “never touched anyone inappropriately or made inappropriate sexual advances.”

In response to a state trooper who accused him of running his hand or fingers across her stomach and back without her consent, Cuomo attempted to justify his actions Tuesday by saying he would often greet members of his security detail with “a grip of the arm, a pat on the face, a touch on the stomach, a slap on the back.”

“He really tried to slip in that touch on the stomach, as if it’s all the same,” Colbert said on “The Late Show.” “‘I would often pat them on the back, stroke them on the groin. Perhaps a friendly suck on the toe.’”

On “Late Night,” Meyers and his fellow “Saturday Night Live” alum Amy Poehler dissected Cuomo’s resignation speech line by line.

“I don’t like anybody touching my face,” Meyers mused.

“Yeah,” Poehler agreed. “The only person allowed to pat my face is my plastic surgeon.”

Advertisement

While delivering his opening monologue at Manhattan’s Ed Sullivan Theater, Colbert summed up the late-night circuit’s thoughts on Cuomo’s withdrawal succinctly with a cold farewell to the governor — soon to be succeeded by the state’s first female leader, current Democratic Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul.

“Don’t let the door hit you on the butt on the way out,” Colbert said. “But if it does, that door should also resign.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Creating the costumes for “Halston” was both a dream job and a daunting task for costume designer Jeriana San Juan, who received an Emmy nomination for her work. Netflix’s five-episode miniseries, based on the book “Simply Halston” by Steven Gaines, involved more than 2,000 costumes, most of which were made from scratch. Throughout the process, San Juan was designing clothing lines on behalf of the titular designer, played by Ewan McGregor, and trying to reflect the designer’s real-life sensibility as well as director Daniel Minahan’s dramatic aesthetic.

Creating the costumes for “Halston” was both a dream job and a daunting task for costume designer Jeriana San Juan, picured with the inspiration board for the costumes. (Julia Hirsch)

“It was always going to be a challenge that I had this very thin rope to walk between paying complete homage to Halston and what he did as a designer and his beautiful clothes, but also remain a storyteller as a costume designer,” says San Juan. “I found myself wearing two different hats and finding the moments in which I really needed to take more creative license and moments where I wanted to feel authenticity. I really had to achieve both of those things to, in my mind, do it correctly. I wanted to affect people who didn’t know anything about Halston and I wanted it to feel celebratory and authentic to the people who are great fans of his.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

While the series spans only five episodes, it covers several decades of Halston’s life, including pivotal moments of his career, like the debut of his iconic Ultrasuede fabric and the looks he created for his muse Liza Minnelli. One piece San Juan painstakingly remade was the red sequined halter minidress Halston designed for Minnelli when she performed “I Gotcha.” The dress in the series is an almost sequin-for-sequin replica of the original.

“That is a documented piece of footage that people can very easily YouTube,” San Juan says. “That ‘I Gotcha’ look was so fresh and so modern. It captured the spirit of young Liza and a fresh take on fashion from Halston. It was perfect — there was nothing to improve on. It is a very specific fabric. It’s a very specific clear sequin that Halston was working in when he created that. It’s a very clean, very sharp shape. That was one where I had to do it completely accurately.”

Krysta Rodriguez as Liza Minnelli in “Halston,” wearing a replica of the red sequined halter minidress Halston designed for Minnelli when she performed “I Gotcha.” (Atsushi Nishijima/Netflix)

In other scenes, San Juan took a more creative approach, looking to capture the feeling rather than the historical fact. The Battle of Versailles, a designer showdown held in France in 1973, was one such instance, where she didn’t feel the need to copy documented images exactly. For Halston’s collection, she found one original piece, a hand-painted, multicolored caftan, and then built her own interpretation of the looks around it. “It was a marriage of many things, but that real caftan became the anchoring point to develop his collection from,” she notes.

For the rest of the show, which involved American designers including Bill Blass, Anne Klein and Oscar de la Renta showing collections versus French designers like Yves Saint Laurent and Hubert de Givenchy, San Juan took a similarly open-minded approach. She wanted to “pay a genuine tribute and homage to the designers represented but also riff on the idea and more capture the spirit and the energy of those collections than literally reproduce everything.” It’s that episode, “Versailles,” that earned San Juan her Emmy nod.

Rory Culkin, Ewan McGregor as the designer, and Rebecca Dayan in “Halston.” (Netflix)

“I, for some reason, thought, ‘There’s no way we could ever do it,’” the costume designer remembers of the episode. “I thought there was some way we would do [the Battle of Versailles] without actually doing it. And lo and behold, I got a script and my jaw hit the ground. It was not small. It was a big thing to do in a TV series.”

Advertisement

While San Juan had only about six weeks to prep ahead of filming — which was paused early on due to the pandemic — she did get help in her research from several of Halston’s peers. Halston’s assistant Sassy Johnson, Halstonette Chris Royer and head tailor Gino Balsamo offered firsthand accounts and notable details, such as Halston’s obsession with red socks. The designer’s former apprentice, Naeem Khan, even helped with the detailed beadwork that appears on several looks, including a maroon jumpsuit Minnelli wears to Studio 54.

Krysta Rodriguez as Liza Minnelli on stage with Halston models in “Halston.” (Atsushi Nishijima/Netflix )

“One of the most wonderful parts in creating the series was being able to talk to people who had known him firsthand,” San Juan says. “And because of the way they spoke about him and the love they had for him and the appreciation for the man he was, I felt a sense of duty to do it right for them, for their friend. It felt, in some way, like it was part of my responsibility to redeem his name.”

San Juan’s work on “Halston” has had a tangible ripple effect. Early in her process, she says she felt like “a private investigator [who was] uncovering Halston,” where it was a challenge to find Halston originals from vintage collectors. Now, in the wake of the miniseries’ success, there’s a renewed appreciation for his designs.

“It’s really remarkable now what I see in the vintage marketplace,” the costume designer says. “How people now more than ever are celebrating Halston. The prices have gone up. It’s fresh again and people are now more aware of the history behind it and of Roy Halston Frowick, who was the man behind it. That has been really exciting for me to see.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Carl Clemons-Hopkins is hard to miss.

Despite a measured, amiable demeanor, the stage veteran who just received their first Emmy nomination for their supporting work in the comedy “Hacks” somehow seems even bigger than their frame, which the actor says is “6-foot-4 and change.” Clemons-Hopkins, who uses the pronouns they/them, was born and raised in Lithonia (“Lie-tho-nee-yuh,” they helpfully offer, putting on the appropriate drawl), Ga. — population: less than 2,000.

“Maybe, maybe. I mean, my world was well under 2,000. These are all really small, little towns about an hour and a half outside of Atlanta. I call it ‘rural-adjacent.’”

Clemons-Hopkins kicked around stages for more than a decade before landing the role of Marcus, the ultra-driven business manager of Jean Smart‘s aging comedian, on HBO’s “Hacks” during the pandemic.

Advertisement

So how does a queer, nonbinary Black kid from tiny, rural-adjacent Georgia wind up on big stages in big cities, and now with a hit show and an Emmy nomination?

Carl Clemons-Hopkins as Marcus in the HBO Max series “Hacks.” (HBO Max)

“My parents would take me and my cousin to see [Alvin] Ailey. My dad would take me to the opera. I was into theater since I was 6,” they says. “I majored in musical theater. In my mind it was like, ‘There’ll be so much opportunity. I’ll come north, the land of opportunity.’ ”

After college in Philadelphia, they did the struggling-actor thing in New York, bartending and managing restaurants. Then Clemons-Hopkins was cast as “Man 6" in the ensemble of the Chicago production of “Hamilton” while understudying George Washington, Hercules Mulligan/James Madison and colead Aaron Burr.

“There was a time I had to go on midsong; there was an emergency. The person who was playing Burr pulled a muscle. One of the actresses was like” — here Clemons-Hopkins waves frantically, conjuring the actress trying to get them to look in the wings. “I see the stage manager, like —" the actor makes crazy gestures indicating “YOU ARE ON!!” They laugh: “We had just finished ‘Schuyler Sisters’ and I’m trying to find a way to exit the stage with my big ass [to come back out as Burr].”

“I’m offstage, change-change-change, and by the time we get to ‘Here comes the general,’ I’m running up, tucking my shirt in: ‘Ladies and gentlemen / The moment you’ve been waiting for!’

“And you hear 2,000 Playbills, wshhh wshhh wshhh. Someone on Twitter was like, ‘I think the actor playing Burr drank a s—-ton of milk because he just grew, like, whoa.’ ”

Advertisement

That production sharpened the actor’s professional mettle. But the play that helped them blossom creatively was a world premiere by R. Eric Thomas, “Time Is on Your Side.”

“It was my first time getting to play a Black, queer character. It was written by a Black, queer playwright, and he said something to me that blew my entire mind: ‘You know, queer history is your history too.’

“I had separated in my mind my Black identity from my queer identity. He introduced me to the fact that ‘They are all in you, so they’re one,’ and it could actually be part of the storytelling of your career. Don’t limit yourself, you can include this in your artistic journey.

Advertisement

“It was, you know, tens of people a night [in the audience], I was sleeping on the floor of my friend’s house, but it was one of my absolute favorite theatrical experiences because I didn’t have to deny a part of myself. I got to invest the fullness of my experiences into a character, similar with Marcus,” who is also queer. “I can relate to this person, and I don’t have to feel like I’m having to limit myself to the agreed, acceptable existence for my body and my personage.”

Movies Q&A: Web series released on YouTube about transgender and queer women gets Emmy nomination The last two years have been a landmark for the visibility of transgender people on screens large and small -- including “Orange Is the New Black” actress Laverne Cox, Eddie Redmayne’s character in “The Danish Girl” and former Olympian Caitlyn Jenner and her reality show “I Am Cait.”

While Clemons-Hopkins uses they/them, “I ascertained very quickly that Marcus is a ‘him’ because my personal exploration of my identity has come from a lot of time that I devote to that, a lot of research and a lot of unearthing whatever. That’s time that Marcus doesn’t allow himself,” they say with a gentle laugh.

Beyond the sheer joy of the series, Clemons-Hopkins says, they’ve also learned to be more comfortable in the work, with help from veteran actor Jean Smart. “She has made me a more compassionate person — to others but also to myself. She has a wonderful grace, and a wonderful humor and a wonderful ease. That makes me beat myself up less.”

Advertisement

Actor Carl Clemons-Hopkins is a stage veteran who just received their first Emmy nomination for “Hacks.” (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

That kindness to self hasn’t translated to Marcus, though. “We’re very different people. I think one thing we share is a respect for work ethic. Our execution of it is very different. His execution is complete immersion, whereas mine is ‘Respect and honor this as part of your schedule, and you are also part of your schedule.’ I put him in the category of a bit repressed, nonpracticing homosexual with a full-time job.

“We share an experience of the world, we share a body type. I think with Wilson [Marcus’ love interest], he gets to just shut it all off and be his soft, squishy self.

“We both have soft, squishy selves.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the Shelf Horse Girls: Recovering, Aspiring, and Devoted Riders Redefine the Iconic Bond Edited by Halimah Marcus

Harper Perrennial: 304 pages, $17



If you buy books linked on our site, The Times may earn a commission from Bookshop.org, whose fees support independent bookstores.

Before reading the outstanding anthology “Horse Girls,” edited by Halimah Marcus, I had always puzzled over my time with horses in rural Alabama. From ages 5 to 10, I had cut kudzu trails with Brownie, the smallest of my neighbor’s equine rescue animals. To break me in, Mrs. Cook and I rode bareback with no helmets, nothing but a few pointers (heels down, back straight). I didn’t know enough to be scared. One day, I thought, I’d get to ride Mrs. Cook’s biggest horse, Cinnamon, who bridled with opinions and attitude, qualities I was accused of having too much of myself.

I never did get my shot with Cinnamon. At 10, I moved to suburban Chicago where only the most affluent of my friends took lessons at city stables with proper English saddles. Like several of the contributors to “Horse Girls,” I found my equestrian pursuits stymied by my family’s modest income. I quickly forgot about horses and have only ridden a handful of times since. Why then, decades later, do those golden afternoons with Brownie remain some of the most vivid, most carefree memories of my life?

Horse girls are saddled with stereotypes, redolent of “heterosexuality, independence, whiteness, femininity,” as Carmen Maria Machado puts it in her striking contribution. In her introduction, Marcus presents her own list: “an overzealous misfit; a girl with her head in the pastures; a princess devoted to ponies and privilege; a dominatrix with high boots and crop.” What makes “Horse Girls” such a moving read is that it often explodes these ingrained ideas. Horse girls can be queer, nonbinary, Asian or Black or Latinx or multiracial. They can be middle class (like me) or poor. Even when a horse girl looks like an ‘80s Ralph Lauren ad, there’s always more to the story.

Advertisement

After reading “Horse Girls,” I see my time in Alabama as a wild education in womanhood and equines, inextricably linked. In her essay “For the Roses,” Allie Rowbottom writes that “like it or not, our bodies define what we’re considered capable of. Embodiment is a burden, a history, we can’t escape; horses, valued or discarded for their bodies depending on situation and cultural mood, remind us of ourselves.”

Halimah Marcus is the editor of the new anthology, “Horse Girls.” (Bryan Derballa)

To reckon with the treatment of horses is to grapple with a world that wants to both enshrine and shatter women. Are women witches or servile tools for procreation? Are horses powerhouses that could crush us in one stomp, or are they slaves to industry, war and other human whims? The heartbreaking answer is, of course, both. Has any creature borne the burden of this historic dichotomy as long and painfully as the horse? Has anyone looked at these power dynamics more closely than a horse girl?

Horses are symbols and stories — some banal, others sublime. T Kira Madden, who trained as a hunter jumper, barrel racer and jockey, has no patience for cocktail-party horse stories.

“When I am in the presence of the basic Horse Story, a rage thickens in me,” Madden writes in her charged and conflicted essay, “I Don’t Love Horses.” “You don’t deserve that story, I think. You don’t even know.” But Madden, whose wife is a horse trainer, also understands that stories are never that simple — a horse is never just a horse. “I want so badly not to love them, to step out of the problem.” Instead, she writes into her possessive horse love, which led her back to riding after quitting at 13.

The sport of horse-riding often entails sacrifices; one theme of the collection is reckoning with the costs. C. Morgan Babst’s stunning “Turnout” is one of a few essays to discuss disordered eating alongside show riding. Babst is the daughter of a serious horsewoman who won prizes by demurely riding sidesaddle — and other times appearing in drag as a man. “Beauty came at a cost — that much was clear — but you had to be beautiful to win,” Babst’s mother taught her while supergluing the girl’s ears before a show. What a relief when, as an adult, Babst takes the too-tight bespoke boots she wore as a starved teenager and severs with a knife “the lovely hand-sewn stitches, [setting] my body free.” The release was so triumphant I almost stood up in bed and applauded.

In “Hungry and Carefree,” Alex Marzano-Lesnevich reclaims a 1928 lesbian classic, “The Well of Loneliness” by Radclyffe Hall, as a tale of trans freedom, one of the many cultural texts that help illuminate their time with their beloved childhood horse, Carefree. Despite “the pleasure of forgetting my body when he ran,” Marzano-Lesnevich resists the impulse to define their horse story as one of gender liberation. Instead, Carefree and the author are bonded by all that was left behind.

Advertisement

“The girl I was is just as much an artifact of history as anyone I can uncover in a book,” Marzano-Lesnevich writes. “Just as mysterious to me. Just as gone. In her place, I imagine Carefree. We do with animals what we do with the past: project our hopes onto them, our human feelings and failings.”

In “Unconquered,” one of several essays to rightfully reset the horse’s relationship with groups outside the white elite, Braudie Blais-Billie, born to a Seminole father and a mother from Quebec, thinks back to the love of horses she shared with her white grandparents. Their family rides were a balm for “the wound that their casual othering left behind.” In adulthood she learns that she descends from a horse-riding Seminole dynasty, building a bridge back to her late father, who painfully self-destructed on the Rez.

(Harper Perennial)

Over the last few years, American culture has become fascinated with Black cowboys and cowgirls, who have turned up at Black Lives Matter protests and in Lil Nas X’s “Old Town Road” video. Sarah Enelow-Snyder grew up a Texas barrel racer, competing in 4-H Club competitions that wouldn’t have allowed her to race against white girls only 30 years prior. Subjected to classmates’ racism, she opted for home-schooling. As an adult, she is floored by the Instagram accounts Outdoor Afro and Cowgirls of Color. “I wondered what my childhood would have been like if… I could have seen girls on horses who didn’t look or perform like archetypal rodeo queens,” she writes.

Advertisement

Many essays in “Horse Girls,” like Courtney Maum’s memorable “Playing Safe,” set in Mexico during the pandemic, concern adults rediscovering riding after a long absence. It’s staggering to imagine Jane Smiley, mother of all horse-girl writers, taking a break from riding for 25 years only to return at 43 with three young children and eight books under her belt, and she affectionately writes about several as if they’re her children.

For Smiley, it’s all about an intimate emotional connection with the animal. We should all be so lucky to know anything, or anyone, so well.

What makes a grown woman return to horses? The snare of adulthood — embodied in Maum’s depression or Smiley’s sheer overcommitment — often demands simplification, a great stripping-back. In those moments, we ride again for the feeling, and nothing more. I was last on a horse about eight years ago in Big Sur. I was humbled by how terrifying it was to be on top of a massive animal, at its mercy. I treasured the experience but thought I never wanted to repeat it — until I read this book. Now I’m itching to know that freedom and fear again.

Advertisement

Wappler is a writer in Los Angeles.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SoCal Bestsellers

Hardcover Fiction

1. The Midnight Library by Matt Haig (Viking: $26) A reader in an infinite library is torn between versions of the life she is leading and the life she could be leading.

2. Billy Summers by Stephen King (Scribner: $30) A skilled hit man wants to retire but must first complete one last job.

3. Afterparties: Stories by Anthony Veasna So (Ecco: $28) A collection of stories of the Cambodian immigrant community, published posthumously.

4. Malibu Rising by Taylor Jenkins Reid (Ballantine: $28) In 1983, a Malibu party spirals out of control in this new novel from the author of “Daisy Jones & the Six” and “The Seven Husbands of Evelyn Hugo.”

Advertisement

5. The Paper Palace by Miranda Cowley Heller (Riverhead: $27) A happily married woman on a summer vacation has a sexual encounter with a lifelong friend.

6. Klara and the Sun by Kazuo Ishiguro (Knopf: $28) A view of a technologically advanced society from the perspective of a child’s artificial friend.

7. The Cellist by Daniel Silva (Harper: $29) A wealthy Russian expat is assassinated in London in this political thriller.

8. The Last Thing He Told Me by Laura Dave (Simon & Schuster: $27) A woman’s husband leaves her a mysterious message before disappearing.

9. Once There Were Wolves by Charlotte McConaghy (Flatiron: $28) Twin sisters lead a team of biologists reintroducing gray wolves into the Scottish Highlands.

10. The Invisible Life of Addie LaRue by V.E. Schwab (Tor: $27) In 1714 France, a desperate young woman makes a Faustian bargain to live forever but is cursed to be forgotten by everyone she meets.

Hardcover nonfiction

1. I Alone Can Fix It by Carol Leonnig, Philip Rucker (Penguin: $30) The authors of “A Very Stable Genius” provide an inside look at the catastrophic final year of the Trump presidency.

2. Crying in H Mart by Michelle Zauner (Knopf: $27) A memoir from the Korean-born singer-songwriter of the band Japanese Breakfast.

Advertisement

3. The Premonition by Michael Lewis (Norton: $30) A real-life thriller in which medical professionals who see a pandemic coming are ignored by political leadership.

4. World Travel by Anthony Bourdain, Laurie Woolever (Ecco: $35) An irreverent guide to some of the late travel writer and TV personality’s favorite locales.

5. Breath by James Nestor (Riverhead: $28) New research yields breathtaking results.

6. Here, Right Matters by Alexander S. Vindman (Harper: $27) The former National Security Council official who risked his Army career to report President Trump’s phone call with the president of Ukraine tells his story.

Advertisement

7. American Marxism by Mark R. Levin (Threshold: $28) The Fox News personality raises the alarm over communism in American culture and institutions.

8. This Is Your Mind on Plants by Michael Pollan (Penguin: $28) The food writer studies three psychoactive plants — opium, caffeine and mescaline.

9. Greenlights by Matthew McConaughey (Crown: $30) A memoir from the Oscar-winning actor.

10. Putting It Together by James Lapine (FSG: $40) A chronicle of the author’s two-year collaboration with Stephen Sondheim to create the Broadway musical “Sunday in the Park With George.”

Advertisement

Paperback fiction

1. People We Meet on Vacation by Emily Henry (Berkley: $16)

2. The Song of Achilles by Madeline Miller (Ecco: $17)

3. Circe by Madeline Miller (Back Bay: $17)

4. Mexican Gothic by Silvia Moreno-Garcia (Del Rey: $17)

Advertisement

5. Dune by Frank Herbert (Ace: $11)

6. Where the Crawdads Sing by Delia Owens (Putnam: $18)

7. The Silent Patient by Alex Michaelides (Celadon: $18)

8. The Guest List by Lucy Foley (Morrow: $17)

Advertisement

9. The Night Watchman by Louise Erdrich (Harper: $18)

10. The Overstory by Richard Powers (Norton: $19)

Paperback nonfiction

1. The Body Keeps the Score by Bessel van der Kolk (Penguin: $19)

2. All About Love by bell hooks (Morrow: $16)

Advertisement

3. Braiding Sweetgrass by Robin Wall Kimmerer (Milkweed: $18)

4. Always Crashing in the Same Car by Matthew Specktor (Tin House: $18)

5. The Four Agreements by Don Miguel Ruiz (Amber-Allen: $13)

6. Sapiens by Yuval Noah Harari (Harper: $25)

Advertisement

7. Entangled Life by Merlin Sheldrake (Random House: $18)

8. The Big Goodbye by Sam Wasson (Flatiron: $19)

9. Becoming Trader Joe by Joe Coulombe (HarperCollins: $20)

10. How to Change Your Mind by Michael Pollan (Penguin: $18)


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mid-August was always my favorite part of summer: still time to loll in the relaxing heat of the season with the sweet anticipation of a new season waiting in the wings. Of course, those were the days when school didn’t start until after Labor Day and the “heat” was in the 90s, not 108 degrees.

Nonetheless, August is still a time for lazy learning and abundant harvests, especially if you planted too many zucchini like yours truly. It’s also great for a few last-minute explorations of botanical gardens or new nurseries, and prepping your garden for fall and winter.

Here are a few classes and other activities to keep you busy. Email garden- and plant-related events to jeanette.marantos@latimes.com at least three weeks in advance of the event and we might include them in the calendar.

Ongoing

Hide and Seek — Art Meets Nature at the South Coast Botanic Garden gives visitors a chance to seek out eight hidden sculptures — six on loan from the Los Angeles County Museum of Art — while exploring the 87-acre gardens at 26300 Crenshaw Blvd. in Rolling Hills Estates, open daily from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. (last permitted entrance at 4:30 p.m.). Download a list of the sculptures and their location. Free with $15 admission to the garden ($11 for seniors and students with ID, $5 for children 5-12, and free to children under 5 and members). southcoastbotanicgarden.org

Advertisement

Lifestyle The most bizarre cactuses and succulents we saw at a crowd-favorite show There were 118 exhibitors showing 1,300 strange and wonderful plants as the 35th Inter-city Succulent and Cactus Show and Sale made up for a lost year this past weekend.

Aug. 12

California Native Container Plants is a class offered by Flora Ito, sales manager of the Theodore Payne Foundation nursery, from 8:30 to 9:45 a.m. at the nursery, 10459 Tuxford St. in Sun Valley. The class offers tips on the best native plants for containers and for creating habitat for pollinators like butterflies and bees as well as a guided walk through the nursery. Masks are mandatory on the nursery grounds, and participants are encouraged to wear long pants and closed-toe shoes for walking on uneven surfaces. Full water bottles and sun protection also are recommended. Tickets are $25 ($20 for members). Register online. theodorepayne.org

Aug. 14-15, 21-22, 28-29, Sept. 4-6

Summer Evening Strolls at the Huntington Library, Art Museum & Botanical Gardens continue through Labor Day, permitting visitors to visit the gardens at 1151 Oxford Road in San Marino on weekend evenings between 4:30 and 8 p.m. The special admission pricing for the strolls is $20 for adults. $15 for seniors 65+, military and students with ID, and $5 for ages 4-11. Children under 4 and members enter free. Reservations are required and members are limited to one evening per week per household. The 1919 Cafe will be open until 7 p.m., and the Huntington Store will be open until 8 p.m. huntington.org

Aug. 14

Soil Regeneration at Arlington Garden, taught by Lynn Fang, a specialist in soil and compost ecology. The hourlong class starts at 10 a.m. and discusses techniques for composting, building soil and the ecology of gardening, with an optional hands-on workshop after the class for people who want a deeper understanding of soil health and regeneration, at Arlington Garden, 275 Arlington Drive in Pasadena. Tickets are $20. eventbrite.com

How to Take Photos of Hummingbirds is a 10 a.m. workshop at Roger’s Gardens nursery, 2301 San Joaquin Hills Road, Corona del Mar, taught by photographer Steve Kaye. The class will provide tips and tricks anyone can use to photograph perched and flying hummingbirds and will feature more than 120 of Kaye’s photos. Advance registration is required. Tickets are $10, with $5 donated to the Sea & Sage Audubon Society. rogersgardens.com

Aug. 15 or 29

Fruitstitute’s Citrus 101 Workshops at Arlington Garden, 275 Arlington Drive in Pasadena, will teach participants how to care for backyard citrus trees using regenerative gardening practices — that is, gardening techniques that nourish and replenish the soil. Each Fruitstitute workshop includes lessons on the seasonal care of citrus trees plus two to three hours of hands-on instruction in pruning in the garden’s citrus grove. Fruitstitute is a Los-Angeles based company dedicated to teaching Angelenos how to care for their backyard fruit trees and grow quality fruit. Each workshop is a complete session and costs $50 with advance registration. eventbrite.com

Aug. 19

Growing Indoor Plants the Easy Way is a class taught by Sherman Library & Gardens horticulturist John Bishop about the best way to keep your houseplants healthy with the right watering, light and pest control. The class runs from 10 to 11 a.m. at the garden, 2647 E. Coast Highway in Corona del Mar. Tickets are $15 ($10 for members) and registration is required. thesherman.org

Advertisement

Aug. 21

Los Angeles Plant Swap/Fundraiser at the Sill’s West Hollywood store, 8125 W. 3rd St. from 4 to 7 p.m. The event is co-sponsored by the Sill, MadreMonstera, PlantManP and TheRealPlantLadyP, and the $5 admission fee will be donated to the Ron Finley Project, which encourages individuals and communities to grow their own food even in urban settings. Participants can swap healthy plants or cuttings (with nodes or roots) as well as pots and other planters. Tickets have one-hour timed entries and capacity is limited, so choose a time slot from 4 to 5 p.m., 5 to 6 p.m. or 6 to 7 p.m. Masks are required. eventbrite.com

California Native Plant Garden Maintenance: Summer Tasks is a workshop sponsored by the Santa Monica Mountain Fund that begins with a short tour of the Santa Monica Mountains Interagency Visitor Center at King Gillette Ranch, 26876 Mulholland Highway in Calabasas. The class runs from 9 to 11:30 a.m. and includes instruction in summer installation of native plants; how and what to prune, deadhead and shape during the dry season; correct hand-watering methods for established plants; and how to identify and collect mature seed. The workshop is free but requires advance registration. Attendees should be prepared to stand for more than two hours in the sun, so bring a water bottle, sunscreen and hat. samofund.org

Aug. 26

Native Plant Maintenance Basics is a walk-and-talk class taught by Erik Blank of the Theodore Payne Foundation, 10459 Tuxford St. in Sun Valley, from 8:30 to 9:30 a.m. Blank will walk participants through the foundation’s demonstration gardens, discussing ways to care for native plants during the summer, when many become dormant and brown. Participants should wear long pants and closed-toe shoes for walking on sometimes steep and uneven terrain; full water bottles and sun protection recommended. Masks are mandatory at the nursery. Tickets are $15 ($12 for members), and advance registration is required. theodorepayne.org

Advertisement

Aug. 28

Gates Cactus and Succulent Society’s 46th Plant Sale at Redlands Church of the Nazarene, 1307 E. Citrus Ave. in Redlands, promises to have thousands of succulents and cactus on sale, including rare and unusual plants. Vendors also will be selling pottery, ornamental garden and dish decor and decorative garden rocks. Club members will be on hand to answer questions and provide tips for growing healthy succulents. The sale runs from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission is free. gatescactusandsucculentsociety.org

Sept. 4-5

Orange Empire Bonsai Society’s Bonsai Show at Sherman Library & Gardens, 2647 E. Coast Highway in Corona del Mar, from 10:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. both days. The show features bonsai trees created by members of the society and, on Sept. 5, a free, two-hour demonstration of how to transform a 20-year-old ‘Femina’ juniper tree “to look like the victim of a severe lightning strike.” Club members began shaping the tree about 18 months ago, removing about 30% of its new growth. This will be an ongoing project and demonstration for the next three to four years, to get the tree to its final desired shape. Admission is free with admission to the gardens. thesherman.org

Sept. 4

Bonsai Kusamono Display workshop at Sherman Library & Gardens, 2647 E. Coast Highway at Corona del Mar, is taught by Debra Mauzy-Melitz of the Orange County Bonsai Society, from 9 to 11:30 a.m. Class projects will include designing and planting a kusamono — a potted arrangement of grasses and flowers — in a wet felted pot and creating a suiseki accent, the small stones or petrified wood used to suggest a natural setting. Supplies will be provided. The workshop costs $120 ($100 for members). thesherman.org

Advertisement

Restoring habitat at the Los Cerritos Wetlands is a volunteer event hosted by the Aquarium of the Pacific to restore habitat at the 66-acre wetlands by collecting seeds from rare plants, planting varieties native to the region and removing invasive non-natives. Takes place the first Saturday of every month through Dec. 4 from 10:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Volunteers should meet at Pacific Coast Highway and 1st Street in Seal Beach at 10:15 a.m. Children under 14 must be accompanied by an adult. Closed-toe shoes are required; hats and sunscreen are strongly recommended. Water will be provided but this is a plastic-bottle-free event, so bring your own reusable water bottle. Registration is not required. aquariumofpacific.org
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Baywatch” star Pamela Anderson just unloaded her longtime beach house in Malibu Colony for $11.8 million. It’s a fairly standard price for the neighborhood, which regularly ranks as one of Southern California’s priciest enclaves.

The actress was originally asking $14.9 million for the teakwood retreat, but the closing price is still a vast improvement upon the $1.8 million she paid for the property in 2000. She’s offered it up a few times over the years, once for sale at $7.75 million in 2013 and later for rent at $40,000 per month.

Clad in wood and glass, the modern abode faces Malibu Lagoon State Beach and features a private pathway that winds its way to the sand.

1 / 11 The open floor plan. (Luxury Level courtesy of the Fridman Group) 2 / 11 The kitchen. (Shade Degges) 3 / 11 The entry. (Shade Degges) 4 / 11 The bedroom. (Luxury Level courtesy of the Fridman Group) 5 / 11 The bathroom. (Shade Degges) 6 / 11 The staircase. (Shade Degges) 7 / 11 The sauna. (Shade Degges) 8 / 11 The rooftop deck. (Luxury Level courtesy of the Fridman Group) 9 / 11 The patio. (Luxury Level courtesy of the Fridman Group) 10 / 11 The pool. (Luxury Level courtesy of the Fridman Group) 11 / 11 The two-story home. (Shade Degges)

Advertisement

Pocketing walls of glass and a retractable sun roof combine for indoor-outdoor living across the 5,500-square-foot floor plan. Other highlights include a wood sauna, vegetable garden and fire pit wrapped in concrete.

Two floating staircases navigate the home. One inside ascends to a primary suite with a custom closet and private balcony, and another outside spirals between the outdoor spaces, connecting a second-story deck to a covered patio.

A guesthouse with a lounge and platinum-tiled pool with a bar complete the small compound.

Anderson, 54, was a Playboy model before her iconic role as C.J. Parker in the original “Baywatch” TV series from 1992 to 1997, and she reprised the role for the 2017 “Baywatch” reboot. Her other notable credits include “Home Improvement,” “Stacked” and “V.I.P.”

Tomer Fridman of Compass held the listing. Sandro Dazzan of the Agency represented the buyer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Marlee Matlin had made only a minor suggestion. After being offered one of her “bucket list” roles — playing a judge on a television series — the actor was preparing for her four-episode arc when she realized there was something missing from the script. There was no role of courtroom interpreter, meaning Matlin’s character would not be able to understand all of the happenings in her workplace.

But when Matlin — who has been deaf since she was an infant — raised the issue with the showrunner, he balked.

“You can speak, Marlee. You can read lips. Why can’t you just play it the way it was written?” she recalled the TV producer asking.

Shortly after that conversation, Matlin said, she was dropped from the project.

Advertisement

Advertisement

“It’s outright discrimination,” said the 55-year-old, still incensed by the memory. “And I was devastated. But you know what? I wasn’t going to let it affect me. I wasn’t going to sit around and cry about it. I just moved on.”

This is the attitude she’s had to adopt in the 34 years since she won the Oscar for her leading role in “Children of a Lesser God.” She described it as a self-protective stance, cultivated to preserve her sanity in an industry that has so often dealt her rejection. On sets, she is almost always the only Deaf person. That never impacts her acting, she said, but it does influence how comfortable she feels socially. Because she is constantly accompanied by her interpreter — at lunch, say — she has been unable to have “a connection where [she] felt entirely relaxed communicating” at work.

And then “CODA” happened.

The film, which will be released in theaters and on Apple TV+ on Friday, is about a family whose two Deaf parents run a fishing business in Gloucester, Mass., with the aid of their kids — a son who also cannot hear and a daughter who can. Because the teenage girl is the only member of the household born hearing — hence the title, which stands for “child of Deaf adult” — she is regularly called upon to serve as a translator.

Matlin, who plays the matriarch, co-stars with two other Deaf actors: theater veteran Troy Kotsur, cast as her husband, and 31-year-old newcomer Daniel Durant as her on-screen son. Emilia Jones, a young Brit from the Netflix series “Locke & Key,” was hired only after she expressed a desire to learn American Sign Language in order to play the daughter caught between two worlds.

Advertisement

Emilia Jones, left, with Marlee Matlin in “CODA.” Jones learned how to use sign language for the role. (Apple TV+)

The movie, which swept the award ceremony at this year’s Sundance Film Festival, was purchased there by the streaming company for a record-breaking $25 million. But the film was unprecedented in other ways. Not only is it the first major Hollywood release to feature multiple Deaf leads, but its hearing director, Siân Heder, endeavored to make the set as accessible as possible. Shortly after Heder landed the gig to adapt “CODA,” based on a 2015 French César winner, “La Famille Bélier,” she began learning ASL. (Her instructor was Deaf actor Hillary Baack, whom the filmmaker was introduced to by Elliot Page; Heder and Page collaborated on 2016’s Netflix feature “Tallulah.”)

And after she’d finished a draft of the script, Heder connected with Alexandria Wailes, a Deaf actor who had served as an ASL consultant on productions including “A Quiet Place” and ABC’s “Quantico.” Over Thai food, the two women spent hours translating the script into ASL — a fluid process, since ASL is not a written language. For each line of dialogue, Wailes would offer her own signed interpretation and Heder would weigh in on the choice.

“Oftentimes, I would see the sign and realize I wanted to change the line,” said Heder. “There was one line that was like, ‘Do you want me to die here?’ But the sign for ‘die’ is not an active, angry sign; there’s something calm about it. So we chatted and I asked if there was something we could do that would be sharper and more dynamic. In that case, ‘You’re killing me’ was more like stabbing, so we went with that.”

Wailes, meanwhile, was jotting down ASL gloss — essentially “writing down in words what we’re going to sign,” she explained. Once they’d gone through the screenplay, Wailes recorded herself signing all of Jones’ lines and sent videos to the actor to study. Jones, who was in Toronto shooting “Locke & Key,” would then spend nine months working with Deaf Canadian actor Anselmo DeSousa to prepare for “CODA.”

“I was filming my show about 75 hours a week, but I was always fingerspelling between takes,” said Jones, 19, referring to the practice of using one’s fingers to form individual letters. “When I approach acting, I think I internalize my emotions because you can portray a lot through your eyes. But with sign language, you cannot; you have to inhabit what you’re saying because there are no words to hide behind. It made me a lot more vulnerable. I got out of my head.”

Jones, 19, spent nine months learning ASL while filming her Netflix show “Locke & Key.” (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Heder, meanwhile, made a visit to the set of “This Close,” a Sundance Channel series co-created by Deaf actor Shoshannah Stern that features numerous Deaf performers. While observing, she picked up a few ideas to employ on “CODA,” like having an interpreter stationed at the monitor to speak the lines into a vocal track for a non-fluent ASL editor to refer to in post-production.

With “CODA” about to start shooting, Wailes and Anne Tomasetti — a Deaf actor who would serve as the ASL master on set — began familiarizing themselves with the Deaf culture in Massachusetts. There are more than 200 sign languages worldwide, and just like with English, there are various dialects.

“The Deaf community is small, and we have a circle of social networks all throughout the country, so we started reaching out on social media,” said Tomasetti. “We asked local Deaf people in Boston, ‘What sign do you use for crab or lobster?’ And they’d video themselves signing and send it to us.”

Advertisement

In rehearsals with the cast, the sign language evolved further. Though Wailes had offered foundational translations, seeing how the actors’ bodies moved often changed the interpretations.

“When we met and saw their signing style, we edited the signs so actors could wear them better,” said Tomasetti. “Maybe they would have to touch things to express the moment, instead of just signing. We never freeze the ASL translation, because there are so many ways to sign the same sentence.”

Emilia Jones, center, plays a CODA (child of Deaf adults) opposite Troy Kotsur, left, and Marlee Matlin in the new Apple TV+ movie. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Kotsur, who developed his own sign-based vocabulary to play a Tusken Raider on the Disney+ series “The Mandalorian,” was particularly passionate about creating his own translations. In one scene where his character urges his daughter to wear a condom during sex, he pretended he was a soldier putting on a helmet and then used his arm to mimic a penis.

“A lot of the dirty language that was graphic, I wanted to bring it to another level and embellish it,” Kotsur said, laughing. “English can be limiting. It’s based on how things sound. A soldier with his helmet? I’m thinking, how can hearing people understand this? So I made it very picturesque and clear.”

(Heder said she later had a “whole conversation” with the MPA ratings board about the scene, explaining that what Kotsur had signed was literally the only way to say “ejaculate” in ASL.)

With rehearsals underway, the ASL consultants were busy vetting other elements of the production. They tried out various fishing gloves, making sure signs would still look clear enough when they were on the actors’ hands. They walked through the house where the family was supposed to live, making sure it realistically replicated a Deaf home — which it didn’t.

“It was all set up beautifully, and we came in and were like, ‘Uh, no,’” Wailes remembered.

“There wasn’t any way to sit and watch TV and have a conversation with each other; the sightlines were all messed up,” added Tomasetti.

Emilia Jones, far left, Troy Kotsur, Marlee Matlin and Daniel Durant sit around the dinner table in “CODA.” (Apple TV+)

Advertisement

Deaf people wouldn’t sit with their backs to the door because they wouldn’t be able to see someone coming in, Wailes and Tomasetti told the set designers. All of the seating should be in the round, allowing the characters to take in one another visually. And there needed to be fewer sharp corners, because if you’re walking and signing, you might accidentally jab yourself.

Even as production began, Heder wasn’t sure how many interpreters would be needed on set. At first, she used one to communicate with the actors, but after just four takes, scrapped the idea.

“It was really challenging for me to have someone else in the middle of that very intimate relationship,” said the director. “I didn’t realize, going in, how much the actor would be looking at the interpreter and not me. So I agreed with my actors that I would sign with them directly and we’d have the interpreter there to jump in. I was like, ‘You’re going to have to put up with a lot of ridiculous signing, and feel free to make fun of me when I get it wrong. We’ll always have someone there to clarify and make sure we’re all on the same page.’ But it was so great, because I think we did forge really strong relationships and developed such important communication about these characters that we wouldn’t have been able to find through the interpreters.”

But Tomasetti was still in constant communication with the actors. Before each take, she followed around the director of photography to see how the scene was being framed. She then took a photo of the monitor on her phone and brought it to the actors to show them whether they’d have to sign bigger or tighter in the space. When the cameras rolled, Tomasetti stood beside Heder at the monitor, making sure all of the ASL was accurate and that hands were clear in the shot. She would jot down which of the takes was the best from an ASL perspective and pass along her notes to the script supervisor to utilize during the editing process.

Tomasetti said the Deaf actors looked to her to confirm they were communicating clearly. “It was really important for them to focus and not be thinking, ‘These are all hearing people. Is anybody going to be able to understand me?’ I almost relieved them of that burden.”

That freedom allowed Matlin to focus more on her performance, which she felt had been overlooked by previous filmmakers she’d worked with.

“A lot of times directors, in my experience, tend to shoot me in two or three takes and say, ‘OK, fine, Marlee, let’s move on. That’s good enough,’” said Matlin. “They think by signing, I did my job — but they don’t actually pay attention to the performance that they might want to look for in actors who are hearing. At first, I thought, ‘OK, well, I must be doing something right for a director to just say, “Fine, let’s move on.”’ But the more it kept happening, I realized, they’re more concerned about time or lights or the next setup. Sian took me seriously as an actor.”

Jones, however, struggled with her new acting skill at times, and Tomasetti said the actor approached her “before and after every take to check that her signing performance was accurate.” During one challenging moment, the actor was filming on a small fishing boat while Tomasetti was observing from a video village on a nearby vessel.

“I could tell that she was stressed out and not feeling comfortable with her signs, because I was watching her through the monitors,” Tomasetti said. “She wasn’t able to see me, and we tried to communicate through FaceTime, but there was no service out at sea.”

Advertisement

The ASL master told the crew that she needed access to Jones, so a tiny transport boat pulled up to bring Tomasetti closer to the action. With the choppy waves rocking the transport craft three miles out at sea, Tomasetti stood up and signed Jones’ lines to her as the actor peered down from the picture boat.

Other important lessons were learned early on, including on the first night shoot, when Tomasetti noticed that the Deaf actors had no way of communicating with the crew because of how dark it was. After spending that night running around using her phone flashlight to help out, the crew adapted.

“They made a belt with a light at the end of it that would shine on the interpreters,” she said. “We were able to create a solution and never had any problems again.”

Creating an authentic collaboration between hearing and Deaf talent “was just unknown before,” said Heder. The director said she is eager to pass along everything she learned during “CODA” to other filmmakers and studios so they don’t feel “intimidated” by the process. In fact, she sees ASL as the ideal on-set language.

Jones said it taught her how much more fulfilling it is to “give people my full attention and eye contact.” And practically, Heder said, it served as a mode of communication that allows crew members to interact from far distances or make notes silently during takes.

“There are so many stories within these communities that need to be told. I feel frustrated about it. Disability representation on-screen has been abysmal,” said Heder. “But I feel hopeful about it too. Because I think the more people that respond to the movie and are inspired by these actors will encourage others to start creating roles. I hope these actors can become muses for other people the way that they are for me.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Times is committed to reviewing theatrical film releases during the COVID-19 pandemic. Because moviegoing carries risks during this time, we remind readers to follow health and safety guidelines as outlined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and local health officials.

There are moments when “Respect,” an uneven, prosaic but affecting new movie starring Jennifer Hudson as a young Aretha Franklin, comes close to pinpointing something true and revealing about its subject’s art. That may sound like faint praise, but it’s closer than many musician biopics get. Watch enough and their clichés start to sound like greatest hits: the troubled childhood marked by flashes of genius; the record deals and album cover montages; the marriages torn asunder by addiction, abuse and the ravages of fame. The music becomes a soundtrack at best and an afterthought at worst, something to paper over the gaps between traumas and milestones.

“Respect,” glossily produced, skillfully performed and notably developed by Franklin herself before her death in 2018, doesn’t entirely avoid these traps. But as directed by Liesl Tommy, making a solid feature debut, it rarely stumbles right into them. The script, by playwright and TV writer Tracey Scott Wilson, may be a thinner, more flattering account than this year’s unauthorized miniseries “Genius: Aretha,” but it also makes a virtue of some of its conventions, investing well-worn notes with fresh reserves of emotion. That’s fitting, insofar as part of Franklin’s brilliance lay in her ability to riff on well-loved standards; her 1972 gospel album, “Amazing Grace,” the production of which draws the story to a close, is a transcendent example. The song that gives the movie its title is another.

Hailey Kilgore, left, Jennifer Hudson and Saycon Sengbloh play the Franklin sisters in the movie “Respect.” (Quantrell D. Colbert / Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures)

Advertisement

“That’s Otis Redding’s song,” someone protests in the early stages of Aretha’s soon-to-be-definitive reworking. (“Otis who?” comes the eventual rejoinder.) The unveiling of that 1967 all-timer provides a rousing mid-movie payoff that Hudson, whom Franklin personally selected for the role, tears into with unsurprising aplomb. But in some ways, the songwriting scene that precedes it is even more enjoyable: Aretha is up late with her sisters, Carolyn (Hailey Kilgore) and Erma (Saycon Sengbloh), teasing out the beats and flourishes that will make this version so memorable, including the infectious chorus of “Ree, Ree, Ree, Ree” — a Ree-petition derived from Aretha’s childhood nickname.

Did it really happen that way? Did Aretha’s caddish first husband and manager, Ted White (played here by a terrific Marlon Wayans), really come storming out of the bedroom, grumbling about the lateness of the hour? Who knows. Like a lot of scenes in Wilson’s script (drawn from a story she’s credited with alongside Callie Khouri), it feels neatly constructed to reinforce bedrock themes. It reminds us that while Franklin’s spellbinding talent was nurtured by her family’s collaborative musicianship, there were a lot of men who tried to control that talent, the very men who most needed to hear “Respect” and its mighty blast of defiance.

They included Aretha’s influential father, the Rev. C.L. Franklin (an imposing Forest Whitaker), a pillar of the Black church in 1950s Detroit and an embodiment of the tightly interwoven forces — family, religion, activism, music — that will shape Aretha and nearly tear her apart. In the opening scene, he trots out his extraordinarily talented 10-year-old daughter (a very good Skye Dakota Turner) to sing and wow the crowd at one of his house parties. But it’s Aretha’s New York-based mother, the gospel singer Barbara Siggers Franklin (Audra McDonald), who leaves the deeper impression, warning her not to let her father or anyone else exploit her gift — and a gift it is, to be given back to God and God alone.

Jennifer Hudson as Aretha Franklin and Forest Whitaker as her father, the Rev. C.L. Franklin, in the movie “Respect.” (Quantrell D. Colbert / Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures)

The rest of the movie will chart Aretha’s flight from that core spiritual truth and her overdue, triumphant return to it. Bouncing from Detroit to Birmingham, Ala., to New York City and beyond, it’s a prodigal journey paved with chart-topping highs and soul-crushing lows, starting with Barbara’s untimely death, which sends the young Aretha into silence for weeks. She finds her voice again at her father’s pulpit, morphing in one sequence from the sweet-voiced Turner into the full-throated Hudson as the camera swirls ecstatically around her. (The widescreen cinematography is by Kramer Morgenthau.)

Finding her voice as an artist, however, will prove more difficult. And Hudson’s tricky, impressive, fitfully persuasive performance seems to embody that difficulty almost too well. It’s not just that Hudson, even when sporting a ’60s updo and clad in Clint Ramos’ radiant costumes, is less physically evocative of Franklin than, say, Cynthia Erivo was in “Genius: Aretha.” Imitation can be the sincerest form of flattening, and like Diana Ross in “Lady Sings the Blues” (or, more recently, Renée Zellweger in “Judy”), Hudson wisely pursues emotional truth over exacting mimicry. And her vocals are unsurprisingly superb; while you can sometimes hear her strain for the upper register that Franklin conquered so effortlessly, her singing is as electric and fully felt here as in “Dreamgirls,” the movie that won her an Oscar 15 years ago.

Indeed, as in “Dreamgirls,” Hudson seems to express her character’s feelings more vividly in song than in dialogue — hardly a fatal flaw in a musical, though it does leave a nagging emotional vagueness at the heart of some of the more straightforward dramatic scenes. That’s partly by design: If the aim is to capture the spirit rather than the letter of Franklin’s immense presence, that spirit in “Respect” is still unformed. The Aretha we see is calculating, hesitant and sometimes even deferential, not yet possessed of the strong artistic identity and music-industry savvy that would define her reign as the Queen of Soul.

Marc Maron, left, Marlon Wayans and Jennifer Hudson in the movie “Respect.” (Quantrell D. Colbert / Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures)

Advertisement

Asked what kind of music she wants to sing, Aretha confesses, “I want hits. I just want hits.” So do the men who help and hinder her, starting with her father, who orchestrates her entry into the biz and curtails her participation in the protests led by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. (Gilbert Glenn Brown), a close family friend. Aretha escapes her father’s clutches by marrying the wheeling-and-dealing Ted, but he turns out to be just as domineering and considerably more abusive. A deal with Columbia Records, where she works with producer John Hammond (Tate Donovan), will pull Aretha in several directions, resulting in a string of records with little clear sense of musical purpose.

One of the slyer insights of “Respect” is that for a while, Franklin’s great versatility — her ability to sing anything and everything — is also an obstacle, one that she won’t surmount until she teams with Atlantic Records and the legendary producer Jerry Wexler (a sly, affectionate turn by Marc Maron). He sends Aretha to record with a scrappy all-white band in Muscle Shoals, Ala., a decision that Ted nearly derails in scenes marked by a dangerous mix of racial tensions and clashing male egos. But the creative and commercial payoffs are undeniable. Hudson’s soft-spoken Aretha surges to life — and so does the movie — during the recording sessions, whether she’s tweaking the arrangement on her first big hit, “I Never Loved a Man (the Way I Love You)” or forging an unexpected camaraderie with the Muscle Shoals crew.

In these scenes, Hudson captures something of Aretha’s brilliance as not only a singer but also a songwriter, someone whose collaborative instincts and deep musical knowledge reinforce every line, beat and trilling glissando. There’s more feeling, more insight into who she is in these performances — which include “Ain’t No Way,” “(You Make Me Feel Like a) Natural Woman” and a sadly truncated “I Say a Little Prayer” — than in the rote, lurching scenes of domestic discord that eventually set in, as Aretha’s marriage to Ted disintegrates and her mounting struggles with alcohol take centerstage.

Jennifer Hudson and Mary J. Blige in the movie “Respect.” (Quantrell D. Colbert / Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures)

Advertisement

“Respect” is less than persuasive as an addiction drama and vague in its sense of Franklin as a political figure, some nods to her performance at Dr. King’s funeral and her support for Angela Davis aside. But there’s an admirable discretion in the way Tommy and Wilson handle certain other aspects of their heroine’s trauma: Rather than rubbing the camera in her experiences of physical and sexual abuse, they reveal those experiences in increments, using staccato flashbacks that suggest the return of repressed memories — or, as they’re referred to here, her “demons.”

Movingly, “Respect” also acknowledges her angels. Those guardians take many forms, some of them prominently featured in the movie’s splendid ensemble: McDonald’s Barbara is one of them, as is another legend, Dinah Washington (Mary J. Blige), who gives Aretha the best tough-love pep talk imaginable. And then there’s her recommitment to gospel and God with “Amazing Grace,” a landmark that was reconsecrated a few years ago with the release of the long-buried documentary of the same title. That film remains by no small margin the greatest Aretha Franklin movie ever, and it throws this one’s achievements and limitations into sharp relief. “Respect” is fine, fitfully rousing, even respectable. And sometimes, it’s something more.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Actors Kevin Hart and Don Cheadle came this close to having a genuine heart-to-heart moment on the former’s new Peacock series, “Hart to Heart.”

But leave it to Hart to ruin the moment by putting his foot in his mouth.

In a clip from Hart and Cheadle’s wide-ranging interview that went viral Thursday, Cheadle is thoughtful about the “blessing and the curse of” a demanding job that allows a person to provide for their family.

Released last week, the conversation instantly derails, however, when the Oscar- and Emmy-nominated actor casually mentions his age — and Hart loses his mind.

Advertisement

“We’re very fortunate, obviously, to be able to create these opportunities for ourselves and for our kids and be in a position, for the first time in my family, ... to have a shot at whatever this generational wealth thing means,” Cheadle says. “But at the same time ... I’m 56 years old —"

“Damn!” Hart interjects, making no attempt to hide his astonishment.

Without missing a beat, Cheadle does what Cheadle does best and goes into serious actor mode, hitting Hart with a withering stare.

“I’m sorry,” Hart says, buckling under the “Black Monday” star‘s stern gaze. “It was a thought, and I blurted it out. I did not mean it that way. ... I didn’t mean it the way it came out.”

“We’ll take a poll on how you meant it with people here, later, after the show’s over,” Cheadle says, committing to the bit with mock(?) irritation.

At this point, the discussion has fully shifted from deep meditation on family values to a debate over whether Hart said “Damn!” as in “Damn, I would not have guessed that!” or, “Damn!” as in, “Damn! That’s old!”

“If we could play it back right now, these are two different ‘damns,’” Cheadle quips. “Do you want me to tell you how you said it? Do you want me to say it back to you how you said it?”

Advertisement

Equally amused by Hart’s unchecked outburst and Cheadle’s sharp response, the internet could not get enough of the exchange on Twitter.

“Nah this just killed me cuz this is how I be ruining moments,” wrote @BigMalikMoves in a tweet that has amassed nearly 90,000 likes.

“It’s a good day when my favorite actor @DonCheadle is trending for this hilarity,” tweeted author and podcast host Jemar Tisby. “That stare!”

Advertisement

After some skeptics blasted Hart for what they considered inexcusably rude behavior, Cheadle came to his friend‘s defense, clarifying that the tense interaction was all in good fun and part of their natural rapport.

“EVERYBODY, please watch the entire episode,” Cheadle tweeted. "[On] top of understanding that this is just how we play it’s a really good one, i think. the first question he asks me is, ‘drugs; do you do them?’ in the parking lot i said he looked like a black-o-lantern in that suit. it’s just us.”

You can stream Hart and Cheadle’s complete, hour-long chat on NBC’s Peacock.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This story contains spoilers from Friday’s episode of “Ted Lasso.” The episode is titled “Carol of the Bells.”

A stop-motion opening credit sequence. A “Love Actually” reenactment. A rousing cover of a Darlene Love classic.

“Ted Lasso‘s” mid-August Christmas episode might be the most earnest half-hour in a series already unabashed in its optimism and joy. And if, like the promotional gag that inspired Jason Sudeikis’ soccer coach, the holiday episode sounds like it can’t possibly work, trust that “Ted Lasso” once again pulls it off: With precise writing and a carefully calibrated tone, “Carol of the Bells” is one of the best entries in its acclaimed second season.

“It’s such a dangerous area, when you’re on the edge of schmaltz the entire time,” admits the episode’s director, Declan Lowney.

Advertisement

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

The installment was a late addition to the season, which Apple expanded to 12 episodes after the writers room had finished breaking its planned 10. They seized the opportunity to revel in two standalone episodes, with “Carol of the Bells” positioned between “when s— goes down and is about to go down,” said the episode’s writer, Joe Kelly.

The episode begins with a scene at the soccer club, where the team’s players and administrators are exchanging gifts and discussing their holiday plans. Ted plans to spend the day opening presents with his son in America via FaceTime — a minutes-long activity that instead leaves him drinking alone at home and watching a rerun of “It’s a Wonderful Life.”

Filming takes place on the set of “Ted Lasso’s” Christmas episode, featuring Hannah Waddingham, who, as Rebecca, is trying to brighten Ted’s holiday. (Apple)

Thankfully, Rebecca (Hannah Waddingham) invites him to pose as Santa’s helper with her and distribute gifts to local children — a tradition she kept up while married and had since abandoned. “I know all too well how stunningly s— your first Christmas after you get divorced can be, so I just wanted to make sure you’re OK,” she tells him afterward.

“Writing for ‘Ted Lasso’ means writing conflict without one-dimensional villains who show up to do horrible things because they’re evil and want to rule the world or whatever,” said Kelly. “The only ‘villain’ in this episode is depression, which really is a powerful villain in real life. The idea that Rebecca swoops in and helps defeat that for Ted for a moment is so sweet, especially after everything that happened between them in Season 1.”

Meanwhile, Roy (Brett Goldstein) and Keeley (Juno Temple) forgo their “sexy Christmas” plans to help Roy’s young niece Phoebe (Elodie Blomfield) with a problem that a “Ted Lasso” writer experienced in real life: a kid embarrassed about her mysteriously bad breath.

Advertisement

They go on a door-to-door search of a dentist, who confirms the symptom is caused by Phoebe’s new antihistamine. (As a Christmas surprise for his family, Kelly named Phoebe’s cat Dauphine, after his mother-in-law, and the episode is called “Carol of the Bells” as a shoutout to his own mother — “because if I did one without the other, I never would’ve heard the end of it.”)

Brett Goldstein, Elodie Blomfield, center, and Juno Temple pay tribute to “Love Actually” in the holiday episode of “Ted Lasso.” (Apple)

Another gift: The dentist onscreen is played by Claire Skinner, the real-life mother of the series’ “ussie” requestor, Bill Skinner, who asks Keeley for a signature photo. Roy, Keeley and Phoebe then stand outside a classmate’s home for a comical tribute to “Love Actually,” in which Phoebe kindly scolds him for making fun of her bad breath. “Unless you make thoughtful amends, you will stink forever,” read her cue cards.

Elsewhere, Higgins (Jeremy Swift) opens his home for team members who don’t have family in town — an evening usually spent with only a couple players. This year, though, nearly the entire team ends up in attendance. “They don’t have enough room to fit all the people who came to this party, which is such a sweet, lovely problem to have,” said Kelly.

Advertisement

They make do with a surfboard and a billiards table, covered in dishes from each player‘s home country: Sam’s (Toheeb Jimoh) Nigerian classic jollof rice; Dani Rojas’ (Cristo Fernández) traditional Mexican ponche; Richard’s (Stephen Manas) French specialties, foie gras and champagne. It’s captured in a lengthy tracking shot inspired by the 1927 silent movie “Wings” and specifically requested by Sudeikis. “It was only difficult to get because the team loves being together, so when you put them all around the table for a scene, it’s hard to get them to pay attention,” said Lowney.

At the end of the meal, Higgins makes a brief speech, listing the players’ hometowns — the actual cities the actors are from. “I know you’d prefer to have been with them, but it was truly an honor to have you with us to share our traditions and help make a few new ones,” he tells them. “To the family we’re born with, and to the family we make along the way.”

× VIDEO | 01:08 In “Ted Lasso,” Higgins delivers a sweet holiday speech The series’ Christmas episode sees Higgins (Jeremy Swift) saluting the varied hometowns of the diverse football team.

Advertisement

The episode ends with Rebecca passing up Elton John’s annual bash to sing “Christmas (Baby Please Come Home)” with Ted and a band of buskers outside Higgins’ home. “That was just me wanting to hear Hannah sing again,” said Kelly in reference to Waddingham’s “Frozen” cover in Season 1. “She said, ‘Remember, I’m a professional singer, but Rebecca’s not.’ I find it amazing that the singing she does on the show is her bringing it down a few notches from what she can really do, in order to stay in character.”

On the day of the shoot, Waddingham abandoned her prerecorded vocals and instead requested to perform live. “It was the first time we had extras and cast in such big numbers together,” said Lowney of filming the episode amid the pandemic. “That was also why the atmosphere was so lovely — everyone was so happy they got to be together and see each other’s smiling faces.”

The episode was written just before the holiday season thwarted by the coronavirus pandemic. So the fact that the holiday treat is dropping in the middle of August can be “another chance at Christmas cheer, since we all maybe missed it last year,” said Lowney.

Added Kelley, “It might be a good thing; we’re getting at it early, when there aren’t already a hundred Christmas commercials and episodes. I hope people don’t think it’s too early for a Christmas episode, and I hope they’ll rewatch it at Christmas and enjoy it again.”

Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Here we go again.

Stevie Nicks, Lynyrd Skynyrd and other musical acts are canceling or postponing tour dates once more as the highly contagious Delta variant of COVID-19 continues to sweep across the United States.

Several musicians have returned to the stage as the country gradually reopens for the first time since COVID-19 vaccines became widely accessible. But some have begun to back out of performances as the recent surge in coronavirus cases takes an increasing toll — primarily on the unvaccinated community.

Other performers — such as the Foo Fighters, the Eagles, Phish, Dead & Company and Maroon 5 — are requiring concertgoers to produce proof of immunization before entering their shows.

Advertisement

AEG Presents, the promoter of marquee music events such as Coachella, announced this week a mandatory vaccination policy for staff and fans at upcoming shows. Meanwhile, some major festivals are already canceling this year’s dates, with more likely to follow suit.

Music Coachella promoter AEG sets mandatory vaccination policy for fans and staff “We are aware that there might be some pushback, but I’m confident we will be on the right side of history” the Coachella and Stagecoach promoter said Thursday.

As of Thursday, 63% of Californians had received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine — but hospitals are quickly becoming overwhelmed after seeing coronavirus hospitalizations double over the span of a few weeks.

The new wave of live music cancellations is, of course, reminiscent of the beginning of the pandemic, when musician after musician — from BTS and Billie Eilish to Khalid and Mariah Carey — began scrapping their planned 2020 concert appearances slowly, and then all at once.

Here’s a running list of artists who have altered their 2021 touring schedules so far.

Korn

California metal band Korn canceled and rescheduled a slew of concert dates Aug. 16 after frontman Jonathan Davis tested positive for COVID-19.

“On Saturday, we received the unfortunate news that Jonathan tested positive for Covid, and needless to say, we had to postpone the show last minute,” the group said in a statement.

“As always, our primary goal is to ensure the safety of everyone involved, so this is something that has to be done. Jonathan’s spirits are high, and he’s resting and recovering now. We’re as disappointed as you are about the circumstances, but we’ll get through it though, and we can’t wait to see you once we’re back, firing on all cylinders once again.”

Advertisement

Some of Korn’s August shows in Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Massachusetts and New Hampshire have been postponed to late September and early October, while next week’s performances in New York have been canceled.

Tony Bennett

After performing back-to-back, sold-out shows with frequent collaborator Lady Gaga last week at New York’s Radio City Music Hall, famed crooner Bennett will no longer go on tour this fall as planned.

“There won’t be any additional concerts,” Bennett’s son told Variety Thursday. ”This was a hard decision for us to make, as he is a capable performer. This is, however, doctors’ orders. ... He’ll be doing other things, but not those upcoming shows.”

Advertisement

Earlier this year, Bennett’s family revealed that the veteran musician had been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. In addition to his health complications, Bennett’s advanced age — he just turned 95 — places him firmly in the high-risk category for COVID-19.

“It’s not the singing aspect but, rather, the traveling,” his son told Variety. “Look, he gets tired. ... [D]oing concerts now is just too much for him. We don’t want him to fall onstage, for instance — something as simple as that.”

Titled “One Last Time: An Evening With Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga,” the singer’s recent appearance in the Big Apple already had hinted at Bennett’s retirement from live performing. Still on the horizon, however, is his second and final joint album with Gaga, “Love for Sale” — out Oct. 1.

Advertisement

Stevie Nicks

On Tuesday, legendary Fleetwood Mac rocker Nicks, 73, announced her reluctant decision to abort a string of upcoming tour dates in Colorado, California, Texas and Louisiana.

“These are challenging times with challenging decisions that have to be made,” the “Edge of Seventeen” hitmaker explained via Twitter. “I want everyone to be safe and healthy and the rising Covid cases should be of concern to all of us.

“While I’m vaccinated, at my age, I am still being extremely cautious and for that reason have decided to skip the 5 performances I had planned for 2021. Because singing and performing have been my whole life, my primary goal is to keep healthy so I can continue singing for the next decade or longer. I’m devastated and I know the fans are disappointed, but we will look towards a brighter 2022.”

Music The moonlight confessions of Stevie Nicks On the eve of the release of a solo concert film, Fleetwood Mac star Stevie Nicks opens up on Lindsey Buckingham’s exit and looking for love in her 70s.

Advertisement

Lynyrd Skynyrd

Southern rock band Lynyrd Skynyrd pulled out of its forthcoming shows in Ohio, Mississippi, Georgia and Alabama last week after longtime guitarist Rickey Medlocke tested positive for COVID-19.

Lynyrd Skynyrd’s Aug. 13 appearance in Atlanta has been moved to Oct. 23.

“Rickey is home resting and responding well to treatment,” the group said in a statement. “We will continue to update you on his condition.”

Advertisement

Michael Bublé

Canadian singer-songwriter Bublé also amended his touring schedule last week “due to concerns over the rising number of Coronavirus infections.”

The “Just Haven’t Met You Yet” artist’s August concert appearances in New York, New Jersey, Massachusetts, Ohio, North Carolina, South Carolina and Florida have all been rescheduled to October, while new dates for the South American leg of the tour “will be announced shortly,” according to Bublé's Twitter account.

Limp Bizkit

On Monday, rap-rock band Limp Bizkit, which performed at Lollapalooza in Chicago late last month, indefinitely postponed the remainder of its August tour dates “out of an abundance of caution and concern for the safety of the band, crew and most of all the fans,” according to a statement.

Advertisement

“In short, the system is still very flawed,” frontman Fred Durst told Billboard. “Even if the performers, crews, staff, and promoters do their best to ensure safety on and behind the stage, that doesn’t ensure the safety of the audience as a whole.”

Tickets purchased online for shows in New York, New Hampshire, Virginia, Nebraska and Texas will be automatically refunded.

Joe Russo’s Almost Dead

On Wednesday, Grateful Dead cover band Joe Russo’s Almost Dead postponed its upcoming indoor shows in Wisconsin and Missouri to late March, while canceling multiple appearances in Michigan and New Orleans.

“After much consideration and discussion, we believe it’s in the best interest of our fans, band and crew to err on the side of safety and caution at this time,” the group said in a statement.

Advertisement

“As of now, we will continue playing [select] shows with ... additional safety precautions. ... As the year progresses, we will make decisions based on the best data available with the health and safety of ourselves and our fans in mind. We apologize for the bad news and deeply appreciate your understanding.”

The String Cheese Incident

On Thursday, Colorado jam band the String Cheese Incident canceled its weekend performances in Kentucky and Ohio after one of its members tested positive for COVID-19 — “despite all being vaccinated.”

“We are super bummed we can’t play music for y’all, but this is how the world seems to run these days,” the group said in a statement. “Thanks for the continued support, and we look forward to crossing paths soon.”

As of Friday, the band’s shows starting again Aug. 19 are still on.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@CBS News Sunday Morning (N) 6 a.m. KCBS

Good Morning America (N) 6 a.m. KABC

State of the Union Secretary of State Antony Blinken; incoming Governor of New York Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul (D); Rep. Michael McCaul (R-Texas.). (N) 6 and 9 a.m. CNN

Fareed Zakaria GPS U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan: Former Chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Michael Mullen. The impact of the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan on women: Mahbooba Seraj, Afghan Women’s Network. The U.N.'s climate change report: John Kerry, presidential envoy for climate change. Wildfires in Greece: Kyriakos Mitsotakis, prime minister of Greece. (N) 7 and 10 a.m. CNN

Advertisement

Sunday Morning Futures With Maria Bartiromo Rep. Jim Jordan (R-Ohio); Dr. Stephen Hoge, Moderna; Sen. Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.); Texas Atty. Gen. Ken Paxton (R). (N) 7 a.m. and noon Fox News

The Sunday Show With Jonathan Capehart Former Atty. Gen. Eric Holder; Rep. Mondaire Jones (D-N.Y); Amy Walter; Brittney Cooper; Matthew Dowd, Country Over Party; Former Rep. Joe Walsh (R-Ill.); Robin Givhan, Washington Post; Tarana Burke, Me Too. (N) 7 a.m. MSNBC

Face the Nation Dr. Anthony Fauci, National Institute of Allergy & Infectious Diseases; Incoming Governor of New York Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul (D); Rep. Steve Scalise (R-La.); Rosalind Osgood, Broward County, Fla., School Board. (N) 7:30 a.m. and 2:45 a.m. KCBS

Meet the Press Secretary of State Antony Blinken; author Michael Osterholm (“Deadliest Enemy: Our War Against Killer Germs”); Richard Engel reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan. Panel: Kristen Soltis Anderson, SiriusXM; Peter Baker; Cornell Belcher; Anne Gearan. (N) 8 a.m. and 1:30 a.m. KNBC; 1 a.m. MSNBC

This Week With George Stephanopoulos Secretary of State Antony Blinken; Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.). Panel: Donna Brazile; Sarah Isgur; Jane Coaston (“The Argument”); author Philip Rucker (“I Alone Can Fix It”). (N) 8 a.m. and 2 a.m. KABC

Fox News Sunday With Chris Wallace Dr. Francis Collins, National Institutes of Health; former Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. Former FCC Chair Newton Minow. Panel: Doug Heye; Julie Pace, Associated Press; Juan Williams. (N) 8 a.m. KTTV; 11 a.m. and 11 p.m. Fox News

Reliable Sources With Brian Stelter COVID misinformation and the media: Surgeon General Vivek Murthy. Reporting in Afghanistan: Clarissa Ward. Press freedom in Poland: David Leavy, Discovery; Anne Applebaum, the Atlantic. Newsmax and One America News (OAN) are sued over false election claims: Stephen Shackelford, attorney for Dominion Voting Systems. Will Rachel Maddow leave MSNBC? Lachlan Cartwright, Daily Beast. (N) 8 a.m. CNN

MediaBuzz Will Cain; Leslie Marshall; Steve Krakauer; Liz Claman; Robby Soave, Reason. (N) 8 a.m. Fox News

Advertisement

60 Minutes An organization in Kenya provides legal counsel to inmates; driverless truck technology. (N) 7 p.m. KCBS

The prime-time TV grid is on hiatus in print. You can find more TV coverage at: latimes.com/whats-on-tv.

Advertisement

TV Grids for the week of Aug. 15 - 21 in PDF format TV Grids for the entire week of Aug. 15 - 21 as PDF files you can download and print



Advertisement

Movies on TV the week of Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format Movies on TV for the entire week, Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format for easy downloading and printing



Television What’s on TV: Television listings Looking for what to watch on TV? Here are the television listings from the Los Angeles Times in printable PDF files.

Advertisement




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In the trilogy-capping Netflix rom-com “The Kissing Booth 3,” heroine Elle Evans (Joey King) has a lesson to learn: prioritize yourself in the journey to love.

But one character grasped that message early and quietly: Rachel, played by Meganne Young.

The 31-year-old South African actress reprises the role of Rachel, a thoughtful, creative student at Los Angeles Country Day High School and love interest to Elle’s best friend Lee Flynn (Joel Courtney) in the threequel, which started streaming this week.

While Elle remains the focus of “The Kissing Booth 3" — embarking on a summer mission to finish a childhood bucket list with Lee, while deciding whether or not to join boyfriend Noah (Jacob Elordi) at Harvard in the fall — Rachel’s maturity, intuitiveness and decisive pursuit of self slowly take center stage.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Joey King, Jacob Elordi, Joel Courtney and Meganne Young in “The Kissing Booth 3.” (Marcos Cruz / Netflix)

While Rachel is an aspiring interior designer — and the visual arts are not Young’s strong suit — she sees parallels between herself and her character, notably the strength of her reserved nature.

“I went to film school ... and people would always think I was in makeup or wardrobe because I was really quiet,” Young said recently by phone. “I was like, ‘Oh, am I supposed to be loud? Is that confidence? Is that what you need to be an actor?’ It rattled me for the first few years, but as I’ve gotten older and the more that I’ve worked on sets, I’ve become quite empowered in my quietness. I love that for Rachel, and I think that’s something that’s really similar between us.”

As a child, Young sought to be the center of attention. Her love for performing spurred her to seek out the stage, but moving from country to country shaped her understanding of the human condition. Born in Johannesburg but a “Cape Town girl” at heart, Young is a self-described “expat baby” who has lived in Nigeria, Switzerland and more, thanks to her father’s work.

“That experience made me quite adaptable and interested in other people’s perspectives and stories. I wanted to explore all these different avenues, all these different roads, and the best way I could come up with to do that was acting. If I had not been an actor, I probably would have studied psychology because I’m always interested in why people make the choices they make. I think that is so key to acting,” said Young.

Advertisement

Young said that she believes perspective does change when navigating different countries, cultures and practices. Those lived experiences made her attentive to societal gaps, the importance of nuance and perception beyond the black-white binary.

“Sometimes I worry that we want to boil everything down and make it simple, instead of finding that complexity, trying to understand it, embrace it and work within it. When you simplify things, that’s when you start pushing out other groups, especially minorities,” Young said. “I love complexity. I live for that. That is why I work in this industry ... but I also understand for a lot of people, it’s intimidating. I don’t think we can shy away from it if we really want to fix things.”

Her first-ever performance in front of an audience was as a student at the Grange School in Lagos, Nigeria, where she played a sugar plum fairy in a Christmas performance. Fast forward to 2018 and Young received an email from her agent: More “Kissing Booth” films were to come (the first was an unexpected Netflix hit), but the future of her character was still unknown.

“The Kissing Booth 3" follows the franchise’s core ensemble through the summer between high school and college. (Marcos Cruz / Netflix)

When she went home to Cape Town for Christmas, she was met with a holiday surprise.

“I sat down with [director Vince Marcello and producer Michele Weisler] and they told me face to face what was going to happen with Rachel through both movies. I just was so excited,” Young said. “Something I was really taken with when I first read the script was seeing how she’s quite an even-keeled character. She doesn’t want to overstep, but she also wants to assert herself and be true to herself and her feelings.”

After Rachel and Lee locked lips in the first “Kissing Booth,” Young saw her character’s importance grow. In “The Kissing Booth 3,” Rhode Island School of Design-bound Rachel reevaluates her future with Lee after Elle and Noah’s relationship hits the rocks.

Joel Courtney and Meganne Young in “The Kissing Booth 3,” which puts their characters’ romantic relationship to the test. (Marcos Cruz / Netflix)

“I hate saying that love is not enough,” said Young, referencing a line from the movie. “Because I am such a romantic. But ... as you get older and you start investigating more serious relationships, you have to take in other factors. At the end of the day, you have to take care of yourself. If you aren’t happy and there’s too much strain on your relationship, for whatever reason, you need to make sure that you feel safe enough to navigate it then make decisions based on that.”

Advertisement

As Young navigates her career, she says a dream of hers is to play a character that seems brash, tough and “ugly” at first glance and “bring compassion into that.” Her hope is to challenge herself, tell “engaging and relatable” stories, and compel audiences to see different perspectives.

“I would love to do an action movie, to be seen so differently to what I appear as. That’s kind of the goal. It’s so easy to feel like you can look at me on paper, you can make an assumption based on all these things that you know about me. Sometimes I feel that I’ve been limited in people’s eyes. ... I think such an important part of being human is that growth, that evolution. I think you should change your mind,” Young said.

In “The Kissing Booth 3,” both Elle and Rachel are presented with choices. The question is who they’re making decisions for: themselves or to please the people around them. Young hopes that audiences take a note from Rachel and understand it’s not a mistake to look after yourself.

"[Rachel] really looks at what’s happening around her and she checks in with herself and she makes choices,” Young said. “They’re not easy choices, but she makes choices that she feels are best and will protect her. Finding that trust in yourself — I hope people take that away [from the film], and knowing that what is meant for you will come back to you. If that doesn’t come back, that means that there’s something else meant for you.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nanci Griffith, the Grammy-winning folk singer-songwriter from Texas whose literary songs like “Love at the Five and Dime” celebrated the South, has died. She was 68.

Her management company, Gold Mountain Entertainment, said Griffith died Friday but did not provide a cause of death.

“It was Nanci’s wish that no further formal statement or press release happen for a week following her passing,” Gold Mountain Entertainment said in a statement.

Griffith worked closely with other folk singers, helping the early careers of artists like Lyle Lovett and Emmylou Harris. She had a high-pitched voice, and her singing was effortlessly smooth with a twangy Texas accent as she sang about Dust Bowl farmers and empty Woolworth general stores.

Advertisement

Music Coachella promoter AEG sets mandatory vaccination policy for fans and staff “We are aware that there might be some pushback, but I’m confident we will be on the right side of history” the Coachella and Stagecoach promoter said Thursday.

Griffith also was known for her recording of “From a Distance,” which would later become a well-known Bette Midler tune. The song appeared on Griffith’s first major-label release, “Lone Star State of Mind,” in 1987.

Her 1993 album “Other Voices, Other Rooms” earned a Grammy for contemporary folk album. Named after a Truman Capote novel, the album features Griffith singing classic folk songs with Harris, John Prine, Arlo Guthrie and Guy Clark.

In 2008, Griffith won the Lifetime Achievement Trailblazer Award from the Americana Music Association.

Country singer Suzy Bogguss, who had a Top 10 hit with Griffith’s song “Outbound Plane,” posted a tribute of her friend on Instagram.

“I feel blessed to have many memories of our times together along with most everything she ever recorded. I’m going to spend the day reveling in the articulate masterful legacy she’s left us,” Bogguss wrote.

Darius Rucker called Griffith one of his idols and said she was why he moved to Nashville.

“Singing with her was my favorite things to do,” he wrote on Twitter.

Advertisement

Keeping in line with the tradition of folk music, Griffith often wrote social commentary into her songs; “It’s a Hard Life Wherever You Go” was an antiracist ode while in “Trouble in the Fields” tackled the economic impact on rural farmers in the 1980s.

“I wrote it because my family were farmers in West Texas during the Great Depression,” Griffith told the Los Angeles Times in a 1990 interview. “It was written basically as a show of support for my generation of farmers.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Times is committed to reviewing theatrical film releases during the COVID-19 pandemic. Because moviegoing carries risks during this time, we remind readers to follow health and safety guidelines as outlined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and local health officials.

The story told in Tsai Ming-liang’s “Days” couldn’t be simpler or more affecting. We are following two men who haven’t yet met each other but are plainly destined to do so: Even when they’re not occupying the same frame, they move through their private worlds in what feels like a shared silence and — contradictory as the phrase may sound — a shared solitude. One day they finally meet, forging a bond that sends shockwaves of emotional and erotic release through this beautifully becalmed movie. And then they say goodbye, returning to lives of loneliness captured here with a spellbinding intimacy, something Tsai offers us as if it were the most casual of gifts.

A different kind of gift changes hands near the end of “Days”: a tiny music box that plays a tinkling version of the theme from “Limelight,” Charlie Chaplin’s 1952 film about a very different fateful encounter. The reference is hardly coincidental. Tsai, a major figure in contemporary Taiwanese cinema, has long nurtured an affinity for Chaplin, Buster Keaton and other great silent comedians: Some of the films he made in the late ’90s and early 2000s — “The Hole” and “What Time Is It There?” among them — could be described as silent comedies of a type, their meticulously composed funny-sad frames teeming with deadpan sight gags and sometimes delirious bursts of slapstick.

In the years since those festival and art-house triumphs, Tsai’s work has become sparer and more somber, and also more daring in its play with time and duration; he’s spent much of his time lately directing short and midlength works, both fiction and nonfiction. With “Days,” his first new feature since the hauntingly bleak “Stray Dogs” (2013), he has made something exquisite and rare: an elegiac, autumnal work that also feels like an artistic breakthrough. It’s a tale of profound isolation and thrilling connection, alert and alive and gorgeously sensual even as every moment carries a bittersweet reminder of time’s inexorable passage.

Advertisement

A scene from the movie “Days.” (Grasshopper Film)

Just as Chaplin’s weary presence in “Limelight” was made all the more poignant by his fans’ decades-long devotion, so Tsai’s admirers will be deeply moved by the sight of the great Taiwanese actor Lee Kang-sheng — a melancholy fixture of the director’s movies since his youthful 1991 debut feature, “Rebels of the Neon God” — here surrendering his slower, wearier 52-year-old body to the gaze of the camera. (The director of photography is Chang Jhong-yuan, who also shot three of Tsai’s recent shorts.) Not that you need to have met any of Lee’s other characters in Tsai’s movies — all of them named Hsiao-kang, or just Kang — to be captivated by this one, whom we first meet staring out his window.

The pane of glass before him reflects back at us his house’s immediate surroundings: a large tree, an overcast sky, a falling rain whose gentle pitter-patter fills in the silence. We see what Kang sees — or do we? His unwavering expression, at once sad and inscrutable, suggests maybe not. No explanations are forthcoming, but gradually a story coalesces in eloquent, wordless images of Kang soaking in a pool and performing outdoor stretches. Eventually he travels to a clinic in Hong Kong where he seeks to reduce his chronic pain through a moxibustion, a traditional Chinese procedure in which burning herbal preparations are applied to the body’s acupressure points.

The treatment is unsimulated, and so is the pain. “Days” arose not from a prewritten script or story but rather from footage that Tsai shot of Lee over several years, capturing, among other things, the actor’s efforts to treat his own long-term illness. Nearly every shot lasts several minutes, as shots often do in Tsai’s movies, as if they were trying to test the limits of the medium’s capacity for sustained contemplation. But that’s already the wrong word: “Days” never feels like a test, never feels severe or punishing. Its gestures are profoundly empathic. But it knows that real empathy, a critical watchword more often bandied about than understood, takes more time, care and attention than most filmmakers or viewers are willing to invest.

Lee Kang-sheng, left, and Anong Houngheuangsy in the movie “Days.” (Grasshopper Film)

Running a little over two hours, “Days” feels as though it has all the time in the world — enough time for Tsai to cut back and forth between Kang and Non, a quiet, hardworking young Laotian immigrant living in Bangkok. (He’s played by Anong Houngheuangsy, and as with Lee, much of what we see of him is drawn from real life.) Non’s background, like Kang’s, is of little consequence; the present, immediate and fleeting, is what matters. The camera drinks in the details of Non’s routine, from his prayers before an altar in his sparsely furnished apartment to his painstaking preparation of a dinner of fish and vegetables. You can fight these moments of quotidian stillness, but it’s best to luxuriate in them. They remind you just how much you can learn about a person from what they do and how they move, often far more than what they say.

Not much is said at all in “Days,” which begins with a pointed note that the dialogue has been left unsubtitled. Don’t worry, you won’t miss a thing, least of all when Kang and Non finally meet. Their brief encounter, a massage appointment in a Bangkok hotel room, is banal in its particulars and almost indescribable in its impact. For minutes on end the camera observes the intimate play of hands on flesh, skirting the imperceptible boundaries between the therapeutic, the transactional and the sexual. Part of what gives it such emotional and visceral force is the fact that we’ve already seen these bodies out in the world, at work and at rest. The most private, personal acts are shown to exist on an experiential continuum with the most ordinary ones.

You can take stock of the contrasts between these two quiet souls — one older, one younger, one richer, one poorer — and also ponder the significance of that music box, whose constant tinkling refrain strikes a sentimental, even cloying note that seems to subtly shift in meaning as you listen to it. But what “Days” gives us is something that can’t really be intellectualized or even explained: a vision of grace that collapses the boundaries between the real and the fictional, the corporeal and the spiritual. There’s something enormously moving about the image of Lee’s beautiful, broken body receiving these tender ministrations, not just from his younger costar but from a filmmaker who has spent a career looking upon him with love.

Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@We’re accustomed to movies — usually adventures, like “Indiana Jones” — with lines that traverse the globe and pinball between global capitals, showing us where our characters are traveling. “The Lost Leonardo,” a documentary about the rediscovery of a Leonardo da Vinci painting, begins with such a line. But its international stops, chronicling the painting’s sales, are baffling leaps.

New Orleans, 2005: $1,175.

London and Geneva, 2013. $83 million, then $127 million.

Saudi Arabia, 2017. $450 million.

Advertisement

Such is the winding journey of the Salvator Mundi, a painting of Jesus Christ attributed to Leonardo da Vinci that has been enveloped in mystery and intrigue ever since it was first acquired, restored and celebrated as a lost original of the Renaissance master. “The Lost Leonardo,” which Sony Pictures Classics releases in theaters Friday, engrossingly frames the unlikely saga like an international thriller as opaque as any John Le Carré novel.

To its director, the Danish filmmaker Andreas Koefoed, it’s also a kind of dark fairy tale, complete with a prince and a lost treasure. Above all, perhaps, it’s a portrait of an art world where masterworks can serve as global capital.

“You have this romantic idea of art as something pure and a beautiful expression of human beings through history, and then it meets this very cynical, capitalistic world,” says Koefoed, speaking by Zoom from Copenhagen. “It’s an explosive cocktail together.”

The painting in 2017 obliterated art-sale records. But it was first acquired, like a far-fetched episode of “Antiques Roadshow,” at a Louisiana estate sale. While browsing, a pair of New York art dealers believed it worth buying to get a better look. They brought it to one of the field’s top conservators, Dianne Dwyer Modestini, who carefully removed the heavy overpainting that coated it and mended other mistreatments from the intervening centuries. Gradually she and others began to think the painting wasn’t the work of a Leonardo pupil, as once suspected, but of the master, himself.

Modestini’s bond with the painting was especially strong. She worked on it for three years following the death of her husband, Italian conservator and art buyer Mario Modestini.

“It’s not just a painting. It’s more than that,” Modestini says, speaking by phone from her New York apartment. “It’s an object infused with power. That sounds a little weird and corny but I believe that. When I was working on it, I had this experience of feeling my husband was right by my side the whole time. And I couldn’t have done it without him.”

Many art historians and institutions — like London’s National Gallery, which exhibited the painting in 2011 — have arrived at the same attribution. (Modestini created a website with technical detail s on her findings.) But not everyone agree with her conclusions. In the film, art critic Kenny Schachter jokes that it’s a “contemporary painting” for how heavily it was restored. The art critic Jerry Saltz calls it “no more real than any of the dreamed-up scams and schemes by people that may not mean to be flim-flamming, but in the end, they all went along for the ride.”

In “Lost Leonardo,” it’s a ride through an art world peopled by colorful characters and eccentric billionaires. The painting was first sold to Swiss businessman Yves Bouvier, who expanded the use of freeports as tax-free stations for high-priced goods, like artwork. He paid $83 million but he was really acting on behalf of Russian oligarch Dmitry Rybolovlev, whom Bouvier immediately flipped it to for $127.5 million. ( A high-profile lawsuit resulted when Rybolovlev learned of Bouvier’s negotiating tactics.)

Advertisement

In the art market as seen in “Lost Leonardo,” it’s seldom clear who’s buying and who’s selling. One person calls it the most unregulated market after drugs and prostitution. Even once the Salvator Mundi was auctioned by Christie’s, the winning bidder of $450 million was unknown. Only later did reports leak out that the ruler of Saudi Arabia, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, was behind the purchase.

The Salvator Mundi was later expected to be shown at the Louvre, but was ultimately absent from a major exhibition reportedly due to the museum’s refusal to exhibit it, as Mohammed requested, alongside the Mona Lisa. Since 2017, the painting hasn’t been seen publicly.

“It proves a point of the story that the truth is somehow lost in all this,” says Koefoed. “There’s so much at stake, so many power interests, so many money interests that the truth disappears. Not only do we have a lost painting, we also have lost the truth somehow.”

Koefoed, a veteran documentary filmmaker, has no fine arts background and was only drawn into the story of the Salvator Mundi after its headline-making auction. He and cinematographer Adam Jandrup shot many of the subjects head-on, as if they’re sitting for a portrait, and lit them a little like a Renaissance painting. The movie refuses to take sides in the still simmering disputes over the Salvator Mundi.

Advertisement

“I decided to remain open to both possibilities,” says Koefoed. “I think it’s more interesting to let the viewer become their own detective in the story.”

The National Gallery, the Louvre and Christie’s declined to participate. But of the many players that did none has a role like Modestini. Her experience with the painting and its contested reputation is rendered intimately. She has only praise for Koefoed and his film, but debates over the Salvator Mundi Modestini no longer has energy for.

“I don’t really care. I know what I know about the painting and it seems to me a no-brainer to me, the attribution. If people have other ideas, that’s fine. But I really would like to get on with my life. It’s been so consumed by this. I will never make another film,” Modestini says. “This is it for me.”

The painting, though, still looms large in her mind. Its power, she says, is only really conveyed in person. The effect can’t be photographed. It can’t be reproduced.

Advertisement

“It just emanates this extraordinary sense of something totally beyond human understanding,” Modestini says. “It’s a tragedy that it was so abused,” she adds, before reflecting on it being out of sight. “It’s a continuing tragedy.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pairing Kevin Hart and Snoop Dogg for an Olympics highlights show wouldn’t have been an obvious move to many Hollywood executives.

But it was a no-brainer to Jeff Clanagan, chief executive of Hart’s digital media company Laugh Out Loud. The idea came after the West Coast rap star’s commentary for the November Mike Tyson-Roy Jones Jr. fight went viral.

“I couldn’t think of anyone else to really pair Kevin with,” Clanagan said. “When Snoop did that boxing match and that went viral, it was, ‘OK, we’ve got to figure out another sports program for Snoop.’”

Newsletter Inside the business of entertainment The Wide Shot brings you news, analysis and insights on everything from streaming wars to production — and what it all means for the future. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Advertisement

The formula worked. “Olympic Highlights with Kevin Hart & Snoop Dogg” became one of the most-watched Olympics programs on Comcast Corp.'s year-old streaming service Peacock. A popular clip showed Hart and Snoop Dogg watching an equestrian event, with Snoop remarking, “The horse crip-walking, cuh. You see that?”

“Snoop and I being broadcasters and doing the Olympics is a recipe for funny if you allow us to be ourselves,” Hart said in an interview between taping segments last week. “This is what’s been missing from broadcasting for years... You’re looking at something untraditional.”

“Olympic Highlights” marks the latest success for Laugh Out Loud as the four-year-old company — led by Hart, Clanagan and President Thai Randolph — tries to grow into a global comedy empire by attracting digital audiences.

The company executives declined to disclose finances but said the business doubled in revenue and staff (to more than 30 full-time) last year despite the COVID-19 pandemic and that sales are expected to increase 50% in 2021.

Earlier this year, Roku released Hart’s action-comedy “Die Hart” on its free service after the show’s original home — Jeffrey Katzenberg and Meg Whitman’s ill-fated Quibi — collapsed. The show set a viewership record for Roku’s budding original programming efforts and was renewed for a second season.

Company Town Why Kevin Hart’s Quibi series is ‘huge’ on the Roku Channel Viewers watched an average of nine episodes of former Quibi shows in two weeks on Roku’s free, ad-supported streaming service the Roku Channel, the company said. More people watched than during shows’ entire lives on Quibi.

The company last year signed a deal with Comcast that included a minority investment from the cable giant and a multiyear first-look streaming pact with Peacock, which operates under the company’s NBCUniversal division.

NBCUniversal’s direct-to-consumer chairman Matt Strauss, in a statement, called the Olympic highlights series “a great example of the success we will find by providing a platform that allows Kevin to just be himself, develop fresh programming that embraces his unique personality and style of humor, entertain existing fans and engage new ones around the world.”

Advertisement

Laugh Out Loud’s strategy has changed significantly since Hart launched it in 2017 through a partnership with Santa Monica studio Lionsgate.

Whereas it briefly tried to compete as a subscription-based streaming app, LOL is now a multipronged company that makes shows for other distributors while building its brand through a variety of businesses spanning live events, satellite radio and an ad-supported streaming network on free platforms such as Pluto TV.

At a swanky Beverly Hills gala in 2017, Hart launched his Laugh Out Loud Network in an attempt to create an online comedy destination for young, diverse audiences. It debuted an app with a $3-a-month subscription version along with a free, ad-supported tier.

But right as LOL was coming on the market, the once-hot space of niche streamers was facing headwinds. NBCUniversal announced it was shutting down its short-lived comedy service Seeso the same month Hart’s app launched. LOL’s subscription service never quite caught on, though the app was downloaded 1 million times in its first 100 days.

Advertisement

Meanwhile, Lionsgate, which bought cable network Starz for $4.4 billion in 2016, increasingly focused on growing its Starz-branded pay-TV and streaming businesses. On the horizon were the streaming wars, in which Disney+ and HBO Max would battle Netflix for dominance.

As the industry shifted, so did LOL. In early 2019, as the streaming battle was heating up, the company spun out of Lionsgate with Hart taking majority ownership. LOL relocated from its Santa Monica offices to Encino, home of Hart’s Hartbeat Productions. Hart is proud of the pivot.

“I think we’re getting the respect of being one of the few companies that survived at a time when so many companies like this were being started and were falling apart,” Hart said. “There’s so many that are gone with the wind.”

Advertisement

Randolph said Hart having majority control allowed the company the flexibility to grow faster and adapt. The fast-paced clip at which the company operates reflects Hart’s intense on-screen energy. At a July retreat in Cabo, executives discussed how to “dream bigger” for the company, Randolph said.

“For us, the conversations we’ve had are, ‘How big can this be?’” she said. “It’s making this happen at an exponential level and speeding up the pace and doing it in a bigger fashion.”

LOL produces its programming at two studio facilities in Canoga Park totaling 42,000 square feet, including a full gym, kitchens, greenscreen soundstage, recording studio, a podcast room, lounge area and “Zen station” with massage chairs. When The Times visited the studios, workers were setting up the stage for Hart’s SiriusXM show, “Straight From the Hart,” where in 2019 he issued an apology for past homophobic Twitter jokes that led to his losing a gig hosting the Oscars.

The business is composed of four distinct units: LOL Studios, responsible for video productions including the Olympics series and the talk show “Hart to Heart,” which debuted on Peacock this month; an audio division with a SiriusXM deal, which expanded last year; LOL Network, the company’s free, ad-based streaming channel, available through streaming services like Pluto TV, Peacock, Tivo and Redbox; and LOL X, which produces live events. The LOL X division aims to create cultural events and festivals like those launched by brands such as Essence and Complex.

Advertisement

Live events are of particular interest to Clanagan, who was instrumental in Hart’s rise as a standup star. Hart’s breakout performance was in Shaquille O’Neal’s “All Star Comedy Jam” special from 2009, which Clanagan produced. Clanagan booked Hart, whom he’d only known from “Soul Plane,” as the opening act. But Hart’s set killed so Clanagan changed the order of the performers during post-production.

“Kevin had this great performance, so I basically re-edited it to have Kevin close the show,” Clanagan said.

The company is looking to expand, including overseas. For example, Comcast this year is expanding Peacock to the UK and other countries to more than 20 million customers of the Sky pay-TV service, which Comcast also owns. In July, the company launched a screenwriting fellowship with the Sundance Institute to support up-and-coming Black women in comedy. Additionally, LOL is expanding into animation.

There’s ample reason for content creators to feel emboldened.

Advertisement

Reese Witherspoon recently sold her company Hello Sunshine at a valuation of $900 million to a Blackstone-backed media venture formed by former Disney executives Kevin Mayer and Tom Staggs. Media companies are voraciously searching for content, with Amazon buying MGM for $8.45 billion (pending regulatory approval).

Asked whether the company would be sold shortly after this article’s publication, Clanagan laughed.

“I got a call this morning with one of our connected TV partners,” he said. “‘OK Jeff, we’re about to do this deal, is this going to go away in three weeks?’ He had the same question as you.’”



The recent sale of Hello Sunshine and the high demand for content means only good things for LOL, Hart said.

Advertisement

“When I hear about Reese’s success, that makes me go, ‘dope,’” Hart said. “That’s super dope for her, super dope for her company and super dope for us because that’s a door that’s now open and something you can work toward.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Fede Álvarez’s 2016 thriller “Don’t Breathe” is genre filmmaking at its best: a cleverly plotted, marvelously acted and handsomely shot picture where each big twist changes the audience’s perception of what they’re watching. Was this a movie about three ruthless young Detroit heist artists trying to land a big score by ripping off a lonely blind man? Or was it about three desperate dreamers trying to survive a night in a house with a guy who turns out to be a monster?

“Don’t Breathe 2” starts out almost as a retread of “Don’t Breathe,” before becoming something quite different. It’s mostly successful, if never in a way that improves on what came before. Then again it would be hard to better “Don’t Breathe,” a model of how to tell an unforgettable tale of suspense.

Álvarez and his co-writer Rodo Sayagues switch roles for the follow-up: Sayagues slips into the director’s chair, with Álvarez as his co-writer. Stephen Lang returns too as Norman Nordstrom, the blind man from “Don’t Breathe,” who has the survival skills of a Navy SEAL and has been driven by tragedy to extreme acts of vengeful cruelty.

Fans of “Don’t Breathe” will likely find it hard not to notice, ruefully, the many places where the sequel deviates from what the original did well. In the first film, Álvarez and Sayagues toyed with the viewers’ sympathies, giving us reasons to root for the robbers and for Norman, before finally revealing Norman’s darkest secret. In “Don’t Breathe 2,” the lines are more clearly drawn: Norman is now the heroic guardian of an abandoned pre-teen named Phoenix (Madelyn Grace), who has become the target of a local gang led by murderous meth kingpin Raylan (Brendan Sexton III).

Advertisement

There are stylistic and tonal differences too. Though both films share the cinematographer Pedro Luque, the luminous reds, yellows and blues of “Don’t Breathe” have now given way to a grayer palette, cloaked in deep shadows. And while Norman’s physical limitations were more of a factor in the first film, in the sequel he at times seems superhuman as he defends his new house — and Phoenix — from Raylan’s goons. The overall violence and gore level too has been cranked up.

But Sayagues and Álvarez have a good sense of how to reprise what worked before without being merely repetitive. Like its predecessor, “Don’t Breathe 2” tells a lot of its story with minimal dialogue, letting us think along with the characters — including the creeps invading Norman’s home to kidnap Phoenix, as they sneak around through a labyrinthine house filled with locked chambers and hidden escapes.

And though there are fewer shocking twists this time out, Sayagues and Álvarez do spring a few doozies late in the film — including the belated entrance of a surprise character whose introduction makes great use of the film’s shadow motif. What starts as another home invasion story takes some genuinely wild and unexpected turns in its last half-hour.

The biggest knock against “Don’t Breathe 2” is that it lacks the original’s subtle but ultimately animating theme, which involved the way Detroit’s decay itself was driving some otherwise decent people to make some awful choices. In the sequel the blight is even more pronounced, to the extent that the movie’s setting looks almost post-apocalyptic. But the location isn’t really meant to elicit sympathy, or to get people thinking about what happens when a once-great city becomes effectively abandoned. Instead, it’s more reflective of Raylan’s own moral rot (played magnificently by Sexton).

In the end, the true test for all sequels is whether they can play well even to people who’ve never seen what came before. And the answer here is a qualified yes. Honestly, “Don’t Breathe 2” might be even more gripping and tense to anyone who has no firsthand experience of the original.

Álvarez and Sayagues have delivered a blood-spattered potboiler that’s no work of genius but is much better than average. As their over-stressed antihero Norman knows well, in this horribly unforgiving and unfair world sometimes you have to take a win wherever you can get it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Find a flick with our weekly curated list of classic movies, cult favorites, film festivals, etc., streaming online or playing at a theater near you.

“Ball of Fire”

Saucy nightclub singer Barbara Stanwyck puts the moves on stuffy academic Gary Cooper in director Howard Hawk’s riotous 1941 screwball comedy. Presented in 35mm, with an introduction by Larry Karaszewski. American Cinematheque at the Los Feliz 3, 1822 N. Vermont Ave., Los Feliz. 1:30 p.m. Aug. 15. $8, $13. americancinematheque.com

“Brewster McCloud”

A salute to Robert Altman continues with the filmmaker’s darkly comic 1970 fable featuring Bud Cort as a young loner living in a fallout shelter beneath the Houston Astrodome. Sally Kellerman and Shelley Duvall also star. The Frida Cinema, Calle Cuatro Plaza, 305 E. 4th St., Santa Ana. 1 and 3:30 p.m. Aug. 14; 2:30, 5:30 and 8 p.m. Aug. 15. $10.50. Thefridacinema.org

“Carrie”

Hell hath no fury like a shy outcast (Sissy Spacek) bullied by her classmates and tormented by her religious-fanatic mother in Brian De Palma’s bloody 1976 supernatural thriller based on the Stephen King novel. With Piper Laurie and John Travolta. Rooftop Cinema Club DTLA, Level, 4th floor, 888 S. Olive St., downtown L.A. 10:45 p.m. Aug. 13. $19.50-$23.40. rooftopcinemaclub.com

Advertisement

Also at Rooftop Cinema Club El Segundo, 1310 E Franklin Ave., parking structure, El Segundo. 10:45 p.m. Aug. 13. $18.50-$22.50; advance purchase required. rooftopcinemaclub.com

“The Conformist”

When fascism rears its ugly head in 1920s Italy, a troubled young man falls right in line in director Bernardo Bertolucci’s 1970 political thriller. With Jean-Louis Trintignant. In Italian, French and English with English subtitles. Presented in 35mm. Secret Movie Club at the Million Dollar Theater, 307 S. Broadway, downtown L.A. 11 a.m. Aug. 14. $20-$37.50; advance purchase required. secretmovieclub.com

“Crazy Rich Asians”

Constance Wu is the belle of the ball and Henry Golding her charming prince in director Jon M. Chu’s 2018 rom-com based on the Kevin Kwan novel. With Awkwafina, Michelle Yeoh, Ken Jeong and Gemma Chan. Marina Drive-In, parking lot 2, 13477 Fiji Way, Marina del Rey. 8 p.m. Aug. 13. $20 per vehicle; advance purchase required. visitmarinadelrey.com

“Dead Men Don’t Wear Plaid” and “The Man With Two Brains”

A double bill of comedies starring Steve Martin and directed by the late, great Carl Reiner pairs the 1982 sendup of classic film noir with the 1983 sci-fi/horror spoof about a brain surgeon turned mad scientist. Presented in 35mm. New Beverly Cinema, 7165 Beverly Blvd., L.A. 7 and 9 p.m. Aug. 13-14. $12 (advance tickets are sold out but some additional tickets will be available at the door). thenewbev.com

“Ferris Bueller’s Day Off”

Matthew Broderick takes truancy to a whole ’nother level in a 35th-anniversary screening of John Hughes’ hit 1986 teen comedy. With Mia Sara, Alan Ruck, Ben Stein, Jennifer Grey and Charlie Sheen. Street Food Cinema, Westdrift Golf Course, 1400 Park View Ave., Manhattan Beach. 8:30 p.m. Aug. 14. $6-$18; ages 5 and younger free; advance purchase required. streetfoodcinema.com

“Finding Nemo”

Something’s fishy in Pixar’s beloved 2003 animated adventure featuring the voices of Albert Brooks and Ellen DeGeneres. PCH Movies & Moonlight, 2nd & PCH, East 2nd Street and Pacific Coast Highway, Long Beach. 7:30 p.m. Aug. 13. Free. (424) 217-2337. 2ndandpch.com

“Friday the 13th”

No one’s a happy camper when there’s a mask-wearing, machete-wielding homicidal maniac running amok in the woods in this classic 1980 slasher flick. With Ari Lehman and Kevin Bacon. Rooftop Cinema Club Presents the Drive-In at Santa Monica Airport, 3233 Donald Douglas Loop S., Santa Monica. $36 for two, $48 for three or more; children 8 and younger free; advance purchase required. rooftopcinemaclub.com

Advertisement

“John Wick”

Keanu Reeves goes ballistic as a hitman seeking vengeance against the hoodlums who stole his ride and killed his puppy in this relentless 2014 action fable; with Ian McShane. Part of the Autry’s “What Is a Western?” series. Autry Museum of the American West, 4700 Western Heritage Way, Griffith Park, L.A. 1:30 p.m. Aug. 14. Included with museum admission ($6-$14); reservations recommended. (323) 667-2000. theautry.org

Movies Review: ‘John Wick’ brings A game to violent business of revenge As weaponized mayhem of the most disreputably electrifying kind, the sleek and eccentric revenge tale “John Wick” jabs far above its weight class thanks to the panther physicality of 50-year-old headliner Keanu Reeves and a tightly pitched mix of humor and expertly choreographed hyper-violence from writer Derek Kolstad and first-time director Chad Stahelski.

“Josie and the Pussycats”

Rachael Leigh Cook, Rosario Dawson and Tara Reid play the titular musical trio in this frisky 2001 sendup of pop culture and corporate hegemony, loosely based on the Archie Comics characters and the old 1970s-era Saturday morning cartoon. Alan Cumming and Parker Posey also star. Brain Dead Studios at the Silent Movie Theater, 611 N. Fairfax Ave., L.A. 10:30 p.m. Aug. 13. $12; advance purchase required. studios.wearebraindead.com.

Also at Rooftop Cinema Club DTLA, Level, 4th floor, 888 S. Olive St., downtown L.A. 8 p.m. Aug. 19. $19.50-$23.40. rooftopcinemaclub.com

Advertisement

“Naked Lunch”

It’s gonna get weird before it gets even weirder in David Cronenberg’s twisted 1991 adaptation of William Burroughs’ twisted, semiautobiographical novel. With Peter Weller, Judy Davis, Ian Holm and Roy Scheider. Presented in 35mm. American Cinematheque at the Los Feliz 3, 1822 N. Vermont Ave., Los Feliz. 7 p.m. Aug. 13. $8, $13. americancinematheque.com

Outfest L.A. 2021

This annual showcase for LGBTQ-themed dramas, comedies, documentaries, etc., returns with in-person screenings — with every film also available online for those who cannot attend — plus panel discussions, artist talks and more. Directors Guild of America, 7920 Sunset Blvd., Hollywood, and other area venues. Various showtimes, Aug. 13-22. $10-$75; virtual all-access pass, $125. outfestla2021.com

“Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory”

Gene Wilder plays the eccentric and vaguely sinister candymaker in this kind-of kid-friendly 1971 fantasy based on the Roald Dahl novel. TCM Big Screen Classics, various local theaters (see website). 3 and 7 p.m. Aug. 15, 7 p.m. Aug. 18. $15. fathomevents.com

Newsletter Get our daily Entertainment newsletter Get the day's top stories on Hollywood, film, television, music, arts, culture and more. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Movies on TV the week of Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format Movies on TV for the entire week, Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format for easy downloading and printing





Four Star Films, Box Office Hits, Indies and Imports, Movies A - Z

FOUR STAR FILMS

Advertisement

Top rated movies and made-for-TV films airing the week of the week of Aug 15 - 21, 2021

Adam’s Rib (1949) TCM Sat. 3:15 p.m.

Almost Famous (2000) IFC Sun. 3 p.m. IFC Wed. 8:30 p.m. IFC Thur. 2:15 a.m.

Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969) TCM Wed. 8 p.m.

The Enchanted Cottage (1945) TCM Mon. 5 p.m.

Forrest Gump (1994) AMC Thur. 4:45 p.m. AMC Fri. 12:45 p.m.

Goodfellas (1990) History Tues. 12:33 p.m.

Hoop Dreams (1994) TMC Tues. 8:05 a.m.

Advertisement

In the Heat of the Night (1967) Cinemax Sat. 1:22 a.m.

Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981) Showtime Mon. 7 a.m.

Jaws (1975) AMC Fri. 8 p.m. AMC Sat. 5 p.m.

Late Spring (1949) TCM Thur. 5 p.m.

Advertisement

The Lion in Winter (1968) TCM Sat. 9:15 p.m.

Mary Poppins (1964) Freeform Sun. 10:50 p.m.

Pulp Fiction (1994) AMC Mon. 3 a.m. AMC Mon. 10 a.m.

Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981) Paramount Mon. 7 p.m.

Advertisement

The Shawshank Redemption (1994) BBC America Thur. 8 p.m. BBC America Thur. 11 p.m.

The Silence of the Lambs (1991) Ovation Mon. 4 p.m.

A Star Is Born (1954) TCM Sun. 1:45 p.m.

Terms of Endearment (1983) Encore Sun. 5:48 a.m.

Advertisement

Tokyo Story (1953) TCM Thur. 9:15 p.m.

Toy Story (1995) Freeform Sat. 5:15 p.m.

Toy Story 2 (1999) Freeform Sat. 7:15 p.m.

Unforgiven (1992) TMC Sun. 3:30 p.m. Showtime Fri. 2:30 p.m.

Advertisement

WALL-E (2008) Freeform Sat. 11:50 p.m.

Four Star Films, Box Office Hits, Indies and Imports, Movies A - Z

BRAVO, IFC & SUNDANCE IN PRIMETIME

Bravo, IFC & Sundance in primetime, airing the week of the week of Aug 15 - 21, 2021

Advertisement

All Eyez on Me (2017) ★★ Bravo Sun. 3 a.m.

Almost Famous (2000) ★★★★ IFC Sun. 3 p.m. IFC Wed. 8:30 p.m. IFC Thur. 2:15 a.m.

Animal House (1978) ★★★ IFC Sun. 10:30 a.m.

Bruce Almighty (2003) ★★ Bravo Sat. 1 a.m. Bravo Sat. 3 a.m.

Advertisement

Conan the Barbarian (2011) ★★ Sundance Mon. 8 p.m. Sundance Tues. 1 a.m.

Coneheads (1993) ★★ IFC Fri. 12:05 p.m. IFC Sat. 5:10 a.m.

Dude, Where’s My Car? (2000) ★ IFC Fri. 2:05 p.m. IFC Sat. 3:10 a.m.

The Dukes of Hazzard (2005) ★★ IFC Fri. 8:30 p.m. IFC Sat. 3:30 p.m.

Advertisement

Evolution (2001) ★★ IFC Fri. 4:05 p.m. IFC Sat. 12:55 p.m.

Failure to Launch (2006) ★★ IFC Wed. 6:15 p.m. IFC Thur. 5:15 a.m.

Fast Five (2011) ★★ Bravo Sat. 7:30 p.m. Bravo Sat. 9:52 p.m.

First Blood (1982) ★★★ Sundance Sun. 7 p.m. Sundance Mon. 4 p.m. AMC Wed. 2:30 p.m. AMC Thur. 10:15 a.m.

Advertisement

Fury (2014) ★★★ Sundance Sun. 1:30 p.m. Sundance Mon. 10:30 a.m.

Grown Ups (2010) ★ IFC Sun. 8:15 p.m. IFC Mon. 12:45 p.m. BBC America Tues. 8 p.m. BBC America Wed. 12:30 p.m. IFC Sat. 5:45 p.m. IFC Sat. 9 p.m. IFC Sun. 1:45 a.m.

Grown Ups 2 (2013) ★ IFC Sun. 6 p.m. IFC Sun. 10:30 p.m. IFC Mon. 3 a.m. BBC America Tues. 10:15 p.m. BBC America Wed. 2:45 a.m.

The Hunted (2003) ★★ Sundance Sun. 11:30 a.m. Sundance Mon. 4 a.m. AMC Tues. 9 a.m. AMC Sun. 5:37 a.m.

Advertisement

Madea’s Witness Protection (2012) ★★ E! Wed. 6 a.m. E! Wed. 2 p.m. Bravo Sun. 12:28 p.m.

The Man From U.N.C.L.E. (2015) ★★ IFC Tues. 12:30 p.m.

Monster-in-Law (2005) ★★ Bravo Thur. 10 p.m. Bravo Fri. Noon E! Sat. 5:30 p.m.

Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian (2009) ★★ AMC Sun. 11:15 a.m. IFC Sat. 1 p.m. IFC Sat. 11:15 p.m.

Advertisement

Raising Arizona (1987) ★★★ IFC Fri. 9:50 a.m.

Rambo III (1988) ★★ Sundance Sun. 11 p.m. Sundance Mon. 1:30 p.m. AMC Wed. Noon AMC Thur. 9 a.m.

Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985) ★★ Sundance Sun. 9 p.m. Sundance Mon. 6 p.m. AMC Wed. 4:30 p.m. AMC Thur. 12:15 p.m.

Revenge of the Nerds (1984) ★★ IFC Sun. 1 p.m.

Advertisement

RV (2006) ★★ IFC Wed. 4 p.m.

S.W.A.T. (2003) ★★ Sundance Sun. 4:30 p.m. Sundance Mon. 1:30 a.m. IFC Tues. 8 p.m. IFC Wed. 1 a.m.

Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home (1986) ★★★ IFC Sat. 10:15 a.m.

Street Kings (2008) ★★ IFC Tues. 3 p.m. IFC Wed. 3:30 a.m.

Advertisement

Super Troopers 2 (2018) ★★ IFC Fri. 6:20 p.m. IFC Fri. 10:45 p.m.

Total Recall (1990) ★★★ Sundance Mon. 10:30 p.m.

2 Guns (2013) ★★ IFC Tues. 5:30 p.m. IFC Tues. 10:30 p.m.

What Happens in Vegas (2008) ★ Bravo Fri. 9 p.m. Bravo Fri. 11 p.m.

Advertisement

What’s Love Got to Do With It (1993) ★★★ IFC Wed. 11:30 p.m.

Four Star Films, Box Office Hits, Indies and Imports, Movies A - Z

BOX OFFICE HITS

Movies that scored big at the box office, airing the week of the week of Aug 15 - 21, 2021

Advertisement

Ace Ventura: Pet Detective (1994) ★★ CMT Thur. 8 p.m.

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls (1995) ★★ CMT Thur. 10 p.m.

The Addams Family (1991) ★★ Paramount Sat. 11 p.m.

Airplane! (1980) ★★★ Encore Wed. 3:40 p.m. Encore Wed. 10:51 p.m. Encore Thur. 7:12 a.m.

Advertisement

Any Which Way You Can (1980) ★★ REELZ Wed. 8 p.m. REELZ Sat. 9:30 a.m.

Apollo 13 (1995) ★★★ Syfy Sun. 5:30 p.m.

Armageddon (1998) ★★ USA Tues. 5 p.m. USA Wed. 12:05 p.m.

As Good as It Gets (1997) ★★★ EPIX Tues. 8 p.m.

Advertisement

Back to the Future (1985) ★★★ Paramount Sat. 11 a.m. Paramount Sat. 3:30 p.m.

Back to the Future Part II (1989) ★★★ Paramount Sat. 1:30 p.m. Paramount Sat. 6 p.m.

Back to the Future Part III (1990) ★★★ Paramount Sat. 8 a.m. Paramount Sat. 8:30 p.m.

Bad Boys II (2003) ★★ USA Sat. 4:30 p.m. USA Sat. 10 p.m.

Advertisement

Big Daddy (1999) ★ TNT Sat. Noon TNT Sun. Noon

The Blair Witch Project (1999) ★★ EPIX Mon. 3:55 a.m.

Blazing Saddles (1974) ★★★ Showtime Tues. 4:45 a.m.

The Bodyguard (1992) ★★ Showtime Wed. 6:15 a.m.

Advertisement

Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1992) ★★★ Ovation Sat. 5:30 p.m.

Braveheart (1995) ★★★ Encore Fri. 2:22 a.m. Encore Fri. 4 p.m.

The Breakfast Club (1985) ★★★ CMT Sun. 2:15 p.m. CMT Sun. 6:15 p.m.

Bringing Down the House (2003) ★★ BET Thur. 6:30 p.m. BET Fri. 3:30 p.m.

Advertisement

Bruce Almighty (2003) ★★ Bravo Sat. 1 a.m. Bravo Sat. 3 a.m.

Cliffhanger (1993) ★★★ EPIX Sun. 12:15 p.m.

Coming to America (1988) ★★★ E! Wed. 4:30 p.m. E! Wed. 7:15 p.m. BET Sat. 8 p.m.

Con Air (1997) ★★ AMC Sun. 6:30 p.m. AMC Mon. 3:30 p.m. AMC Wed. 9:30 p.m. AMC Thur. 2:15 p.m.

Advertisement

Contact (1997) ★★★ Showtime Tues. 6:30 a.m.

The Da Vinci Code (2006) ★★ Paramount Tues. 7 p.m. Paramount Wed. Noon

The Dark Knight Rises (2012) ★★★ HBO Sun. 2 p.m. HBO Mon. 5:15 a.m. HBO Sun. 2:14 a.m.

The Day After Tomorrow (2004) ★★ MTV Mon. 11:30 a.m. MTV Mon. 7 p.m.

Advertisement

Deep Impact (1998) ★★ Syfy Mon. 5:30 p.m. Syfy Tues. 1 p.m.

Despicable Me (2010) ★★★ Freeform Mon. 6:45 p.m. Freeform Tues. 3 p.m.

Despicable Me 2 (2013) ★★★ Freeform Mon. 8:50 p.m. Freeform Tues. 5 p.m.

Dirty Dancing (1987) ★★★ Cinemax Sun. 8:01 a.m. Cinemax Wed. 12:59 p.m.

Advertisement

Django Unchained (2012) ★★★ Paramount Fri. 7 p.m. Paramount Fri. 10:30 p.m.

Enemy of the State (1998) ★★★ AMC Tues. 9 p.m. AMC Wed. 6:30 p.m.

Every Which Way But Loose (1978) ★★ REELZ Thur. 8 p.m. REELZ Sat. 7 a.m.

Fast Five (2011) ★★ Bravo Sat. 7:30 p.m. Bravo Sat. 9:52 p.m.

Advertisement

A Few Good Men (1992) ★★★ AMC Mon. 6 p.m. AMC Tues. 1 p.m.

First Blood (1982) ★★★ Sundance Sun. 7 p.m. Sundance Mon. 4 p.m. AMC Wed. 2:30 p.m. AMC Thur. 10:15 a.m.

Flatliners (1990) ★★★ Encore Sat. 9:21 a.m.

Footloose (1984) ★★ Encore Sun. 2:09 p.m. Encore Mon. 2:04 a.m. Encore Mon. 10:10 a.m. Encore Wed. 5:02 a.m. Encore Wed. 12:25 p.m. Encore Wed. 9 p.m.

Advertisement

For Your Eyes Only (1981) ★★★ Ovation Sun. 11 a.m. Ovation Fri. 4 p.m.

Forrest Gump (1994) ★★★★ AMC Thur. 4:45 p.m. AMC Fri. 12:45 p.m.

Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994) ★★★ TMC Fri. 10:05 p.m.

Frozen (2013) ★★★ Freeform Sun. 5:15 p.m.

Advertisement

Full Metal Jacket (1987) ★★★ Showtime Wed. 12:30 p.m.

Gladiator (2000) ★★★ TNT Sun. 11:02 p.m.

Grown Ups (2010) ★ IFC Sun. 8:15 p.m. IFC Mon. 12:45 p.m. BBC America Tues. 8 p.m. BBC America Wed. 12:30 p.m. IFC Sat. 5:45 p.m. IFC Sat. 9 p.m. IFC Sun. 1:45 a.m.

Grumpier Old Men (1995) ★★ CMT Sat. 5:15 p.m.

Advertisement

Grumpy Old Men (1993) ★★ CMT Sat. 2:45 p.m.

Hancock (2008) ★★ MTV Mon. 4:55 p.m. Paramount Thur. 12:30 p.m.

The Hangover Part II (2011) ★★ FX Fri. 7 p.m. FX Sat. 12:30 p.m.

The Hangover (2009) ★★★ FX Fri. 5 p.m. FX Sat. 10:30 a.m.

Advertisement

The Help (2011) ★★★ Lifetime Thur. 8 p.m. Lifetime Fri. 12:59 p.m.

The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey (2012) ★★ BBC America Mon. 5 p.m. BBC America Tues. 12:15 p.m.

The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies (2014) ★★ BBC America Mon. 9 p.m.

The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug (2013) ★★★ AMC Sun. 7:30 a.m.

Advertisement

Hook (1991) ★★★ Ovation Tues. 6:30 p.m. Ovation Wed. 4 p.m.

The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996) ★★★ Freeform Mon. Noon

The Hunger Games: Catching Fire (2013) ★★★ POP Fri. 8:30 p.m. POP Sat. 1:30 p.m.

The Hunger Games (2012) ★★★ POP Fri. 5 p.m. POP Sat. 10 a.m.

Advertisement

The Hunt for Red October (1990) ★★★ BBC America Sun. 8 p.m. BBC America Mon. 1:30 a.m. AMC Tues. 1:08 a.m. AMC Tues. 10 a.m.

I Am Legend (2007) ★★★ MTV Mon. 2:25 p.m.

In the Line of Fire (1993) ★★★ TMC Sun. 5:45 p.m.

Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008) ★★ Showtime Mon. 1:10 p.m.

Advertisement

Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989) ★★★ Showtime Mon. 11 a.m. Paramount Tues. Noon

Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom (1984) ★★★ Showtime Mon. 9 a.m. Paramount Mon. 9:30 p.m.

Inside Out (2015) ★★★ Starz Sat. 7:39 a.m.

Jaws (1975) ★★★★ AMC Fri. 8 p.m. AMC Sat. 5 p.m.

Advertisement

Jaws 2 (1978) ★★ AMC Fri. 11 p.m. AMC Sat. 2:30 p.m.

Jumanji (1995) ★★ Freeform Mon. 4:15 p.m. Freeform Tues. 12:30 p.m.

Jurassic Park (1993) ★★★ HBO Sun. 6:45 p.m. HBO Wed. 3:40 p.m.

Kindergarten Cop (1990) ★★ AMC Fri. 10:15 a.m. AMC Sat. 8 a.m.

Advertisement

Kung Fu Panda 2 (2011) ★★★ KVEA Sat. Noon

The Last of the Mohicans (1992) ★★★ BBC America Sun. 10 a.m.

The LEGO Movie (2014) ★★★ Freeform Sat. 8 a.m.

Liar Liar (1997) ★★ MTV Thur. 11 a.m. MTV Fri. 9 a.m.

Advertisement

The Lion King (1994) ★★★ Freeform Sun. 3:10 p.m.

Look Who’s Talking (1989) ★★ Ovation Fri. 10 p.m. Ovation Sat. Noon

The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997) ★★ HBO Wed. 6:50 p.m.

Madagascar 3: Europe’s Most Wanted (2012) ★★ Nickelodeon Sun. 9 a.m.

Advertisement

Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa (2008) ★★★ KMEX Sun. 10 a.m.

The Martian (2015) ★★★ FX Tues. 8 p.m. FX Tues. 11 p.m.

Mary Poppins (1964) ★★★★ Freeform Sun. 10:50 p.m.

Meet Me in St. Louis (1944) ★★★ TCM Sun. 11:30 a.m.

Advertisement

Men in Black (1997) ★★★ Encore Tues. 10:11 a.m. Encore Tues. 11:18 p.m.

Men in Black II (2002) ★★ Encore Thur. 3:51 a.m. Encore Thur. 9 p.m.

Misery (1990) ★★★ Cinemax Fri. 3:02 p.m.

Mission: Impossible 2 (2000) ★★★ FX Mon. 1:30 p.m. FX Tues. 7 a.m.

Advertisement

Mr. Mom (1983) ★★ Encore Mon. 5:23 p.m.

Mrs. Doubtfire (1993) ★★★ Freeform Tues. 7 p.m. Freeform Wed. 4 p.m.

The Natural (1984) ★★★ MLB Sun. 5 p.m. FS1 Tues. 4:30 p.m. Ovation Tues. 10 p.m. TCM Wed. 2:30 p.m. Ovation Wed. 7:30 p.m.

Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian (2009) ★★ AMC Sun. 11:15 a.m. IFC Sat. 1 p.m. IFC Sat. 11:15 p.m.

Advertisement

Notting Hill (1999) ★★ TMC Mon. 10 a.m. TMC Fri. Noon TMC Fri. 8 p.m.

The Nutty Professor (1996) ★★★ TMC Tues. 12:55 p.m. TMC Sat. 8:30 a.m.

Out of Africa (1985) ★★★ TCM Wed. 5 p.m.

Patriot Games (1992) ★★★ BBC America Sun. 3 p.m. BBC America Sun. 11 p.m.

Advertisement

The Patriot (2000) ★★★ AMC Thur. 2:07 a.m.

Planes, Trains and Automobiles (1987) ★★★ EPIX Thur. 4:45 p.m.

Pretty in Pink (1986) ★★★ CMT Mon. 12:30 p.m.

Pulp Fiction (1994) ★★★★ AMC Mon. 3 a.m. AMC Mon. 10 a.m.

Advertisement

Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981) ★★★★ Paramount Mon. 7 p.m.

Rambo III (1988) ★★ Sundance Sun. 11 p.m. Sundance Mon. 1:30 p.m. AMC Wed. Noon AMC Thur. 9 a.m.

Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985) ★★ Sundance Sun. 9 p.m. Sundance Mon. 6 p.m. AMC Wed. 4:30 p.m. AMC Thur. 12:15 p.m.

Revenge of the Nerds (1984) ★★ IFC Sun. 1 p.m.

Advertisement

The Rock (1996) ★★★ AMC Mon. 9 p.m. AMC Tues. 6 p.m.

S.W.A.T. (2003) ★★ Sundance Sun. 4:30 p.m. Sundance Mon. 1:30 a.m. IFC Tues. 8 p.m. IFC Wed. 1 a.m.

Scarface (1983) ★★★ Encore Sun. 9 p.m.

Scrooged (1988) ★★★ EPIX Thur. 8 p.m. EPIX Fri. 11:35 a.m.

Advertisement

Seabiscuit (2003) ★★★ FS1 Sun. 9:30 p.m. FS1 Mon. 5 p.m.

Seven (1995) ★★★ Showtime Tues. 2:30 a.m.

Shakespeare in Love (1998) ★★★ Showtime Thur. 5 a.m.

Shrek 2 (2004) ★★★ Nickelodeon Thur. 8 p.m. Nickelodeon Fri. 1 p.m.

Advertisement

The Silence of the Lambs (1991) ★★★★ Ovation Mon. 4 p.m.

Skyfall (2012) ★★★ EPIX Sat. 9:50 p.m.

Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home (1986) ★★★ IFC Sat. 10:15 a.m.

Steel Magnolias (1989) ★★★ Encore Mon. 6:11 a.m. Encore Mon. 6:58 p.m. Encore Sat. 5:13 p.m. Encore Sun. 1:22 a.m.

Advertisement

Stepmom (1998) ★★ Encore Sat. 11:19 a.m.

Ted (2012) ★★★ HBO Thur. 12:55 p.m.

Terms of Endearment (1983) ★★★★ Encore Sun. 5:48 a.m.

Tombstone (1993) ★★★ AMC Sat. 8 p.m.

Advertisement

Top Gun (1986) ★★★ Encore Sun. 6:14 a.m. Encore Sun. 12:16 p.m. Encore Fri. 2:07 p.m. Encore Fri. 10:48 p.m. Encore Sat. 7:27 a.m.

Total Recall (1990) ★★★ Sundance Mon. 10:30 p.m.

Toy Story (1995) ★★★★ Freeform Sat. 5:15 p.m.

Toy Story 3 (2010) ★★★ Freeform Sat. 9:20 p.m.

Advertisement

Toy Story 2 (1999) ★★★★ Freeform Sat. 7:15 p.m.

True Grit (2010) ★★★ Cinemax Mon. 2:23 a.m.

The Truman Show (1998) ★★★ AMC Fri. 9 a.m.

Uncommon Valor (1983) ★★ Cinemax Wed. 2:40 p.m.

Advertisement

Unforgiven (1992) ★★★★ TMC Sun. 3:30 p.m. Showtime Fri. 2:30 p.m.

WALL-E (2008) ★★★★ Freeform Sat. 11:50 p.m.

The Waterboy (1998) ★ MTV Sat. 1 p.m. MTV Sat. 8 p.m.

Working Girl (1988) ★★★ Encore Sat. 11:24 p.m.

Advertisement

Wreck-It Ralph (2012) ★★★ Freeform Sat. 12:35 p.m.

X-Men (2000) ★★★ Syfy Wed. 11:15 p.m. Syfy Thur. 1:45 p.m.

Movies on TV the week of Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format Movies on TV for the entire week, Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format for easy downloading and printing


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The prime-time TV grid is on hiatus in print. You can find more TV coverage at: latimes.com/whats-on-tv.

SERIES

Secret Celebrity Renovation Jesse Tyler Ferguson travels to Dobbin, a small town in Texas, where he helps renovate the dilapidated family farmhouse belonging to a longtime friend in this new episode. 8 p.m. CBS

American Ninja Warrior Semifinals. 8 p.m. NBC

Advertisement

Burden of Truth Joanna and Billy (Kristin Kreuk, Peter Mooney) are blindsided when Joanna becomes the target of a criminal investigation. Star Slade, Meegwun Fairbrother and Anwen O’Driscoll also star in this new episode with guest star Skye Pelletier. 8 p.m. The CW

Television Review: In ‘Burden of Truth,’ ‘Smallville’ star Kristin Kreuk returns to the CW as a big city lawyer The Canadian import “Burden of Truth,” premiering Wednesday on the CW, begins as a group of high school girls in the fictional prairie town of Millwood start to manifest neurological symptoms — tics, seizures, balance difficulties, fuzziness of mind — that locals attribute to a vaccine against human papillomavirus.



Love Island (N) 9 p.m. CBS

Dynasty Jeff (Sam Adegoke) urges Dominique (Michael Michele) to remain patient in the face of disappointing sales figures for her new business. Maddison Brown, Elizabeth Gillies, Rafael de la Fuente and Sam Underwood also star in this new episode of the prime-time soap. 9 p.m. The CW

Icon: Music Through the Lens The first of two new episodes documents the transition of music photography from a niche pastime to a highly collectible and valuable art form. Then, the series finale examines the role photography plays in the contemporary music landscape. 9 p.m. KOCE

Disney’s Magic Bake-Off Three teams of two young pastry chefs race against the clock to design a Disney-inspired cake in this new kids cooking competition. 10:05 p.m. Disney

SPECIALS

Descendants: The Royal Wedding This new animated special takes place at the wedding of Mal and King Ben, the most anticipated social event in the fantasy kingdom of Auradon. “Descendants” actors Dove Cameron and Mitchell Hope voice their respective characters. Others from the movies providing voices include Cheyenne Jackson, Sofia Carson, BooBoo Stewart, Sarah Jeffery, Melanie Paxson, China Anne McClain, Jedidiah Goodacre, Anna Cathcart and Bobby Moynihan. 9:40 p.m. Disney

Advertisement

SPORTS

Little League Baseball Midwest regional semifinal: Iowa versus TBA, 8 a.m. ESPN; New England regional semifinal: New Hampshire versus TBA, 10 a.m. ESPN; West regional semifinal: Southern California versus TBA, Noon ESPN; Great Lakes regional semifinal: Ohio versus TBA, 2 p.m. ESPN; Mid-Atlantic regional semifinal: Delaware versus TBA, 4 p.m. ESPN; Northwest regional semifinal: Oregon versus TBA, 6 p.m. ESPN.

Baseball The Dodgers visit the New York Mets, 4 p.m. SportsNetLA; the Houston Astros visit the Angels, 6:30 p.m. BSW

NFL Preseason Football The Buffalo Bills visit the Detroit Lions, 4 p.m. NFL; the Dallas Cowboys visit the Arizona Cardinals, 7 p.m. NFL

TALK SHOWS

CBS This Morning Audra McDonald. (N) 7 a.m. KCBS

Advertisement

Today Kent Babb; Brice Brown; Ben Platt performs. (N) 7 a.m. KNBC

KTLA Morning News (N) 7 a.m. KTLA

Good Morning America Sheryl Crow performs; Avantika. (N) 7 a.m. KABC

Good Day L.A. (N) 7 a.m. KTTV

Advertisement

Live With Kelly and Ryan Julianne Moore (“Lisey’s Story”); Holly Robinson Peete (“American Housewife”). (N) 9 a.m. KABC

Washington Week Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s resignation; infrastructure bills; U.N. Climate report: Laura Barrón-López, Politico; Eva McKend, Spectrum; Jonathan Martin, the New York Times; Ronan Farrow, the New Yorker. (N) 7 p.m. KOCE

Real Time With Bill Maher Martin Short and Steve Martin (“Only Murders in the Building”). Panel: Donna Brazile, ABC; Michael Moynihan, Vice News. (N) 10 p.m. and 12:05 a.m. HBO

The Issue Is ... With Elex Michaelson (N) 10:30 p.m. and 1:30 a.m. KTTV

Advertisement

Amanpour and Company (N) 11 p.m. KCET; 1 a.m. KLCS

The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon 11:34 p.m. KNBC

The Late Show With Stephen Colbert 11:35 p.m. KCBS

Jimmy Kimmel Live! 11:35 p.m. KABC

Advertisement

Late Night With Seth Meyers Lorde performs; Taku Hirano with the 8G Band. 12:36 a.m. KNBC

The Late Late Show With James Corden Gov. Gavin Newsom (D-Calif.); rap group Migos. 12:37 a.m. KCBS

Nightline (N) 12:37 a.m. KABC

MOVIES

Spin This new TV movie from director Manjari Makijany stars Avantika Vandanapu as a bubbly Indian-American teenager who discovers her previously untapped creative side through the unique world of DJ culture. Meera Syal, Michela Luci, Kerri Medders and Anna Cathcart also star. 8 p.m. Disney

Advertisement

A Mighty Wind (2003) 8:15 a.m. HBO

Fury (2014) 9:15 a.m. AMC

Any Wednesday (1966) 9:15 a.m. TCM

Thelma & Louise (1991) 9:40 a.m. Epix

Advertisement

Life of Pi (2012) 9:50 a.m. HBO

Blockers (2018) 10 a.m. FX

Contact (1997) 10 a.m. Showtime

Titanic (1997) 10:02 a.m. Encore

Advertisement

Long Shot (2019) 10:35 a.m. and 9 p.m. Bravo

Shakespeare in Love (1998) 11:55 a.m. and 8 p.m. TMC

A Quiet Place (2018) Noon FX

Rio (2011) 1 p.m. Nickelodeon

Advertisement

Agnes of God (1985) 1 p.m. TCM

Spider-Man (2002) 1:05 p.m. Starz

Instant Family (2018) 1:30 p.m. FXX

The Italian Job (2003) 1:38 p.m. Cinemax

Advertisement

War Horse (2011) 1:45 p.m. HBO

Kingsman: The Secret Service (2014) 2 p.m. FX

Room (2015) 2 p.m. TMC

Jaws (1975) 2:30 p.m. AMC

Advertisement

Sunday in New York (1963) 3 p.m. TCM

Spider-Man 2 (2004) 3:10 p.m. Starz

Amistad (1997) 3:30 p.m. Cinemax

The Simpsons Movie (2007) 4 p.m. FXX

Advertisement

The Spy Who Loved Me (1977) 4 p.m. Ovation

Silver Linings Playbook (2012) 4 p.m. TMC

Scary Movie (2000) 4 p.m. VH1

The China Syndrome (1979) 5 p.m. TCM

Advertisement

Creed (2015) 5 p.m. TNT

The 40-Year-Old Virgin (2005) 5:15 p.m. HBO

The Devil Wears Prada (2006) 5:21 p.m. Starz

Capote (2005) 6:05 p.m. Cinemax

Advertisement

About Last Night ... (1986) 6:05 p.m. TMC

Toy Story 4 (2019) 6:15 p.m. Disney

Hook (1991) 6:30 p.m. Ovation

John Wick (2014) 7 p.m. USA

Advertisement

Klute (1971) 7:15 p.m. TCM

The Fifth Element (1997) 7:30 p.m. Syfy

Creed II (2018) 7:30 p.m. TNT

Argo (2012) 8 p.m. Cinemax

Advertisement

Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy (2004) 8 p.m. IFC

Shrek (2001) 8 p.m. Nickelodeon

The Killing Fields (1984) 8:02 p.m. KCET

The Nutty Professor (1996) 8:30 p.m. BET

Advertisement

Forgetting Sarah Marshall (2008) 9 p.m. Encore

John Wick: Chapter 2 (2017) 9 p.m. USA

Saving Private Ryan (1998) 9:30 p.m. Showtime

Galaxy Quest (1999) 9:40 p.m. Epix

Advertisement

The Bourne Legacy (2012) 10 p.m. Cinemax

Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1992) 10 p.m. Ovation

Love and Monsters (2020) 11:25 p.m. Epix

Advertisement

Movies on TV the week of Aug. 8 - 14 in interactive PDF format Movies on TV for the entire week, Aug. 8 - 14 in interactive PDF format for easy downloading and printing



TV Grids for the week of Aug. 8 - 14 in PDF format TV Grids for the entire week of Aug. 8 - 14 as PDF files you can download and print



Advertisement

Television What’s on TV: Television listings Looking for what to watch on TV? Here are the television listings from the Los Angeles Times in printable PDF files.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the Shelf The King of Infinite Space By Lyndsay Faye

Putman: 384 pages, $27



If you buy books linked on our site, The Times may earn a commission from Bookshop.org, whose fees support independent bookstores.

Lyndsay Faye plays a kind of literary jazz. The author likes to riff on the standards, putting her own stamp on them as she jams. Her previous novels include inventive takes on Sherlock Holmes (“Dust and Shadow”) and “Jane Eyre” (“Jane Steele”). Her Timothy Wilde detective series and her novel “The Paragon Hotel” infuse a contemporary sensibility into gritty, evocative historical fiction.

Faye’s new novel, “The King of Infinite Space,” brings Shakespeare’s “Hamlet” into the present day. The contemplative Danish prince becomes Benjamin Dane, the scion of a wealthy New York City family. His father, Jackson, comes from Texas oil money but chose to spend his life running an avant-garde theater company. After Jackson dies of an overdose, his widow, Trudy, quickly marries his brother Claude. Benjamin, buffeted by this sea of troubles, discovers a video Jackson made shortly before his death, in which he says his brother is out to kill him. Set on discovering the truth, Benjamin enlists his best friend Horatio, with whom he has a complicated romantic past, to help him investigate. Lia, Benjamin’s ex-fiancée, works for the Three Sisters Florist Boutique, whose proprietors — a trio of seemingly ageless women from New Orleans — appear to provide their customers with a whole lot more than artful bouquets.

In addition to the obvious homages to Shakespeare’s most quoted play, then, we have the witchy “Macbeth” reference and — in a character named Robin Goodfellow — a nod to “A Midsummer Night’s Dream.” There are more subtle linguistic nods. Benjamin, for instance, thinks “there’s been something in the air since [his] father died, something toxic and stifling,” something “tangible, the rotting taste.” Shakespeare novices may or may not miss the quotes; aficionados will find themselves assaulted with the slings and arrows of lyrical literalism.

Advertisement

What rescues “The King of Infinite Space” is what Faye chooses to change in the story (in the spirit of the Bard, the original master of rebooted IP). Her protagonist, the charming and mercurial Benjamin, is a compelling and complex version of Hamlet. A student of philosophy with a neurodiverse mind, Benjamin wrestles with the big ideas of heaven and earth, his Hamlet-like semi-madness abetted by pills. Faye creates a love triangle between Benjamin, Lia and Horatio that forms the emotional center of the story. Most believable and winning — and farthest from its source — is the romance between the two men.

It’s also very funny. Benjamin thinks of one of the detectives investigating Jackson’s death, a ne’er-do-well named Barry Fortuna, as a “comprehensive runny cow tit.” A list of people he’d like to strangle to death includes “whoever wrote the Kars4Kids commercial.” The novel’s Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, a pair of entitled bro-dudes named Rory and Garett, bring gibes and gambols into the mix (though no one will ever best Tom Stoppard’s duo in “Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead”).

“The King of Infinite Space,” by Lyndsay Faye (G.P. Putnam’s Sons)

Inserting considerable jest into the novel while staying true to the spirit of the play is quite a feat. Consider the key supporting players in the original, Ophelia and Horatio. Horatio famously closes the play with a bravura first draft of history after Hamlet is slain. He is a scholar in the play; Faye, craftily, makes him an aspiring biographer.

After her father, Polonius, dies, “Hamlet’s” Ophelia sinks into intense grief, “speaks things in doubt / That carry but half sense,” as Queen Gertrude puts it, and uses the symbolism of flowers to describe her pain. Lia, Ophelia’s counterpart in Faye’s novel, is a florist who describes her emotional reactions via the bouquets she constructs. When Benjamin tells her, “You were always everything to me,” we get: “Heliotrope: Endlessly devoted affection. Cowslip: You are my divinity. Helenium: Weeping.”

Faye’s descriptive language evokes — and has fun with — the theatricality of Shakespeare. Her rendering of the three sisters’ home captures the spirit of this book’s magic: “Their rooms swell to suit them. The two floors above the flower shop are walled with recessed shelves groaning with exotica, esoterica, erotica, idols, cookbooks, crystals, antique perfume atomizers, and one statue of the Virgin Mary decked in Mardi Gras beads. Lia was exploring once and came upon a baby grand piano. She never found it again.”

Advertisement

There are times when a reader may wish Faye had taken more liberties with the dramatic arc, if only to make the conclusion less predictable. Yet her two greatest divergences come in the form of plot twists. One involves Lia, the other Jórvík — Faye’s reinvention of Yorick, the dead jester whose skull Hamlet honors in the graveyard. Both twists are quite jarring. They work, ultimately, but not without a bit of narrative readjustment. Jórvik is not a man of most excellent fancy but rather something far more sinister. And Lia’s relationship with the sisters upends Ophelia’s narrative. These departures will come as less of a surprise to Faye’s regular readers, who watched her turn Jane Eyre into a serial killer.

This above all: “The King of Infinite Space” is both a fleet-footed delight and a true tragedy in the classical tradition of its source. It is a tragicomedy, a hybrid of past and present, a pastiche and an original yarn, a verily fun and achingly melancholy novel. All this, Faye can truly deliver.

Clark is the author of “An Oasis of Horror in a Desert of Boredom” and the forthcoming “Skateboard.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Michelle Pfeiffer’s time in Pacific Palisades was short but successful. A year and a half after buying a French-style manor for $22.25 million, the actress and her husband, TV producer David E. Kelley, have sold it for their full asking price of $25 million.

Newly built when they bought it, the 10,000-square-foot mansion claims a third of an acre overlooking the fairways of the Riviera Country Club golf course.

According to the listing, the three-story home showcases “Old World charm interwoven with modern sensibility.” That design palette is best captured in the living room, where rustic beams and a wall of rough-cut stone touch up a sleek, indoor-outdoor space lined with pocketing doors.

Built in 2019, the French-style manor blends modern and Old World influences across more than 10,000 square feet. (Anthony Barcelo)

Advertisement

Carved stone fireplaces pop up throughout the neutral-toned floor plan. Downstairs, an entertainer’s space with a wine cellar, tasting area and screening room is wrapped in concrete columns.

Seven bedrooms and 10.5 bathrooms complete the property, which opens up to a scenic patio, grassy lawn and infinity-edge pool. At the edge of the space, there’s an art studio with walls of glass.

A native of Orange County, Pfeiffer has racked up three Oscar nominations for her roles in “Dangerous Liaisons,” “The Fabulous Baker Boys” and “Love Field.” Her other credits include “Scarface,” “Dangerous Minds,” “Batman Returns” and, more recently, “Ant-Man and the Wasp.”

Kelley, a former attorney, is a writer and producer who created the shows “Doogie Howser, M.D.,” “Chicago Hope,” “The Practice,” “Big Little Lies” and “Big Sky,” which was recently renewed for a second season.

Cindy Ambuehl of Compass held the listing. Marc Noah and Kyle Dordick of Hilton & Hyland represented the buyer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Only the biggest real-life super villain of them all, COVID-19, could delay Free Comic Book Day. For the second consecutive year in its 20-year history, the event didn’t happen in its traditional window, the first week of May. Last year, pandemic forces pushed the organizers to transform Free Comic Book Day into Free Comic Book Summer, with different free titles released over nine weeks in July and August to accommodate social distancing in stores. This year, the event is once again a single-day happening in most shops, delayed to to Saturday, Aug. 14, although some shops have expanded the celebration to two days.

Administered by a panel representing comic book retailers, publishers, suppliers and Diamond Comic Distributors, Free Comic Book Day has always been a major undertaking, with millions of comics given away worldwide each year. Diamond handles logistics for the event, shipping comics to shops and providing marketing and PR. Though organized by the comics industry, movie studios have often used the event to jumpstart or continue publicity campaigns, with summer releases such as “Spider-Man” in 2002 and “Venom” in 2018, usually coinciding with the celebration.

But this year some local comic book shops are doing more than the usual dispersal of titles and artist signings.

Comics Factory in Pasadena is one of many shops that is expanding the event into a two-day affair, making Sunday a kids’ day, and raising money for the Comic Book Legal Defense Fund and Comic Books for Kids, which gets comics into hospitals for children.

Advertisement

Free Comic Book Day 2021 logo (Handout)

“Our Free Comic Book Day Jr. is squarely aimed at the kids. We found that Free Comic Book Day has gotten so overwhelmingly popular and busy that oftentimes kids get lost in the mix,” says George Huang, owner of Comics Factory. “We wanted to give kids the chance to come in and read and not be amongst the big adults.” They also created a customizable Free Comic Book Day Jr. T-shirt for children.

Activities are part of the main focus for Golden Apple Comics, a well-known comics shop in Hollywood. To help protect its customers, the majority of its books will be available outside in the parking lot rather than inside the store. And the shop is partnering with other businesses (a coffee shop, a butcher) to spread out the books with its neighbors, and maybe spread some of the financial love around as well. With games and prizes (a spinner rack!), popular artist signings (including “Stray Dogs” creator and “My Little Pony” artist Tony Fleecs), Golden Apple is inviting the kinds of crowds that could be daunting and make businesses second-guess their level of involvement.

“We weren’t hesitant at all to participate,” says Joe Annabi, ordering manager at Golden Apple. “All we wanted to do was make sure we still did something that was safe and fun.”

The event spills into periphery collectibles as well. Legacy Comics in Glendale will be a PokéStop, meaning it’s one of the hot spots Pokémon collectors go to for cards, items and general Pokémon Go activities. Along with the comics giveaways, Saturday also offers pre-release events for Evolving Skies, the newest Pokémon trading cards set.

During the shutdown, and for much of the last year, Legacy had to shift its business model, putting more emphasis into online sales.

Advertisement

“Initially it was tough during the pandemic. It’s like you post more stuff online, more stuff online sells,” says Olin Tellefsen, comics manager at Legacy Comics. “One of our challenges was finding places to put our things as business expanded.”

Tellefsen also echoes what most comics and collectible retailers saw with their customer base and hope to see more of in the current market.

“During the pandemic, people were isolated,” Tellefsen says. “They got back into their hobbies, which include comic books and trading cards.”

Free Comic Book Day hopes to encourage and build on that momentum. There is often a noticeable retention of new customers, even if it’s only for a few months. Publishers see this and have stepped up by offering new stories as well.

“Out of the 50-some-odd titles that we have, almost half of them are going to be new exclusive material. It’s created for Free Comic Book Day, and it’s not just for people who haven’t read comics,” says Huang.

Advertisement

“Financially, once we got into the swing of things [after a few years], Free Comic Book Day became our Black Friday. It’s the single biggest day of the year for us oftentimes. We do see some retention, and we try to foster that when they come back in.”

To do that, there are dozens of books being offered from a diverse range of publishers (see video above for titles or click here). Publishers have grown more savvy, but the audience is also more nuanced and knowledgeable about comics.

“Publishers have gotten better at this. They’re putting their ‘A game’ forth. It’s great for DC to put out Batman, but everybody knows Batman. Companies like Image and Boom! Studios, they have a lot of really great properties that aren’t as well known. To have them put out books that reach more casual readers beyond the standard capes and cowls books that you normally think of for comics, that’s where we see a lot of the excitement coming from.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The prime-time TV grid is on hiatus in print. You can find more TV coverage at: latimes.com/whats-on-tv.

SERIES

The Zoo: San Diego A hippo welcomes an adorable addition to the family and a team travels to Kenya to share their innovative milk formula for elephant calves. Another segment features an orphaned koala joey as the documentary series returns for a new season. 8 p.m. Animal Planet

Advertisement



Eden: Untamed Planet The new episode “Galapagos: Enchanted Isles” takes viewers to the Pacific Ocean archipelago of volcanic islands, one of the world’s most important areas of biodiversity. Helena Bonham Carter narrates. 8 p.m. BBC America

Pawn Stars (season premiere) 9 p.m. History

SPECIALS

Los Angeles LGBT Center’s Love in Action Telethon This new fundraiser is hosted by Cher Calvin and Jai Rodriguez. Scheduled to appear are Adam Lambert; Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin; Jane Lynch and Manila Luzon; Nate Berkus; Belinda Carlisle; Melissa Etheridge; Eva Longoria; RuPaul; Trans Chorus of Los Angeles; Gabrielle Union; Rufus Wainwright; Lena Waithe. 7 p.m. The CW

SPORTS

Little League Baseball Midwest Regional Final, 7 a.m. ESPN; New England Regional Final, 9 a.m. ESPN; West Regional Final 11 a.m. ABC; Great Lakes Regional Final, 1 p.m. ESPN; Northwest Regional Final, 5 p.m. ESPN

Golf PGA Tour — Wyndham Championship Third Round, 10 a.m. Golf and noon CBS; U.S. Amateur Championship Semifinals, noon Golf and 1 p.m. NBC

NFL Preseason Football The Chargers visit the Rams, 7 p.m. CBS, ABC and NFL. Also, the Miami Dolphins visit the Chicago Bears, 10 a.m. NFL; the Denver Broncos visit the Minnesota Vikings, 1 p.m. NFL; the Cleveland Browns visit the Jacksonville Jaguars, 4 p.m. NFL

Advertisement

Baseball The Cincinnati Reds visit the Philadelphia Phillies, 1 p.m. FS1; the Dodgers visit the New York Mets, 4 p.m. SportsNetLA; the Houston Astros visit the Angels, 6 p.m. BSW

MLS Soccer The LA Galaxy visit Minnesota United FC, 3 p.m. Fox

SATURDAY TALK SHOWS

Good Morning America (N) 7 a.m. KABC

Good Morning America Jeremy Parsons. (N) 9 a.m. KABC

Advertisement

Frank Buckley Interviews Heather O’Neill and Maria Fleet (“No Ordinary Life”). (N) 12:05 a.m. KTLA

MOVIES

Sing A pig, a mouse, a porcupine, a gorilla, an elephant and other animals gather at a koala’s theater for a singing competition in this 2016 animated feature featuring the voices of Matthew McConaughey, Reese Witherspoon, Seth MacFarlane, Scarlett Johansson, John C. Reilly, Taron Egerton, Jennifer Saunders, Jennifer Hudson and Peter Serafinowicz. 8:45 p.m. Freeform

Advertisement

Sealed With a Kiss: Wedding March 6 Jack Wagner and Josie Bissett reprise their roles as engaged inn owners in the final installment of the “Wedding March” TV movie franchise. Nathan Witte and Caitlin Stryker also star. 9 p.m. Hallmark

Tarzan (1999) 8 a.m. Freeform

The Matrix (1999) 8 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. POP

The Snows of Kilimanjaro (1952) 8 a.m. TCM

Advertisement

Forgetting Sarah Marshall (2008) 8:14 a.m. and 3:32 p.m. Encore

Love and Monsters (2020) 8:15 a.m. Epix

Obvious Child (2014) 8:30 a.m. TMC

Say Anything... (1989) 8:56 a.m. Cinemax

Advertisement

Instant Family (2018) 9 a.m. FXX

Kingsman: The Secret Service (2014) 9:30 a.m. FX

Captain Horatio Hornblower (1951) 10 a.m. TCM

Moonlight (2016) 10 a.m. TMC

Advertisement

Rabbit Hole (2010) 10:38 a.m. Cinemax

The Devil Wears Prada (2006) 10:39 a.m. Starz

The Help (2011) 11 a.m. Lifetime

Dunkirk (2017) 11:10 a.m. HBO

Advertisement

The Matrix Reloaded (2003) 11:25 a.m. POP

The Simpsons Movie (2007) 11:30 a.m. FXX

Batman Begins (2005) 11:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. Paramount

Back to the Future (1985) Noon and 7:30 p.m. CMT

Advertisement

Shrek (2001) Noon Nickelodeon

Changing Lanes (2002) Noon and 7:15 p.m. TMC

Hercules (1997) 12:05 p.m. Freeform

Moby Dick (1956) 12:15 p.m. TCM

Advertisement

Hook (1991) 12:30 p.m. Ovation

Field of Dreams (1989) 1 p.m. MLB

Planes, Trains and Automobiles (1987) 1:30 p.m. Epix

Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018) 1:30 p.m. FXX

Advertisement

Death Wish (1974) 1:40 p.m. TMC

Ghost (1990) 2 p.m. KCOP

The Nutty Professor (1996) 2 p.m. BET

Friday (1995) 2 and 8 p.m. MTV

Advertisement

John Wick (2014) 2 p.m. USA

The Little Mermaid (1989) 2:10 p.m. Freeform

Bridesmaids (2011) 2:30 and 10:30 p.m. Bravo

Back to the Future Part II (1989) 2:30 and 10 p.m. CMT

Advertisement

The Dark Knight (2008) 2:30 and 8:30 p.m. Paramount

Twelve O’Clock High (1949) 2:30 p.m. TCM

Creed (2015) 3 p.m. TNT

Animal House (1978) 3:30 p.m. IFC

Advertisement

I Am Legend (2007) 3:30 p.m. VH1

John Wick: Chapter 2 (2017) 4 p.m. USA

Six Degrees of Separation (1993) 4:26 p.m. Cinemax

Back to the Future Part III (1990) 5 p.m. CMT

Advertisement

The Big Country (1958) 5 p.m. TCM

Men in Black (1997) 5:26 p.m. Encore

Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1992) 5:30 p.m. Ovation

Creed II (2018) 5:30 p.m. TNT

Advertisement

Moana (2016) 6:15 p.m. Freeform

John Wick: Chapter 3 — Parabellum (2019) 6:30 and 9:15 p.m. USA

Top Gun (1986) 7:07 p.m. Encore

Mission: Impossible — Ghost Protocol (2011) 8 p.m. Epix

Advertisement

Don’t Breathe (2016) 8 p.m. FX

Jurassic Park (1993) 8 p.m. HBO

Fast Times at Ridgemont High (1982) 8 p.m. IFC

The Silence of the Lambs (1991) 8 p.m. Ovation

Advertisement

The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit (1956) 8 p.m. TCM

Black Panther (2018) 8 p.m. TNT

Apollo 13 (1995) 8:30 p.m. Syfy

Shazam! (2019) 8:30 p.m. TBS

Advertisement

Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues (2013) 10 p.m. Comedy Central

Deadpool (2016) 10 p.m. FX

Almost Famous (2000) 10:05 p.m. IFC

The Omen (1976) 10:45 p.m. TCM

Advertisement

Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2017) 10:45 p.m. TNT

Advertisement

TV Grids for the week of Aug. 15 - 21 in PDF format TV Grids for the entire week of Aug. 15 - 21 as PDF files you can download and print



Advertisement

Movies on TV the week of Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format Movies on TV for the entire week, Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format for easy downloading and printing



Television What’s on TV: Television listings Looking for what to watch on TV? Here are the television listings from the Los Angeles Times in printable PDF files.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If the heat has you feeling like a spent dishrag, then get on up by streaming the absolutely joyous “Summer of Soul” on Hulu. It’s got music. It’s got moves. It’s got mounds of late ‘60s polyester. I’m Carolina A. Miranda, art and urban design columnist at the Los Angeles Times, and I’m here with all the cultural essentials:

Western history through a distortion lens

In Raul Guerrero‘s solo exhibition at David Kordansky Gallery, you start at the end. Specifically with the word “Fin,” which is painted in the undulating style of a cinematic end credit over an image of a stagecoach in the middle of a violent robbery. A man lies prone as if wounded. A woman pleads with a cowboy on horseback. Assorted bandits go about their ransacking.

The painting may depict an end of sorts, but in many ways, it’s a beginning — an excellent primer on Guerrero’s attitudes toward his subjects. The piece, “Ataque de Una Diligencia,” 1995-2021, marries his eclectic interests: cinema, colonial history and the ways in which culture is mediated. “That’s how we understand our history — as cinematic,” says Guerrero via telephone. “We know it through media.”

“Ataque de Una Diligencia,” 1995 - 2021,” by Raul Guerrero — on view in the artist’s solo show at Kordansky. (Elon Schoenholz / David Kordansky Gallery)

Advertisement

As with much of his work, it features a rich color palette and comes pre-loaded with a dose of absurdity. (The handsome lettering of the words hang like an elegant scrim over a scene of pure chaos.) The painting contains a mournful aspect too. As far as the European settlement of the West was concerned, episodes such as this did spell an end of sorts. But it wasn’t for the settlers; it was for the Indigenous cultures who lived in their path.

Guerrero’s one-man show, “Fata Morgana,” at Kordansky through the end of the month, offers a generous sampling of the sorts of images and ideas that drive this long-time Southern California painter’s work.

Born in Brawley, Guerrero grew up in National City and lives in San Diego. His father’s family was Indigenous — Tarahumara or Apache, he says — while his mother’s relatives were descended from Spain and France. He occupied a hybrid reality in more ways than one: Like a lot of Mexican Americans who grow up along the border, he spent his life traveling back and forth between Mexico and the United States and inhabiting a territory (Southern California) where those realities overlap in myriad ways.

“You are going through these paradigm shifts and these different reality shifts,” he says. “That inspires the imagination, simply because you are living in a shifted situation.”

Newsletter Your essential guide to the arts in L.A. Get Carolina A. Miranda's weekly newsletter for what's happening, plus openings, critics' picks and more. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Now 75, Guerrero has never settled into one reality, and the show at Kordansky — which features paintings from various stages of his career — reflects that. This includes paintings of food, bar interiors, invented historical scenes, canvases inspired by filmmaking and his appropriations of romantic 19th century paintings of Native Americans.

One series was inspired by his journeys through South Dakota in the 1990s. Driving through the Pine Ridge Reservation, he hung out with a group of Indigenous women who had car trouble. This was followed by his own automative break-down in the Black Hills where he ended up in a joint worthy of a Hollywood Western.

“The first night I walk into this bar/restaurant/saloon and it’s 1990 and my hair is dark and I’m Mexican ... and I thought, I’m going to get killed,” he says. “These men are all at the bar and they all have long hair and beards and they look like they are straight out of a movie. I realized that everything I knew about this place was through media — movies, television.”

Advertisement

In the wake of that journey, he placed some of those faces in paintings inspired by the history of Western settlement, but also by Westerns. There are barroom standoffs and “Wanted” posters and Gen. George Custer getting shot with arrows. All of this is delivered in a deeply saturated color palette that Guerrero describes as “Looney Tunes.”

It’s an interesting parallel. The ways in which U.S. history is recounted can sometimes feel like a cartoon.

An installation view of paintings from Raul Guerrero’s “The Black Hills” series, painted in 2021. (Jeff McLane / David Kordansky Gallery)

A pair of paintings depicting a hot dog and a chorizo platter in sickeningly garish colors show an artist who likes playing with his food. (He crafts faces out of mustard and jalapeños.) They also serve as his observations on the ways in which food travels across cultures.

Advertisement

“If you think of Mexican food ... it’s chiles, it’s tortillas de maíz, it’s carnitas, aguacates [avocados],” he says. “These are all Indigenous foods. I find it interesting that it’s taken ahold of the society. Everybody creates or digs Mexican food. But what they are really digging is Indigenous food.

“Could it be that Indigenous philosophy is spread through the food?” he asks. “That’s an interesting premise.”

Raul Guerrero’s painting “Hot Dog: The Weinerschnitzel,” 2006. (Elon Schoenholz / David Kordansky Gallery)

What do paintings of hot dogs and the Black Hills have in common? Guerrero’s perceptive eye. These are works that are less about the objects than the ways in which they are perceived. The paintings, taken together, function as a humorous ethnography of our culture — the American one, the Mexican one, the Indigenous one and the ways in which they fuse and collide in this place we now call Southern California.

Advertisement

“Raul Guerrero: Fata Morgana” is on view at David Kordansky Gallery through Aug. 28; davidkordansky.com.

Art report

At the California African American Museum, L.A.-born, New York-based artist Sanford Biggers has a solo show, “Codeswitch,” which explores quilting as material but also as a technique. He reassembles found quilts in ways that play on tradition. “Throughout the show, there’s a sense of these additive moves being made up as the artist went along, rather than following a predetermined design,” writes Times art critic Christopher Knight. “They radiate pleasure in the making.”

Sanford Biggers, “Reconstruction,” 2019, writes Christopher Knight, “is reminiscent of the folded planes of Japanese origami.” (RCH Photography)

Design time

A 1960s bank building in Inglewood has been reborn as a new performance hall and rehearsal space for the Youth Orchestra Los Angeles courtesy of Frank Gehry. It’s a warm and unfussy 272-seat performance hall with 45-foot ceilings and acoustic design by Nagata Acoustics International. A handsome work of adaptive reuse, it helps preserve at least one aspect of Inglewood’s profile at a time of rising rents and gentrification. “It’s not necessary to build a bright, shiny object that everybody looks at,” Gehry tells me. “The programming and the effect on the community — that is the issue.”

Advertisement

Once a Security Pacific Bank and, later, a Burger King, a 1965 building by Austin, Field & Fry has been transformed into a permanent home for Gustavo Dudamel’s YOLA. (Myung J. Chun/Los Angeles Times)

Performance notes

At the age of 83, stage and theater actress Annie Korzen (“Pen15,” “Oliver Beene” and “Seinfeld”) has developed a new fanbase by speaking her mind on TikTok. The Times’ Jessica Gelt sat down for an interview with Korzen, along with her pal Mackenzie Morrison, 30, who assists Korzen with tech and advice on how to stay relevant with the youngs. Reports Gelt: “Before TikTok, Korzen thought she knew her fan base: ‘middle-aged or older college-educated people, mostly women, mostly Jews.’ On TikTok, her followers represent all ages and a variety of races and ethnicities.”

Actress Annie Korzen is a technophobe who has nonetheless managed to assemble a big fanbase on TikTok. (Allen J. Schaben/Los Angeles Times)

The COVID-19 Delta variant is throwing a wrench into the theater community’s best-laid plans. Taylor Mac’s “Joy and Pandemic,” which was set to debut at the Magic Theater in San Francisco next month, has been postponed indefinitely. (Ironically, the work is set during the 1918 flu pandemic.) Berkeley Repertory Theatre has also postponed its schedule — a world premiere of “The Ripple, the Wave That Carried Me Home.” This pushes the theater’s reopening to November.

Advertisement

Pairings

Sometimes reading a story becomes more meaningful after reading another that informs it.

I’ve been enjoying artist Pablo Helguera‘s newsletter, “Beautiful Eccentrics,” which consists of erudite dispatches on a range of cultural subjects. In an essay published last month, titled “Unelected Affinities,” he talks about how objects — including works of art that go unacknowledged by gatekeepers — can nonetheless turn into “the signifiers of a period.”

That essay shaped my reading of a recent report by Times Middle East bureau chief Nabih Bulos. In it, he explores the one-year anniversary of the ammonium nitrate blast in Beirut, the third-largest non-nuclear explosion in history. It also leveled a set of grain silos at the port that served as improvised symbols of the country’s resilience. “They were like the pyramids, like the Eiffel Tower of Beirut,” artist Lamia Ziade tells Bulos. “Every time I passed them, I would think how lucky we were to have this sentinel, these silos, protecting us.”

A year later, they sit in a state of destruction and decay.

Advertisement

Enjoying this newsletter? Consider subscribing to the Los Angeles Times Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Become a subscriber.

There are two other pieces I read recently that also offer interesting resonances.

The first is the New Yorker‘s recent profile of landscape architect Kate Orff. A founder of SCAPE, Orff and her team are known for devising nature-based designs to help mitigate the effects of climate change. Her ideas first came to wide public attention in the 2010 exhibition “Rising Currents: Projects for New York’s Waterfront” at the Museum of Modern Art. At the time, Orff wanted to reinsert oyster beds into New York Bay — a process she referred to as “oyster-tecture.”

Oysters had once been plentiful in New York’s waters, but over the decades had been dredged to make way for shipping lanes. This removed a line of defense during deadly storm surges, such as the one that accompanied Hurricane Sandy, which made landfall in 2012.

Advertisement

Back in 2010, putting oysters back in the city’s waterways seemed like it stood a snowball’s chance in hell of getting implemented. But as the New Yorker’s Eric Klinenberg reports, that is exactly what’s happening now.

In 2010, MoMA took a group of designers and reporters on a cruise around New York Bay to examine sites where Kate Orff’s “oyster-tecture” might thrive. Eleven years later, some of her plans are becoming reality. (Carolina A. Miranda / Los Angeles Times)

That story pairs well with this beautifully illustrated report by my colleague Rosanna Xia, about how some California coastal communities are trying to re-wild beach areas, restoring sand dune ecosystems that function as critical buffers against rising sea levels. Currently, beach dunes are often “groomed” (a.k.a. raked and flattened) for the benefit of coastal development and beachgoers. Some scientists are saying it’s time to un-groom them.

Together, both reports tell an interesting story about the ways in which the designers of the future may build: with oysters and sand.

Advertisement

Essential happenings

The Delta variant is making outdoor events more appealing than ever — and The Times’ Matt Cooper has some good ones in his weekly events round-up, including a production of “The Tempest” at the Griffith Park Free Shakespeare Festival and a site-specific performance by the Heidi Duckler Dance Company on the Wallis’ outdoor stage.

If you happen to be running around Koreatown, don’t miss Gabriela Ruiz‘s installation, “Grounding, Prevent from Flying,” at the diminutive new art space LaPau Gallery. (It’s in the same ramshackle, two-story building as Commonwealth and Council.) At LaPau, Ruiz has transformed the space — which is literally the size of a very large closet — into a riotous, color-saturated immersive experience that is a little bit like stepping into another dimension. Think of it as a mysterious trapdoor that leads to wonders beyond.

“Grounding, Prevent from Flying” is on view at LaPau Gallery through Aug. 21; lapaugallery.com.

A detail of Gabriela Ruiz’s installation at LaPau Gallery, a closet-sized space in Koreatown. (Salvador Lara / LaPau Gallery)

Advertisement

Entering its final weekend is “Intergalactix: Against Isolation / Contra el Aislamiento, an intriguing group exhibition at Los Angeles Contemporary Exhibitions (LACE) organized by curator Daniela Lieja Quintanar, featuring work that explores borders of a physical and psychological nature. This includes compelling work by artists such as Beatriz Cortez, Tanya Aguiñiga and Cog*nate Collective.

Particularly worthwhile is a suite of videos by Fire Theory, a collective of artists that came together in El Salvador and now operates internationally. This includes the beautiful and haunting “El sonido del viento en las tierras de nadie (The sound of the wind on no one’s lands),” 2020-21, by Melissa Guevara and Ernesto Bautista, which features audio of people discussing their motives for immigrating against images of stark desert landscapes, along with some poetic observations about the nature of those landscapes.

Most riveting was an installation film by Bautista. “Teatro del desencuentro (Theater of Missed Connections),” from 2018-21, centers on the story of a group of young children trapped in a cage. There they discuss migration, violence, the American dream and have some intensely metaphysical conversations about their condition.

“Are we dead or alive?” asks a squeaky-voiced child early on in the piece.

Advertisement

A still from Ernesto Bautista’s “Teatro del Desencuentro,” 2018, on view at LACE. (Ernesto Bautista)

Interestingly, this work of performance was not written by adults. The dialogue was inspired by a series of discussions and improvisations staged at a theater workshop with children in Tegucigalpa. Moreover, large portions of the video are filmed at angles that feel more like surveillance than cinema. It is surreal and unsettling — made more so by the fact that child detention has not ended with the advent of the Biden administration.

Bautista’s piece is intended to be seen as part of a 360-degree video installation. But for reasons of space, it is presented at LACE as a single-channel video. Here’s hoping some enterprising museum curator picks up on it and gives this theater of the oppressed the space and treatment it so richly deserves.

“Intergalactix: against isolation/contra el aislamiento” is on view at LACE through Sunday; welcometolace.org. Melissa Guevara and Ernesto Bautista’s videos will be available for viewing on LACE’s website through Aug. 31.

Advertisement

Passages

Hung Liu, an Oakland-based painter known for creating work that explored identity, migration and the Maoist culture she grew up in, in her native China, is dead at 73. This comes just as the artist opened a solo show at San Francisco’s de Young Museum.

In other news

— A logical next step: New York’s Immersive Van Gogh experience is partnering with a cannabis brand for some special events.

— How the new documentary, “The Lost Leonardo,” tracks the rise and disappearance of the mysterious “Salvator Mundi” attributed to Leonardo Da Vinci.

— A great profile of Ishmael Reed, the writer and satirist who wrote the play “The Haunting of Lin-Manuel Miranda,” a critique of the founding father mythology that saturates “Hamilton.”

— How museums are rethinking their roles in the era of climate change, courtesy of new grants from the Frankenthaler Foundation.

— Speaking of climate: A typhoon swept a Yayoi Kusama sculpture into the sea and I’m imagining the countless cinematic possibilities of floating pumpkin sculptures in a Hollywood apocalypse picture.

— In South Korea, how one hospital has designed a mobile, contactless COVID-19 testing booth.

— Plus: Why isn’t the COVID-19 vaccine card designed to fit in our wallet?

— Variations on a theme: what the White House could have looked like.

And last but not least ...

Café Tacvba frontman Rubén Albarrán recently teamed up with San Diego band the Color Forty Nine on the song “What would I know? — ¿Yo que sé?” Tijuana artist Hugo Crosthwaite (who I have interviewed in the past) designed the animations for their video and they are terrific.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The following contains spoilers from the Season 1 finale of “The White Lotus.”

“The White Lotus,” writer-director Mike White’s sinister satire of Western imperialism, luxury tourism, the class divide and Oberlin College reading lists, has emerged as the most talked-about TV series of the summer. But it’s hard to tell with precision whether that’s thanks to its dreamy setting, its earworm of a score or the tragicomic stylings of Jennifer Coolidge.

Sunday’s season — not series — finale may tie up the loose ends of its multi-stranded narrative, but this is “The White Lotus,” so there’s still plenty of mess. (In one unforgettable moment, quite literally.) Did White stick the landing on his group portrait of trouble in paradise or did that hectic final hour reveal the series’ seams? Times TV critic Lorraine Ali and staff writer Meredith Blake break it all down, from the ideological to the scatological.

Newsletter The complete guide to home viewing Get Screen Gab for weekly recommendations, analysis, interviews and irreverent discussion of the TV and streaming movies everyone’s talking about. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Advertisement

Meredith Blake, staff writer: Aloha, Lorraine! Our stay at “The White Lotus” has ended and there is much to discuss, but I suppose we have no choice but to start with the elephant in the room — or, to be more precise, the steaming turd in the Pineapple Suite. For six episodes now, “The White Lotus” has kept us playing an irresistible game of guess-who’s-in-the-coffin. We now have an answer, as well as an indelible image of a grown man pooping into a suitcase before keeling over and dying in a king-sized bathtub. It’s a death destined to go down in HBO history.

Lorraine Ali, TV critic: Mahalo, Meredith, for starting this convo exactly where I expected you would. Mystery solved, but not before paradise literally turns to [unprintable word here]. Frankly, everyone was so unhappy at the resort that death seemed like a sweet release. The collection of reprehensible characters doing insidiously horrible things in the series was impressive in a misery-porn sort of way.

Blake: Some might dismiss the dead-body-at-the-top-of-the-series as a gimmick, but I found it devastatingly effective in ratcheting up the tension and dread. And the whole murder-mystery-in-an-exquisite-setting is a time-honored tradition dating back to Agatha Christie. To White’s credit, there were many characters who seemed destined for (or deserving of) an untimely death. For a while there I was sure that Tanya’s boyfriend — you know, the one from BLM — was a serial killer who was going to murder her and run off with her jewels. At another point, I was convinced Quinn would kill off his family in a scuba diving “accident.” There was even a minute or two when I thought Kai would get back at Paula for screwing him over in such spectacular fashion.

Armond was clearly on a downward spiral from Episode 1, but I wasn’t completely sure he was a goner until he unbuckled his pants and unleashed his bowels on Shane’s hideous seascape sweater. (If only it had been his Cornell hat!) And even then, I prayed for a miracle, because I have found Murray Bartlett so brilliant and sympathetic as Armond, a man whose tightly wound, obsequious demeanor can’t quite mask his deep-seated despair. (Bartlett is every bit as good as the rightfully praised Coolidge, IMHO.) I’m at least glad that Armond went out in a blaze of coke-fueled glory, giving a virtuoso final performance as dinner host (set to “Jesu, Joy of Man’s Desiring”) before taking that cathartic revenge dump. Best of all, he died with a look of peace on his face.

Ali: I was rooting for Paula to beat Olivia to death with her copy of “Discourse on Colonialism,” or for Lani, the pregnant employee who vanishes after giving birth in Armond’s office, to come back and slay someone. Anyone. (OK, Shane first.) I needed a follow-up to her story. One of the problems I had with the series is that it spent too much time satirizing the self-centered issues of the resort’s rich guests and their interplay with the staff instead of exploiting the despondency on both sides of the divide. The nuanced slow burn of wealthy folks drowning in their own dysfunction is nothing new, especially to HBO, and it was a slog at times. That said, Armond was also one of my favorite characters, and his exit was epic.

Blake: It certainly was. Because I am an intrepid journalist, I immediately began to wonder about the mechanics of the deadly doo-doo. (For starters, what was the turd made of? Who was responsible for creating the fake poop? Props? Visual effects? God forbid… craft services?) But mostly I admired White for his willingness to completely and utterly go there and make the scene as over-the-top as possible. A more timid filmmaker would have cut to a tasteful close-up of Armond’s face before the first turd fell. But not White. In any case, the poo-nami was a fitting farewell for Armond, and a microcosm of the show as a whole — twisted, outrageously funny and deeply sad all at once.

The thing I love about White’s work, dating back to the dear, departed “Enlightened,” is his comfort with complexity, his willingness to be deeply compassionate to the characters he’s also skewering, the ease with which he switches from poetry to potty humor. In a single episode you can have an underwater sequence so beautiful it brought a tear to my eye (side note: He really loves sea turtles) and a gross-out close-up of a poop. Just like life itself! Anyway, I’ll curtail my verbal diarrhea and let you share your thoughts.

Advertisement

Ali: Thank you, Meredith. I will never again think of craft services in the same way. By the finale, I did not care who ended up going home in that box. Like Tom Hanks, I just wanted off the island.

Blake: Let’s talk a little bit about who does and doesn’t get off the island. You raise a good point about Lani. I also wondered what became of poor, tragic Kai, who’s last seen running down the beach after the ill-fated heist. You could argue that White is simply less interested in what happens to the less affluent, non-white characters in the series. In fact, he told me he was “trying to get into the mind-set of the people who have money and the power” with this series. To that end, I felt like White was making a point about how expendable the employees are at a place like the White Lotus — they’re here one day, gone the next, only to be replaced by a new batch of “pleasant, interchangeable helpers,” as Armond once put it.

Even the supposedly progressive Paula ultimately treats Kai like a pawn in a revenge plot against the Mossbachers, never reaching out to him because she knows better than to implicate herself. That last shot of Belinda, robotically greeting another boatload of awful rich people as she stands next to Lani and Armond’s replacements, her life playing out like an endless rerun of “Fantasy Island,” says it all, really.

Advertisement

For the resort’s guests, things mostly turn out fine — which is how the world works when you’re wealthy. Rachel resigns herself to life as a plus one, which honestly sounds OK compared to being a poorly paid content aggregator. Despite literally killing someone, Shane jets off to Tahiti — where he is destined to never finish “Blink” — with nary a slap on the wrist. Tanya finally lets go of her mom’s ashes and heads to Aspen with her probably dying boyfriend.

The one person who seems significantly healthier by week’s end is Quinn, who has freed himself from the shackles of technology and is off on his hokule’a. Do we think he’ll get bored and fly back home? HBO recently announced plans for a second season of “The White Lotus,” with a new setting and presumably new guests. Got any suggestions for White to make the next season less excruciating for you?

Ali: White definitely makes the point that inequality is baked into the character outcomes, which stands to reason since that is the reality of the world — and so many cruise ship ports. But he does so almost exclusively from the colonizer’s vantage point, which is problematic on a lot of levels. For starters, it limits the series by giving it the same blind spots as the resort’s self-centered guests. There’s no shortage of satirical series out there about affluent jerks treating others like disposable wipes, and “The White Lotus” had the perfect chance to stretch that formula when it took a family like the Mossbachers out of their usual habitat and brought in characters like Lani and Kai. But it never moved beyond the absurdity of white affluence — money in lieu of parenting, the lopsided power-differential in their marriage — which frankly felt played out.

Advertisement

I mean, we both love the soundtrack by Cristobal Tapia De Veer, right? A large part of what makes it amazing is that it sounds like a collision of opposing cultures at the resort, a mixture of the tension between mainlanders and islanders, colonizers and natives, both historically and now. For me, Season 2 would be far more dynamic and smarter if it ventured into the employee break room before the hukilau dinner show or lei greeting or whatever “native entertainment” awaits guests at the next season’s White Lotus property. And that does not mean turning this HBO series into a woke diatribe. God no. It needs to stay sardonic with its working-class and non-white characters too (see “Ramy” or “Atlanta” for pointers). As for Quinn, I predict he’ll end up running a Sandals-like property in the 2024 spin-off “The Blue Flip Flop.”

Blake: Book now for the best rates!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tucked away at the end of a secluded cul-de-sac, Nichelle Nichols’ Woodland Hills home was a testament to her boundary-breaking career spanning more than 70 years. Nichols lined walls and shelves with photos of herself as Lt. Uhura on the original “Star Trek” series, memorabilia from her legions of fans and documentation of her contributions to NASA’s recruitment of women and people of color in the 1970s.

The home was Nichols’ pride and joy, say those close to the star. She purchased it in 1982 for $12,000 and meticulously planned its details, from her plush, oversize furniture to the garden where she planted roses to the neighboring property she purchased in 1994 to use as a guesthouse and workspace for projects.

Questions around the fate of Nichols’ home — who lives in it and what happens to it — have been central to an ongoing, years-long legal battle over the finances and care of the beloved TV star, who friends and family say is financially drained and struggling with dementia.

A three-way fight over Nichols’ fate involves her only child, Kyle Johnson, who is also her conservator; her former manager Gilbert Bell; and a concerned friend, Angelique Fawcette.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Nichelle Nichols in her role as Lt. Uhura in “Star Trek” projects from 1966 to 1982.

(CBS )

In 2018, Johnson filed a petition for conservatorship, arguing that his mother’s dementia made her susceptible to exploitation. In 2019, Bell filed a lawsuit against Johnson, alleging attempts to remove him from Nichols’ guest home, where he has lived since 2010, and “aggressive and combative behavior.”

Bell says that while living in close proximity to Nichols, he helped to restore her career and financial well-being. According to Johnson, who filed a countersuit against Bell in 2020, Nichols’ home was the place where her former manager “exerted his undue influence and took control over Ms. Nichols’ assets and personal affairs,” misappropriating the star’s income as her health deteriorated and memory faded.

Fawcette, a producer and actress who met Nichols in 2012, entered the legal fight opposing Johnson’s conservatorship petition. Fawcette pushed for visitation rights to spend time with her friend, and she argued for Nichols to stay in Woodland Hills — a scenario that has looked increasingly improbable.

At 88, Nichols no longer occupies the house. Last year, Johnson moved her to New Mexico, where he and his wife live. Johnson declined The Times’ requests to speak with Nichols directly.

Against the backdrop of the #FreeBritney movement around Britney Spears raising public consciousness about conservatorships, Nichols’ former agent and friend have launched court battles to intervene, they said in interviews. Their fear: Nichols is being denied a chance to live out her remaining years as she wants.

Advertisement

° ° °

Born in Robbins, Ill., Grace Nichols was renamed Nichelle as a teenager moving into the world of professional entertainment. She sang and danced through the Chicago club circuit in the 1940s and 1950s, and after her brief marriage to fellow dancer Foster Johnson and the birth of son Kyle, she moved to L.A. to focus on film and television.

In 1959, Nichols had a small role in the Samuel Goldwyn production of “Porgy and Bess,” which brought her together with some of the most successful Black stars of the day, including Sammy Davis Jr. and Dorothy Dandridge. Nichols met “Star Trek” creator Gene Roddenberry in 1963 after being cast in an episode of his TV series “The Lieutenant,” and in 1966 she made her debut as communications officer Lt. Nyota Uhura in “Star Trek.”

Nichelle Nichols as Lt. Uhura in the original “Star Trek” series. (CBS)

Frustrated with the lack of depth in her role, Nichols considered leaving “Star Trek” during the first season. A chance encounter with Martin Luther King Jr., a Trekker, changed her mind. He told her she was a trailblazer — a Black woman on TV in a nonstereotypical role. Although the original “Star Trek” series was short-lived, running three years until 1969, Nichols became an icon, appearing in the many manifestations of the “Star Trek” franchise, including the animated show and a string of feature films.

In 1970, Nichols attended her first “Star Trek” convention, and at a 1975 event, NASA representative Jesco von Puttkamer sparked her relationship with the space agency. In 1977, NASA hired Nichols to help recruit astronauts for its space shuttle program.

Over four months, she appeared in TV public service announcements and traveled the country to speak at universities and professional science organizations to encourage women and people of color to apply. NASA credited Nichols for helping to attract astronauts including Sally Ride and Frederick Gregory.

With a NASA doctor standing by, Nichelle Nichols walks on a treadmill in 1977 as part of her work recruiting women and people of color to the space program. (PhotoQuest / Getty Images)

The space shuttle orbiter OV-101, dubbed Enterprise, unveiled in 1976 in Palmdale with, from left, NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher and “Star Trek” actors DeForest Kelley, George Takei, Nichols and Leonard Nimoy, series creator Gene Roddenberry and actor Walter Koenig. (Space Frontiers / Getty Images)

But for many years, conventions provided Nichols’ primary connection to the public. In her 1994 autobiography, she writes, “Star Trek” conventions “are unlike any other fan gathering, perhaps because a Trekker is unlike any other fan in the world. One would be hard-pressed to find such a large group of intelligent, sensitive, aware people.”

And fans loved Nichols, says Adam Malin, co-founder of Creation Entertainment, which has staged traveling fan conventions since 1971. Malin considers her “the ultimate ambassador for what we hope the future could be.”

Advertisement

The fan gatherings were a major source of income for Nichols, who commanded top dollar for her signature and photos. She drew lines that would last all day long, says Chase Masterson, a “Star Trek: Deep Space Nine” actor who appeared with Nichols at conventions.

But by the time Bell began working with Nichols — in 2009, according to court documents — the convention appearances had dried up, and Nichols was struggling financially, says Bell, 82.

The two had met earlier that year, hitting it off over lunch at P.F. Chang’s. Bell became Nichols’ manager, helping her book conventions, other appearances, films and TV projects.

After he sold his home in Studio City, Bell says, Nichols encouraged him to move into her guesthouse for free in 2010. (He began paying rent, $300 a month, after two years of living in the guesthouse.) Bell recalls her saying, “We’re only across the driveway from each other, and we’ll be able to develop these projects much faster.”

Under his guidance, Nichols began to recover financially, going from one or two convention bookings a year to at least three a month, Bell says. Nichols could earn $10,000 to $15,000 for attending a small convention and $40,000 to $50,000 participating in major conventions, he says.

While Bell was her manager, her annual income reached several hundred thousand dollars, he claimed, although her son Johnson disputes that number and characterizes Bell’s accounting records as “extremely deficient.”

In January 2013, Nichols collapsed in her living room and was taken to the hospital, where she was diagnosed with pancreatitis — attributed to alcohol, Johnson says. Johnson, 70, says he and other family members noticed an increase in her drinking over the years. Bell attributes Nichols’ struggles with convention bookings at the time to alcohol.

“She denied it,” Johnson says, “and did not want to do any kind of [Alcoholics Anonymous], Betty Ford [Center] or any such alcohol treatment.”

Nichelle Nichols with her son, Kyle Johnson, at the annual “Star Trek” convention in 2019 in Las Vegas. (Gabe Ginsberg / Getty Images)

While Nichols recovered in the hospital, Bell, Johnson and Fawcette crossed paths. Fawcette and her husband, writer-director Steven Fawcette, met Nichols while casting their “Star Trek” parody film “Unbelievable!!!!!” They describe Nichols at the time as gravely ill.

Advertisement

On a low point during her recovery, the couple say, they were the only two people by Nichols’ side.

“She was definitely gasping for breath,” Angelique Fawcette, 51, says. “She was calling out to her people who had passed away.”

After weeks in the hospital, Nichols moved into a nursing and rehabilitation facility. Nichols tried to leave the facility twice on her own, Bell says, so he took her home — against medical advice and without the consent of her family.

On the day Bell helped Nichols leave the rehabilitation facility, she signed an advance health care directive and a general power of attorney naming Bell as primary agent, allowing him to make healthcare decisions and to manage finances for her. Angelique Fawcette was named as a successor.

That night, Fawcette says, Nichols asked her to record a video about what she wanted in her later years. In the interview, titled “Nichelle’s Own Words,” Nichols responds to questions about her career and desire to work.

During an edited, hourlong interview posted over three videos, Nichols — then 80 — appears coherent at times but repeats herself at others. She says relatives, including Johnson, tried to convince her to work less.

“My son thinks that I should be letting up, you know. I say to him, ‘Kyle, when you pay my bills you’ll be able to tell me what to do.’”

Fawcette says Nichols told her that she would know when to release the video. And five years later, in 2018, Fawcette published it to YouTube during the conservatorship proceedings.

× In a video called “Nichelle’s Own Words,” the performer talks to producer Angelique Fawcette about her career and desire to continue working.

After the hospitalization, Nichols continued working, making the convention rounds and appearing in film and on TV, including on “The Young and the Restless” in 2016.

Advertisement

“It was because I got her off alcohol and turned her career around professionally that she was working,” Bell says.

With Bell and Nichols, the line blurred between manager, caregiver and friend, he says. Bell cooked meals every day. After Nichols had a mild stroke in 2015, she required more intense care. Bell arranged for physical therapists, caregivers and assistants.

“It was very, very close, as it often happens between managers and their clients in Los Angeles, because it’s intensely personal work,” says Bell’s attorney, William Bowen.

Gilbert Bell, 82, Nichols’ former manager. In 2010 he moved into Nichols’ guesthouse as he managed her career. (Mel Melcon / Los Angeles Times)

Fawcette says her bond with Nichols also deepened, as she came to view the star as a family member. She describes Bell as Nichols’ “gatekeeper,” controlling who had access to the performer. “I never really liked the guy. ... I had to deal with him in order to see my friend.”

Fawcette says Nichols’ home fell into a state of disrepair. Before Nichols’ 85th birthday celebration, she found the performer’s closet empty. At one point, she reached out to Nichols’ younger sister, Marian Nichols Smothers, for help.

“It was just getting to be too much, where the family was not intervening in the manner in which they should,” Fawcette says.

Johnson says he came to L.A. intermittently to help Nichols with tasks around the home, but Bell and Fawcette say Johnson was a rare presence in Nichols’ life in the years leading up to the conservatorship.

Then Bell reached out to Steven Fawcette with a surprise: Bell wanted to marry Nichols. Bell says he and Nichols talked about marriage as a business partnership, a way to ensure that she was protected financially.

The Fawcettes called Smothers and Johnson in a state of panic. That was around early 2018.

Advertisement

In May 2018, Johnson petitioned for conservatorship, known in other states as a legal guardianship, nominating a team of licensed professional fiduciaries to temporarily control Nichols’ person — including healthcare, food, clothing and housing — as well as her estate, the financial assets. In the petition, Johnson claimed Nichols has “severe short-term memory loss impacting her executive functioning. ... Certain individuals have unduly exerted themselves into Ms. Nichols’ life to her detriment.”

Johnson says the trigger for filing a conservatorship petition was learning that Bell in 2017 had transferred Nichols’ home into his name as power of attorney. The petition kicked off three years of legal proceedings — with objections and battles over the cost of legal representation.

In 2019 court documents, Johnson indicated that for one 144-day period, Nichols’ temporary conservator had requested nearly $115,000 to cover fiduciary and attorney fees. Fighting over conservatorship can be so costly it often hurts the conservatee, says Kurt Eggert, director of the Elder Law Center at Chapman University’s Dale E. Fowler School of Law. “It’s a tragedy if fighting over who gets to control the estate chews up too much of that estate; the conservatee is powerless to stop that.”

After filing the petition, the probate court suspended Bell’s power of attorney, and Nichols’ home was transferred back into her name. Johnson moved to L.A. to serve as Nichols’ sole caregiver and mapped out appearances at conventions, “which allowed us to pull her back from the brink, financially,” he says. “She was completely underwater at her own bank.”

Producer Angelique Fawcette holds a photograph taken in 2016 of her and Nichols. (Mel Melcon / Los Angeles Times)

In August 2018, Fawcette went to court to object to Johnson’s petition for conservatorship, arguing that Nichols was able to manage her personal and financial affairs with limited help from a caregiver or assistant. Fawcette accused Johnson of primarily wanting access to Nichols’ income and personal property. In a court response he filed to Fawcette’s petition to enforce visitation rights, Johnson accused the producer of wanting to profit from Nichols’ fame.

In January 2019, Johnson was appointed conservator of Nichols’ person and estate, but the battle continued.

In a video Bell recorded in April of that year, Nichols reads conservatorship documents in her guesthouse. “I didn’t give permission to have conservatorship over me,” she says to Bell. When Johnson enters and leads her back to her main house, she shrieks, “You get your hands off of me.”

The video, first reported by a CBS station in Atlanta, cast doubt not only on Johnson but also on Bell, criticized for releasing upsetting footage of a dementia patient who might not have had the capacity to approve of its public release.

People with dementia often “object to somebody else making decisions for them. Even if it’s necessary, even if they are no longer able to make their own decisions,” Eggert says. “You can imagine how frustrating it is to feel like your decision-making power is being taken away from you.”

Advertisement

A 2020 deposition of the former court-appointed temporary conservator of the estate, licensed professional fiduciary BJ Hawkins, shed additional light on the substantial financial difficulties Nichols faced. In an analysis, Hawkins cited money that couldn’t be accounted for, poorly written contracts and a significant amount of debt.

“It was clear that other people had handled her financial affairs and that there was no evidence that they handled them in a way that was to her best benefit,” Hawkins told The Times, echoing her court testimony.

In the deposition, Hawkins also said that in her experience with Johnson, he was prone to explosive outbursts of anger and that she had “areas of deep and grave concern that he would not be able to act in the best interest of the conservatee, despite the fact that it was his mother and despite the fact that it is my general position that a member of the family is in the best position to act in the role of conservatorship of the person.”

° ° °

What is Nichols’ condition these days? How exactly does the “Star Trek” legend want to live out her final years? And if her wish was to be cared for at home in Woodland Hills, as friends suggest, would that even be an option, given her financial problems and the high cost of in-home care?

The answers remain unclear. After initially talking with The Times, Johnson largely declined to respond to subsequent requests for comment.

For many people struggling with dementia — financially, logistically, emotionally — moving in with family or even into a care facility sometimes is the best choice, especially as needs increase. But while Johnson says the isolation in New Mexico protects Nichols from exploitation, others say she’s being deprived of the love and support of friends. Sci-fi magazine founder Kerry O’Quinn, who has been close with Nichols since they met 40 years ago at a “Star Trek” convention, hasn’t seen his friend in more than two years.

Fawcette, who last saw Nichols in mid-2019, is working with an attorney to win the right to visit in New Mexico.

Meanwhile the progression of Nichols’ dementia is unclear. Smothers says her sister has had considerable memory loss.

“I feel like I’ve already lost my sister in so many ways,” Smothers says. “She’s not the person she used to be, the vibrant, in-charge, take care of everything person.”

“Star Trek: Deep Space Nine” actor Nana Visitor, who last saw Nichols two years ago at a Las Vegas convention, says Nichols appeared frightened and confused at times. Even though they had appeared at conventions together for more than 20 years, Nichols didn’t recognize Visitor. “I would say something, and then she would ask immediately,” Visitor says. “It was as if I had not said it.”

Advertisement

What some are calling a farewell tour, organized by Johnson and agent Sky Conway, is moving forward despite Nichols’ condition. In March, Nichols visited L.A. to shoot a scene for the pilot “Renegades: Ominara,” billed on Kickstarter as her final performance. While shooting, Nichols needed a teleprompter to recite her lines.

“She likes attention, so when she was on set, she was fine,” producer Frank Zanca says.

Nichols on the set of “Renegades: Ominara” this spring. (Albert L. Ortega/Getty Images)

Nichols was scheduled to sign autographs at a Creation Entertainment “Star Trek” convention running this weekend, along with fellow headliners William Shatner, George Takei and Walter Koenig, but she canceled her appearance for unknown reasons. The Times reached out to the original “Star Trek” actors for comment, but none responded.

Nichols was scheduled for a visit in September to the Ohio headquarters of the International Federation of Trekkers, a “Star Trek” fan club created in 1984. The live event, recently canceled because of the nationwide surge in COVID-19, was described as Nichols’ “last public appearance east of Los Angeles before she enters retirement.”

One year ago Smothers launched a GoFundMe campaign to support Johnson on behalf of Nichols’ family — including her sister Diane Robinson and older brother Samuel Nichols. The campaign has raised about $146,000.

Bell continued to live in Nichols’ neighboring property and last saw her about two years ago. In his lawsuit, Johnson alleges that in 2015, Bell “induced” Nichols to procure a reverse mortgage on the property for more than $400,000. Bell says that he had nothing to do with the reverse mortgage and that Nichols pursued it independently.

Bell is photographed earlier this year by Nichols’ guest home. (Mel Melcon / Los Angeles Times)

He denies the allegations that he mishandled Nichols’ income. And he says he misses her “tremendously.”

Fawcette is upset that Nichols is not in her own house.

Advertisement

“She’s not getting the life that she wished for,” Fawcette says. “She’s getting the life that other people have chosen for her.”

The quest to bring Nichols home to Woodland Hills appears to be futile, however. Property records show that her house and guesthouse were sold last week for nearly $2.2 million to Baron Construction & Remodeling Co. On Friday, Bell confirmed that he moved out two weeks prior; in a brief email Saturday, Johnson says proceeds from the sale were placed in his mother’s conservatorship account to ensure her continued care.

Johnson says Nichols is living in a rental house in an undisclosed New Mexico location, where he serves as the primary caregiver.

“There’s still some sensitive issues,” Johnson says, explaining why he is declining The Times’ request to speak with Nichols. He’s just trying to protect his mother’s privacy, he says.

“We have moved here, and we’re going to remain here,” Johnson says from New Mexico. Nichols still has “financial issues that need to be settled.”

In the meantime, he says, Nichols’ home in New Mexico is “a nice place. Smaller, a little more modest than being in Los Angeles, but meeting our needs.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Free Guy,” an action comedy starring Ryan Reynolds as a background character in a video game, opened better than expected over the weekend, collecting an estimated $28.4 million in ticket sales despite a marketplace challenged by COVID-19.

After a few weeks of declining audiences and underwhelming debuts amid the Delta variant surge, “Free Guy” succeeded with an old-school formula: an original, star-fronted movie with good word-of-mouth playing only in theaters. The movie directed by Shawn Levy was made by the Walt Disney Co.-owned 20th Century Fox, with a theatrical release contractually stipulated for the roughly $100-million production.

Playing in 4,165 North American theaters, “Free Guy” was expected to debut around $20 million. Its surprisingly strong opening gave further proof to what some analysts have been saying throughout the year — hybrid releases that send new movies immediately onto streaming platforms can significantly sacrifice ticket sales. The last two No. 1 movies — Warner Bros.’ “The Suicide Squad” and Disney’s “Jungle Cruise” — debuted simultaneously in theaters and homes.

But however movies are being released right now, box office conditions are far from ideal. The rise in U.S. coronavirus cases over the last month has corresponded with diminished ticket sales at theaters. Some cities, including New York and San Francisco, are preparing to make vaccine passports required for entering movie theaters.

Advertisement

David A. Gross, who runs the movie consultancy FranchiseRe, estimates that new releases are selling about half the tickets they normally would.

“Since Memorial Day weekend, the domestic box office has been running at approx. 50% of 2019 levels, with several spikes from strong titles, but then returning to 50% of 2019,” Gross said in an email. “Under normal conditions, ‘Free Guy’ would be opening 50% higher than this weekend’s number — comfortably.”

But the enthusiasm for “Free Guy” was enough to lead Reynolds to announce Saturday that Disney wants a sequel. In the film, Reynolds’ character, Guy, realizes he’s a “non playable character” in a “Grand Theft Auto"-like game. It features co-stars Jodie Comer, Lil Rel Howery and Taika Waititi.

Reviews were good (82% fresh on Rotten Tomatoes), and a male-heavy audience gave “Free Guy” an “A” CinemaScore. (About 60% of moviegoers were male, Disney said.) “Free Guy” also added $22.5 million internationally.

“Free Guy” is also the latest in a comeback for gaming-based movies. After decades of futility, Hollywood is increasingly finding success by mining video games for intellectual property. Reynolds starred in one of the best performing video game adaptations — 2019’s “Pokémon: Detective Pikachu,” which grossed $432 million worldwide.

“Free Guy” will play exclusively in theaters for at least 45 days — and its strong performance through the weekend suggests it could buck the summer’s typical trend of fast drop-offs.

Last week’s top film, “The Suicide Squad,” slid steeply, dropping 70% in its second weekend. After its $26.2-million debut, James Gunn’s “Suicide Squad” redo pulled in just $7.8 million for Warner Bros., bringing its two-week total to $42.9 million. It’s concurrently playing on HBO Max.

That film’s tumble gave a few other releases more room at multiplexes. Sony Pictures’ horror sequel “Don’t Breathe 2” opened with $10.6 million, in line with studio projections. Although “Don’t Breathe 2” debuted with less than half the opening of the 2016 original, the sequel was made with a modest budget of $15 million.

Advertisement

MGM and United Artists’ Aretha Franklin biopic “Respect,” starring Jennifer Hudson, debuted with $8.8 million. “Respect,” which has drawn praise for Hudson’s leading performance, also landed an “A” CinemaScore. Its audience was 66% female.

Apple didn’t report grosses for “CODA,” one of the company’s major movie acquisitions and one seen as a crowd-pleasing milestone in deaf representation of on screen. The film, starring deaf actors Marlee Matlin, Troy Kotsur and Daniel Durant, was a prize-winning sensation at the Sundance Film Festival in January, where Apple plunked down a festival-record $25 million for the film. “CODA,” which stands for child of a deaf adult, debuted simultaneously in theaters and on Apple TV+.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SUNDAY

“The Walking Dead” comes ambling back for its 11th and final season. Anytime, AMC+ (Aug. 22 on AMC)

“Summer Under the Stars” continues with an all-day salute to Judy Garland that includes the 1954 melodrama “A Star Is Born.” 1:45 p.m. TCM

The special “All Creatures Great and Small: Between the Pages” offers a behind-the-scenes look at the veterinary drama. 7:30 p.m. KOCE

Advertisement

The family drama “Chesapeake Shores” launches its fifth season. With Treat Williams and Meghan Ory. 8 p.m. Hallmark Channel

A college coed might’ve pledged the wrong sorority in the new TV movie “Sisters for Life.” 8 p.m. Lifetime

A rogues’ gallery of 1970s-era homicidal maniacs are profiled in the new three-night series “Invisible Monsters: Serial Killers in America.” 9 p.m. A&E; also Monday-Tuesday

It’s checkout time at “The White Lotus” as this satirical series set at a posh Hawaiian resort ends its first season. With Connie Britton and Jennifer Coolidge. 9 p.m. HBO

It’s brother versus brother for control of the family-run wrestling business in the new series “Heels.” With “Arrow’s” Stephen Amell and “Vikings’” Alexander Ludwig. 9 p.m. Starz

It’s brother versus brother for bragging rights in the new culinary competition “Battle of the Brothers.” With chefs Bryan and Michael Voltaggio. 10 p.m. Food Network

MONDAY

Advertisement

“Bachelor in Paradise” returns with a rotating roster of guest hosts including David Spade, Lance Bass, rapper Lil Jon and Tituss Burgess. 8 p.m. ABC

I scream, you scream for the new ice cream-making competition “Ben & Jerry’s Clash of the Cones.” 9 p.m. Food Network; also Discovery+

“The Best Thing I Ever Ate” serves up a fresh batch of episodes. With chefs Andrew Zimmern, Anne Burrell, et al. 10:30 and 11 p.m. Food Network

TUESDAY

Advertisement

The sports doc “Untold: Deal With the Devil” tells the story of Christy Martin, the women’s boxing champ who survived a murder attempt by her then-husband in 2010. Anytime, Netflix

The reality series “My Big Fat Fabulous Life” and “Welcome to Plathville” each return with new episodes. 9 and 10:05 p.m. TLC

WEDNESDAY

Sprechen sie Deutsch? An American cop (Taylor Kitsch) searches for his missing brother in post-WWII Berlin in the new drama “The Defeated.” With “Dexter’s” Michael C. Hall. Anytime, Netflix

Advertisement

Our young Latina heroine (Tess Romero) is still a ways away from 1600 Pennsylvania Ave. in Season 2 of “Diary of a Future President.” With Gina Rodriguez. Anytime, Disney+

All creatures great and small — with an emphasis on “small” — strut their stuff in the new nature series “Growing Up Animal.” Anytime, Disney+

Listen, if you dare, to an incarcerated serial killer’s self-recorded recollections of his crimes in the new docuseries “Memories of a Murderer: The Nilsen Tapes.” Anytime, Netflix

Advertisement

There’s more weirdness than wellness happening at a high-end retreat run by Nicole Kidman in the new mystery series “Nine Perfect Strangers.” With Michael Shannon, Melissa McCarthy, Bobby Cannavale and Regina Hall. Anytime, Hulu

Would-be victims share first-person accounts of their brushes with death in new true-crime series “I Survived a Serial Killer.” 9:30 p.m. A&E

Awkwafina is still Nora from Queens in a second season of the sitcom “Awkwafina Is Nora From Queens.” 10 and 10:30 p.m. Comedy Central

THURSDAY

Advertisement

The special “Eyes on the Prize: Hallowed Ground” salutes filmmaker Henry Hampton and his Emmy-winning PBS series that documented the history of the civil rights movement. Anytime, HBO Max

“Jakob’s Wife” is having a midlife crisis — a very gory midlife crisis — in this 2021 horror tale. Barbara Crampton stars. Anytime, Shudder

The stand-up special “Marlon Wayans: You Know What It Is” catches the actor-comic cracking wise about family and fame. Anytime, HBO Max

American teens studying abroad compare and contrast the U.S. and foreign countries’ education systems in the documentary “Smartest Kids in the World.” Anytime, Discovery+

Advertisement

“Sweet Life: Los Angeles,” a new reality series from “Insecure’s” Issa Rae, follows a close-knit group of 20-somethings in South L.A. Anytime, HBO Max

Everything you always wanted to know about everyday objects is uncovered in the new series “The Uncommon History of Very Common Things.” Anytime, Crackle

COVID-19 rears its ugly head in the Season 3 premiere of the Canadian-made procedural drama “Coroner.” Serinda Swan stars. 8 p.m. The CW

Advertisement

A cool half-a-mil goes to the last person standing in the season finale of the survival competition “Alone.” A recap special follows. 9:30 and 11:05 p.m. History Channel

FRIDAY

Sparks fly between Adam Driver and Marion Cotillard in the 2021 musical fantasy “Annette,” featuring songs by sibling art-rock duo Ron and Russell Mael. Anytime, Amazon Prime

Sandra Oh settles into “The Chair” as head of the English department at a liberal arts college in this new comedy-drama. Jay Duplass also stars. Anytime, Netflix

Advertisement

Shh! A kid-friendly animated series goes big before it goes home in 2021’s “The Loud House Movie.” Anytime, Netflix

Woof! A different kid-friendly animated series also goes big in 2021’s “PAW Patrol: The Movie.” Anytime, Paramount+

The tide is high — thanks, global warming — but Hugh Jackman’s holding on in the post-apocalyptic 2021 thriller “Reminiscence.” Anytime, HBO Max

“Aquaman’s” Jason Momoa battles some shady pharmaceutical-industry types in the 2021 action thriller “Sweet Girl.” Anytime, Netflix

Advertisement

True-crime podcaster Octavia Spencer suspects gal pal Kate Hudson might not be on the up and up in Season 2 of the mystery drama “Truth Be Told.” Apple TV+

Everyday people continue to go viral — the good kind of viral — in a second season of “The Greatest #AtHome Videos.” Cedric the Entertainer hosts. 9 p.m. CBS

A pair of OG true-crime shows are back in business with reboots of “Cold Case Files” and “American Justice.” 9 and 10 p.m. A&E

Advertisement

SATURDAY

The new docuseries “Children of the Cult” investigates a scandal-plagued religious organization founded in Long Beach in the late 1960s. Anytime, Discovery+

Stars align to “Stand Up to Cancer” once more in a new edition of the annual telethon. Anthony Anderson, Sofia Vergara, Ken Jeong and his wife, Dr. Tran Ho, co-host. 8 p.m. CBS, NBC, ABC, Fox, E!, HBO, IFC, Showtime, Starz and various streaming platforms

Liam Neeson is a rancher with — say it with us, now — a particular set of skills in the Arizona-set 2021 action drama “The Marksman.” 8 p.m. Epix

Advertisement

A TV writer creates “A Little Daytime Drama” with her soap-star ex-boyfriend in this new TV movie. With Jen Lilley and Ryan Paevey. 9 p.m. Hallmark Channel

An Irish lass (Olivia Cooke) is caught between the mob and some murderous priests in the 2020 caper “Pixie.” Alec Baldwin also stars. 9 p.m. Showtime

Newsletter Get our daily Entertainment newsletter Get the day's top stories on Hollywood, film, television, music, arts, culture and more. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Advertisement

Movies on TV the week of Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format Movies on TV for the entire week, Aug. 15 - 21 in interactive PDF format for easy downloading and printing



Advertisement

TV Grids for the week of Aug. 15 - 21 in PDF format TV Grids for the entire week of Aug. 15 - 21 as PDF files you can download and print



Television What’s on TV: Television listings Looking for what to watch on TV? Here are the television listings from the Los Angeles Times in printable PDF files.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Despite mogul and marketing wizard Sean “Diddy” Combs’ bold assertion , he and his Bad Boy Records in-house production team, the Hitmen, didn’t invent the remix.

They did, however, during the label’s indomitable peak in the mid- to late 1990s, popularize and glamorize the remix, as hip-hop and R&B began to supplant rock as the sound of popular music. Producer Carl “Chucky” Thompson, who died Aug. 9 from COVID-19 complications at age 53, was a pillar of the Hitmen — which included Deric “D-Dot” Angelettie, Nashiem Myrick, Stevie J and Mario Winans — and his fingerprints are all over some of the greatest hip-hop/R&B records of the ‘90s and 2000s. Quietly, Thompson’s resume and musical acumen reflect so much of what remains singular about those genres during that era — particularly their fusion.

The Washington, D.C., native’s ability to spot the ties between R&B and its brash offspring, hip-hop, then create something novel in the overlap was the bedrock of the Bad Boy records that helped push the label, and Black music in general, up the mountain at a pivotal time for both. He produced three songs, including the chart-topping “ Big Poppa ” and the original “One More Chance ,” on the Notorious B.I.G.'s 1994 debut, “Ready to Die” — the album that propelled Bad Boy to a new plateau.

Thompson helped guide Mary J. Blige through the grief that inspired 1994’s “My Life,” producing almost the entirety of arguably the best R&B album of the decade. Not only did “My Life” utilize ‘70s soul samples from Barry White, Curtis Mayfield, Al Green and Roy Ayers to create the backdrop for Blige’s pain, it became the manifesto for Black women staring that pain in the face and pushing forward, even at their lowest moments.

Advertisement

“My Life” features background vocals from a then-unheralded Faith Evans, whom Thompson met while working on a teenage Usher’s “ Think of You ,” from his self-titled debut album, earlier that year. Impressed by Thompson, Evans enlisted him to produce the bulk of her debut, 1995’s “Faith.” From the snap of the drums, the intricate vocal layerings and the flourish of Thompson’s “Quiet Storm” sensibilities, “You Used to Love Me” and “ Soon as I Get Home ” showcase ‘90s R&B at its smoothest. Thompson was more than good taste and a deep record collection though. As he did with Blige, Thompson treasured Evans’ rough edges. Whereas most producers would have smoothed over Evans’ rawness, he harnessed it and set it to music that appealed to moms raised on Aretha and kids who knew every Biggie verse.

The ‘90s was a golden age for producers like Thompson, proficient in both hip-hop and R&B. The members of Organized Noize are best known for their work with OutKast and Goodie Mob, but they also produced TLC’s “ Waterfalls ” and En Vogue’s “ Don’t Let Go (Love) .” Jermaine Dupri was the maestro for his So So Def artists such as Xscape, but he also worked with Mase and Jay-Z. The Neptunes (N.O.R.E., Kelis, Jay-Z, and Clipse) and Timbaland (Aaliyah, Missy Elliott), mad scientists from Virginia, took apart and put back together the very sound of Black music; soon pop stars of all stripes were clamoring to work with them.

The ongoing fascination with hip-hop and R&B of the ‘90s and ‘00s has created a swell of content and commerce around it. The late Aaliyah is a point of obsession (even among fans too young to have experienced her music in real time), and the recent news that all of her music will finally be available on streaming platforms in the coming months has sparked interest 20 years after her death. The 2022 Lovers & Friends festival, with its massive, star-laden lineup , had to add a second show to keep up with demand. And the popular Verzuz series of livestreams, recently starring Bad Boy affiliated hip-hop group the Lox, provides classic R&B and hip-hop acts the opportunity to revisit their star-studded catalogs with fans old and new.

The intoxicating pull of nostalgia notwithstanding, it’s the bedrock musicality of Thompson’s body of work that makes it essential listening still. The Notorious B.I.G’s “Big Poppa” matched Biggie’s natural charisma with a satin-smooth sample of the Isley Brothers’ ” Between the Sheets. ” Total’s “ Can’t You See ,” which features an opening verse from Biggie, is driven by a James Brown sample , the foundation for so much of hip-hop’s earlier generations. It also has crisp hip-hop drums, as does Thompson’s R&B remix of the group’s “ No One Else ” — which bears faint traces of the famous Boogie Down Productions sample on which the original was built.

Thompson was also an accomplished multi-instrumentalist, finding his groove as a teenager by playing the congas in go-go music deity Chuck Brown’s band, the Soul Searchers. That taught him to find the pockets in beats on the Bad Boy remix of Gina Thompson’s “The Things That You Do” and Biggie’s “ I Got a Story to Tell ” and “ Dead Wrong .” He’s credited with playing every instrument on Blige’s “My Life.” All of the instruments heard on Biggie’s “ Me & My Bitch ” were played by Thompson, as was the guitar heard on the title track of “ Ready to Die. ” The crescendos and decrescendos of Nas’ ” One Mic ” exhibit a true musician’s grasp of how volume and intensity work in concert to create atmosphere. Even when using samples, Thompson approached the music as if the instruments were right there in his hands.

“I put myself in the position of the musicians that are actually on the samples,” he told Vibe in a 1998 profile of the Hitmen. “I try to envision me being in a room with them and just catch their vibe.”

Chucky Thompson, right, was a pillar of the Bad Boy Records’ Hitmen, which included Mario Winans. (Kevin Kane / WireImage)

Thompson understood vibes because he understood people and music. His work was already going to live on, but it’s found new life in recent years. Kentucky singer Bryson Tiller’s “Set It Off ” and “ Stay Blessed ,” from his 2017 album “True to Self,” sample Thompson’s work with Evans and Blige. Producer 40 and Drake have never been shy about flexing their ‘90s and ‘00s R&B bona fides, and the former made “ Mary’s Joint ,” from “My Life,” the skeleton for the latter’s “ Weston Road Flows ” on 2016’s “Views.”

Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@