Soon after Maribel Munoz joined the trailblazing ranks of American owners of hydrogen cars — a group that exists only in California — she began to fear that the low price of the taxpayer-subsidized Toyota Mirai she purchased came with a tremendous cost.

“You can’t have a job and own this car,” said the 49-year-old clothing designer from Azusa. “Finding fuel for it becomes your job. It is constant anxiety. I told the guy at Toyota, ‘If I have a stroke, it’s on you.’”

Munoz found herself stranded with an empty tank on the highway and stressed out by the repeated fuel shortages Mirai drivers call “hydropocalypses.” She struggled not to scream at her phone after driving miles to stations that a hydrogen fueling app said were working just fine, only to find them out of order.

These are the kind of hassles that can come with being an early adopter. But in the case of California’s “Hydrogen Highway” — a network of fueling stations then-Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger dreamed would lure masses of Americans to hydrogen vehicles — even the most climate-conscious, tech-savvy motorists are asking: What’s the point? The Hydrogen Highway was meant to stretch from coast to coast. But after 17 years, it has yet to make it past the state line.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Environmentalists warn that the futuristic hydrogen fuel cell cars, marketed as producing zero emissions, leave an inexcusably heavy carbon footprint. The few automakers that have not backed away from the concept of powering a passenger car by splitting off electrons from hydrogen ions are struggling to persuade drivers that the vehicles are a reliable alternative to zero-emission battery-powered ones. And other states that typically look to California for climate-friendly transportation inspiration are taking a pass.

You can’t have a job and own this car. Finding fuel for it becomes your job. Maribel Munoz, on her hydrogen-fueled car

Maribel Munoz, a clothing designer from Azusa, got rid of her hydrogen-powered Toyota Mirai after finding the fuel supply system too stressful. “It is constant anxiety. I told the guy at Toyota, ‘If I have a stroke, it’s on you.’” (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

“It started as kind of a bad bet by the state,” said Ethan Elkind, director of the climate program at UC Berkeley’s Center for Law, Energy and the Environment. “Now it has become a legacy zombie technology.”

California can’t let go of Schwarzenegger’s vision. In 2004, he famously got behind the wheel of a clunky Hummer prototype that ran on hydrogen to signal that drivers can have it all: the excess and convenience of a gas guzzler, with none of the emissions. (It turned out that the hydrogen Hummer wasn’t so climate-friendly and never made it to commercial production.)

Advertisement

State officials say the hydrogen experiment is merely experiencing the growing pains of every transportation innovation California pushed into the mainstream. The Biden administration is right there alongside California, championing lucrative subsidies and demonstration projects aimed at making hydrogen fuel an affordable and truly green alternative, one that it hopes could complement the battery-powered electric vehicle market.

“Ten years ago, people would have come to me and said, ‘Why is California supporting battery vehicles? There is hardly any market, and they will never be competitive,’” said Patty Monahan, a member of the California Energy Commission. Of course, battery electric vehicles are all the rage now.

It started as kind of a bad bet by the state. Now, it has become a legacy zombie technology. Ethan Elkind of UC Berkeley’s Center for Law, Energy and the Environment

Hydrogen-powered cars line up June 28 at the South Coast Air Quality Management District hydrogen fuel station in Diamond Bar. Customers waited more than two hours that day. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Monahan said the state’s aggressive push to get drivers into hydrogen cars is meant to help the technology rapidly scale up, to the point where large fleets of trucks running on diesel and aircraft powered by jet fuel could be retired in favor of cleaner-burning hydrogen models. Demonstration hydrogen trucks are operational at the Port of Los Angeles, and 48 hydrogen buses are being used by local transportation agencies.

Hydrogen boosters note that the far more popular battery-powered cars are experiencing their own growing pains, as automakers and regulators confront supply-chain challenges and environmental questions complicating the push to rid the planet of climate-unfriendly internal combustion engines. The hydrogen cars can go 400 miles on a full tank, and they don’t require waiting around for a battery to charge.

ABOUT THIS SERIES

No state has had a bigger impact on the direction of the United States than California, a prolific incubator and exporter of outside-the-box policies and ideas. This occasional series examines what that has meant for the state and the country, and how far Washington is willing to go to spread California’s agenda as the state’s own struggles threaten its standing as the nation’s think tank.

Yet nearly two decades into the hydrogen experiment, it remains a uniquely expensive gambit. The state has spent $125 million to make its struggling network of 50 public hydrogen fueling stations operational. That network is still so shaky — with stations frequently malfunctioning or out of fuel — that Toyota provides free towing and car rental service to drivers who purchase a Mirai, as getting stranded is a constant risk.

“It was a regular sight to see a car coming in on a flatbed when I went to get fuel,” said Scott Lerner, a writing instructor at UC Irvine who leased a Mirai until the hardship of hydrogen motoring got to be too much. “We would often have these commiserating circles at the station, where people would share horror stories.”

The state is undeterred. At the end of last year, as Lerner was retiring his Mirai, the California Energy Commission was greenlighting an additional $169 million for fueling stations. The panel hopes to help open 111 more stations by 2027, plus 13 that can also service trucks and buses.

Advertisement

That is a subsidy from the state of more than $1 million per station, mostly for a fleet of about 9,000 private vehicles. They are mainly Mirais, but there are also a smattering of Hyundai and Honda hydrogen cars on the freeways. In the latest unencouraging sign for Hydrogen Highway evangelists, Honda this month announced that it will soon stop selling the Clarity, the one hydrogen model it has available.

The news was met with relief by some.

“Failure is never something to celebrate, but nor is wasting money on dead end transport solutions,” Michael Liebreich, a clean-energy analyst, wrote on Twitter.

A sign outside the fuel storage area at the South Coast Air Quality Management District. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

This is not the way things usually go for California, which is accustomed to having its pioneering policies enthusiastically embraced by other Democratic-led states. In this case, however, many California transportation visionaries are ready to move on and focus all efforts on battery-powered zero-emission passenger cars, which accounted for 1.1 million of the more than 14 million cars sold nationwide last year. But the big business interests invested in hydrogen are harnessing their influence to preserve the status quo.

Among those lobbying Gov. Gavin Newsom to vastly expand California’s investment in the Hydrogen Highway are Chevron, Shell, Toyota, Hyundai and BMW. Within their ranks is Henry Perea, the former assemblyman who wrote the transportation bill mandating funding for hydrogen stations. He is now a lobbyist for Chevron.

The firms assert that the fuel is green, yet the “100% renewable” hydrogen sold at California fueling stations is made with natural gas. It gets branded as renewable through a scheme in which hydrogen companies pay to trap greenhouse-gas-intensive methane from landfills and farming operations elsewhere in the country. The companies don’t use the resulting biogas, which gets pumped into natural gas pipelines, except to generate carbon credits they rely on to claim their fuel is green.

An app used by owners of hydrogen cars shows that a fueling station is offline — a common problem. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

“You are still avoiding those greenhouse gases and getting all the benefits from an environmental point of view,” said Shane Stephens, founder of the hydrogen fuel company True Zero.

Some environmental groups, including the Sierra Club, see it differently.

Advertisement

“It is not renewable,” said Sasan Saadat, an analyst at Earthjustice. “What they are doing does not make sense.” There is so much natural gas involved in the fuel production process, he said, that calling it sustainable is indefensible. While hydrogen could ultimately prove the most effective method to cut emissions from trucks and planes, the Hydrogen Highway concept for cars just isn’t penciling out, Saadat said.

The Energy Commission aspires toward truly renewable fuel for hydrogen cars, a goal achieved by the engineers who run the fueling station at Cal State Los Angeles. The caveat is that this costs a fortune — double or triple the price of making other hydrogen fuel, which is already so costly that Toyota provides $15,000 fuel cards to lure drivers into Mirais.

“It’s still a long ways off,” said Michael Dray, who runs the Cal State station. He mocks assurances from hydrogen producers and the state that all the fuel on the Hydrogen Highway will be green within the decade.

Michael Dray runs the hydrogen fueling station at Cal State Los Angeles. “Think very carefully before investing in this technology,” said Dray, who mocks assurances that fuel on the Hydrogen Highway will be green within the decade. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

“Think very carefully before investing in this technology,” said Dray, adding that the “party line” is deceptively upbeat.

“Do not be deceived by these people,” he said. “Big corporations are having a hard time with this. Major oil companies are having trouble making the stations run. The auto manufacturers are having trouble with the cars.”

Newsletter Get our Essential Politics newsletter The latest news, analysis and insights from our politics teams from Sacramento to D.C. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Toyota officials take exception. They argue that the ridicule of hydrogen car technology — Elon Musk calls the fuel cells “fool sells” — resembles what they encountered when the wildly successful and widely copied Prius hybrid debuted.

“We think in terms of decades, not one cycle,” said Craig Scott, a manager at the company’s Electrified Vehicles & Technology Office.

In Europe, where some 2,000 hydrogen cars and vans are scattered across the continent, both BMW and Jaguar Land Rover are mulling over the launch of a hydrogen model.

Advertisement

Richard Wong fills his hydrogen-fueled Mirai at a station in Irvine, as other drivers wait their turn. Wong and his wife, Irene, are happy with the car and the benefits it offers. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

In the U.S., there are plenty of Mirai drivers who share Toyota’s outlook. These true believers can be found on Mirai owner Facebook pages, warring with drivers posting rants about getting stranded, waiting intolerably long for fuel and struggling to get the pump nozzle unfrozen from their fuel tank. It is a volatile corner of the World Wide Web.

“The car was almost free,” said Feridoon Aslani, 61, an actor and writer. “I am happy with it.”

He praised his 2017 Mirai even as he waited two hours for fuel in Diamond Bar. The station was overwhelmed by desperate Mirai drivers seeking a fill after one of the scant fueling stations in the nearby Inland Empire went down. One car arrived by flatbed.

But Aslani, who lives in Santa Monica, said the $15,000 in free fuel Toyota is giving hydrogen pioneers was too good a deal to pass up, and the vehicles work fine for Angelenos on the Westside, where there is a critical mass of fueling stations.

Eunjin Hana Joo’s enthusiasm for the Mirai she rents to the hydrogen-curious in Los Angeles was tempered after she took two journalist clients to fill the tank at Dray’s station. It was disappointing, the 30-year-old artist said, to learn that most of the fuel she had been using was made with natural gas. “The point is to reduce our carbon footprint,” she said. “Why are we creating it?”

Joo, who had been in a rush to make her next appointment, found herself stuck an extra 20 minutes at the station, because fuel pumps had shut down in the heat, another recurring challenge.

Maribel Munoz knows all about that. She pulled into the Diamond Bar station during the June heat wave to find that the app had deceived her again. The station was down — too hot. She had to wait three hours until it was cool enough to pump fuel — and the pump stopped dispensing at half a tank.

Munoz vented on Facebook as she waited. The next day, she drove to the Toyota dealer to demand that they buy back the vehicle.

“There were so many problems that kept me from using the car,” Munoz said, “that I called it my lawn ornament.”

Newsletter Toward a more sustainable California Get Boiling Point, our newsletter exploring climate change, energy and the environment, and become part of the conversation — and the solution. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The global climate report released Monday offered a dramatic reminder of the need to slash use of fossil fuels — not just by 2050, when many corporations have pledged to stop scorching the planet, but in the next few years.

Scientists have said that zeroing out planet-warming emissions by midcentury is needed to stave off the worst consequences of the climate crisis. But there’s a giant gap between the many companies that have pledged to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050 and the much faster action the new report makes clear is desperately needed.



For the record: An earlier version of this article said Dan Sperling is a former air quality regulator. Sperling is a member of the California Air Resources Board.

“You can’t get to those kinds of ambitious emissions targets without getting to work now,” said Kim Cobb, a climate scientist at Georgia Institute of Technology. “There’s a mountain of change between where we are here and where we would need to be.”

Cobb was a lead author of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s latest report. Hundreds of researchers contributed to the authoritative dispatch, which found that rising temperatures are already fueling worse heat waves, droughts, fires and storms — calamities Californians know all too well. The report built on earlier United Nations-backed science showing the world must cut heat-trapping carbon emissions nearly in half by 2030, and close to zero by the middle of the century.

Advertisement

Newsletter Record heat. Raging fires. What are the solutions? Get Boiling Point, our newsletter about climate change, the environment and building a more sustainable California. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

The vast majority of climate pollution comes from burning coal, oil and natural gas. Rapid efforts to reduce reliance on those fuels would lead to noticeable benefits for people living in California and across the American West, Cobb said. She pointed to ever-larger wildfires and ocean acidification that is beginning to ravage marine ecosystems. They are climate consequences that have already arrived but could be limited, depending on what governments and businesses do next.

“The longer we put our foot on the gas here with emissions, the higher we’re going to push that damage,” Cobb said.

The list of companies pledging net-zero emissions by 2050 includes European oil majors BP and Shell, American Airlines, cement maker Cemex and food giant Nestle. A similar pledge is reportedly under consideration at Exxon Mobil, the Texas-based oil heavyweight that has known since the 1970s about its role in global warming but for decades denied the scientific consensus.

Experts say those kinds of pledges are potentially helpful but wildly insufficient. And many environmentalists have slammed them as little more than a marketing tool for companies trying to show off their environmental bona fides.

Flames from the Dixie fire consume a home on Highway 89 south of Greenville Calif., on Aug. 5, 2021. (Noah Berger / Associated Press)

To Jonathan Foley, a climate scientist who leads Project Drawdown, there are two problems with net-zero goals. The first is they’re difficult to measure. “Net zero” technically means emitting no more carbon than you remove from the atmosphere, but Foley said this leaves a lot of room for companies to fudge the numbers.

The other problem is the timeline. Foley said he’s a lot more interested in what companies are doing now to cut pollution.

Advertisement

“What are your goals by 2021 or 2022? And who is accountable for that?” he asked.

That could be an especially difficult question for the oil and gas industry to answer. The Paris-based International Energy Agency released a groundbreaking report this year concluding that zeroing out heat-trapping emissions by midcentury means bringing new fossil fuel exploration to an immediate halt. That’s directly at odds with the industry’s long-standing business model.

“The best way to be net zero in this business is to shut down,” Foley said.

Advertisement

The actual work of slashing fossil fuel consumption will look a lot different across different sectors of the economy — none of which is adding more carbon to the atmosphere than transportation, at least in the United States.

Carmakers including Ford and Nissan have trumpeted plans to hit net zero by 2050, with General Motors and Volvo aiming for 2040. Under heavy pressure from regulators in the Biden administration and globally, the auto industry has committed to invest hundreds of billions of dollars in electric vehicles and other clean technologies, including hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles.

But those commitments could change if consumers don’t step up — or if the companies have a change of heart.

While America’s three largest automakers stood with President Biden last week and set a goal of half of new car sales being zero-emission by 2030 — roughly in line with what scientists say is necessary to avoid the worst of global warming — that goal isn’t backed up by a government mandate. The industry already backtracked once before on a climate deal with President Obama.

Advertisement

John Loehr, managing director at consulting firm AlixPartners, said what happens next is largely up to drivers.

“Whether we hit these targets depends on consumer demand, on what the consumer wants to buy,” he said.

A Los Angeles traffic jam. (Irfan Khan / Los Angeles Times)

But what people want to buy could depend largely on how government addresses the main concerns with electric vehicles — namely range anxiety, lack of familiarity and prices, which are falling but still higher than for gasoline-powered cars.

Advertisement

California hopes to offer a case study for the rest of the country, with Gov. Gavin Newsom ordering that all new cars and light trucks sold must be zero-emission by 2035. But the state’s rebates and other financial incentives for people to buy electric vehicles are spread across several programs with hard-to-decipher requirements, and funding frequently runs out, forcing people to wait months for their checks. Federal tax credits, too, are running low and are more helpful for higher-income buyers.

“What we really need is to get everyone’s attention, get everyone focused,” said Dan Sperling, a California air quality regulator who heads the Institute of Transportation Studies at UC Davis. “This is urgent.”

Electricity is the country’s second-largest source of planet-warming emissions, and a crucial sector for rapid cuts especially as other parts of the economy — including transportation and home heating — shift from fossil fuels to electric power.

The list of utility companies promising net-zero emissions or 100% clean energy by 2050 includes multistate giants Dominion Energy, Duke Energy and Southern Co., as well as San Diego-based Sempra (the parent company of Southern California Gas Co. and San Diego Gas & Electric) and Ohio-based American Electric Power and FirstEnergy Corp.

Advertisement

“Electricity is the one sector I feel pretty good about,” Foley said. “Wind and solar are a pretty good way to make money.”

But many utility companies still operate coal-fired power plants that are among the worst polluters, in some cases with plans to keep operating them for decades. A recent Princeton University study on options for reaching net-zero emissions by 2050 found that coal “all but disappears” by 2030 under every scenario, and that natural gas probably must decline this decade, possibly as much as 30% — a reality at odds with the many utility companies pledging net-zero while building new gas plants.

President Biden wants the country to get 100% of its electricity from climate-friendly sources by 2035. Scientists say it’s possible, but requiring companies to achieve it may hinge on the vote of coal-state Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia.

Advertisement

California law, meanwhile, requires power companies to reach 100% clean energy by 2045. Gov. Gavin Newsom has acknowledged that timeline is inadequate and needs to be sped up, although his administration hasn’t yet taken steps to do that.

Some experts say there’s reason for optimism if the pressure on businesses keeps increasing — not just from government but also from employees, customers and investors. Even insurance companies are starting to take climate change more seriously.

Westlands Solar Park, which could be one of the world’s largest renewable energy facilities when finished, is under construction in California’s San Joaquin Valley in July 2021. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Forty percent of the country’s 400 largest companies have made a commitment to go carbon-neutral in the coming decades, said Michael Vandenbergh, a law professor at Vanderbilt University who studies how corporations are responding to the climate crisis.

Advertisement

“I don’t want to underplay the fact that government really matters,” he said. “The way to evaluate private-sector action is not whether it’s a perfect solution, or will solve the problem, but to ask whether it can fill in the gaps to do what government should be doing.”

Companies in the tech and retail industries have led the pack. Microsoft says it intends to go not only carbon-neutral but carbon-negative by 2030, meaning it would remove more carbon from the atmosphere than it emits — a pledge that depends on a massive scaling-up of carbon capture technologies. Apple vowed that its entire supply chain will be carbon-neutral by 2030.

Walmart, the nation’s largest retailer, pledged in 2020 that it would eliminate emissions from its own operations by 2040, and since 2017 has been working to help its vast network of suppliers cut carbon. Amazon pledged two years ago to zero out its carbon pollution by 2040, in response to a massive employee walkout that called for the company to reach that goal by 2030.

But those types of goals don’t always result in the near-term progress that scientists say is badly needed. Amazon, for instance, dramatically increased its emissions in 2020 as demand surged during the pandemic, using 69% more fossil fuels for its own delivery networks and measuring nearly 30% emission increases for new equipment and third-party transportation.

Advertisement

Support our journalism Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Subscribe to the Los Angeles Times. Subscribe

Cynthia Cummis, who works with the private sector to set emission-reduction goals through the Science Based Targets initiative, said she’s encouraged by the more than 1,600 companies that have pledged to set targets that align with what climate scientists say is necessary, including AT&T, Pfizer, Sony and Visa.

“Now we’ve got to see if the commitments lead to validated targets and lead to actual achievement of the targets,” she said.

Unless companies can start cutting emissions now, climate advocates will be skeptical of 2050 pledges. The global nonprofit Oxfam International released a report last week labeling net-zero targets “a dangerous distraction that could delay the rapid reductions in emissions that high-emitting countries and companies need to make if we are to avoid catastrophic climate breakdown.”

Advertisement

Experts say there are big opportunities to reduce pollution now, if government and industry set their minds to it.

One of the biggest is methane, an especially powerful planet-warming gas that comes from pipeline leaks, oil and gas extraction, landfills and livestock, among other sources. It dissipates in the atmosphere more quickly than carbon dioxide but traps heat more powerfully in the interim, and it’s a focus of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s latest report.

“We will land in very different places in 2050 depending on the near-term reductions that occur,” Cobb said. “The take-home from the whole report is that the risks increase with each increment of warming. If you don’t do that increment of warming, you will have a noticeable decrease in that risk. That’s really the bottom line.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In case you hadn’t heard, California is once again in a drought.

But don’t take our word for it. The pictures tell a chilling (or, rather, incrementally heating) story. Boat slips on dry land. “Bathtub rings” around lakes. Juvenile salmon cooked to death in warming rivers. And the U.N.'s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued a report on Monday that outlines just how much damage has been done and who’s to blame: “It is a statement of fact, we cannot be any more certain; it is unequivocal and indisputable that humans are warming the planet.”

Something has to change.

In July, Gov. Gavin Newsom asked Californians to reduce residential water usage by 15% to help combat the drought. Back in 2015, then-Gov. Jerry Brown asked for a 25% reduction. A year later, residential water usage was down 24.5%.

Advertisement

But now, some Californians who made those impactful changes half a decade ago — ripping out lawns, replacing old toilets and showerheads, letting the Prius develop a tactile layer of dirt and dust before hitting the car wash — are stumped as to how to cut back any more without risking a body odor apocalypse on top of the climate one.

“For my household, meeting the governor’s requested 15% reduction in water use will be impossible unless we stop showering,” wrote one reader in a letter to the editor.

Furthermore, if we previously cut residential usage by a quarter and still landed back in a drought, what’s the point of cutting more? Could it possibly make a difference?

Perhaps surprisingly, yes.

First, it’s important to know how California uses water. About 80% of water used in the state goes toward agriculture, said Kelly Sanders, associate professor of civil and environmental engineering at USC. The other 20% is urban usage, she said, which is split roughly in half between indoor and outdoor use. So when we talk about shorter showers and turning off the tap when you brush your teeth, you’re playing with a pretty small slice of the overall pie.

In other words: Letting the faucet run while you wash your face wasn’t what got us into the drought, so not doing that won’t singlehandedly get us out of it.

“While individual actions are essential for addressing huge environmental issues like climate change and drought, they’re always insufficient,” said Jason Mark, who is an editor at Sierra who wrote about this issue and the cofounder of Alemany Farm in San Francisco. He described it as “addition where we need multiplication.” That multiplication comes in the form of better public policy, pressure on government officials to address these issues, and lifestyle changes to reduce reliance on water-intensive products and plants.

Advertisement

But that doesn’t mean you should feel free to take hourlong showers and let your taps run with abandon. Addition still adds up. And our reservoirs can use all the help they can get.

“Our water sustainability challenges are so significant. It is an all-hands-on-deck moment. We all need to be doing our part,” said Heather Cooley, the director of research for the Pacific Institute, a think tank that identifies and advances research-based sustainable water policies.

So, climate change is real. The drought is happening because of it. Maybe you can’t save California on your own, but it’s worth doing your part.

Advertisement

Ways to reduce your water usage

Rip out your lawn. Or at least water it less. Our frontyards became a major focus of the 2016 water reduction campaign. There’s a reason for that: They’re lush and water-intensive. Cooley said watering the average lawn in Southern California was a big sip on the order of around 40 to 80 gallons. Comparatively, she said, turning off the faucet while you brush will save four to five gallons, and chopping two minutes off your shower time saves five.

Replace non-native plants. Beyond your lawn, plants that aren’t native to Southern California probably take up more water than ones that evolved to thrive here. You have lots of options. And as a bonus, natives help the birds and the bees.

Find and fix leaks. Keep an eye on your water bill. If it creeps higher than normal without a good reason, investigate whether you have a leak somewhere. Depending on the type of water meter you have, you may be able to monitor the meter with all your water turned off and see whether anything is still moving through your system. You may also want to invest in a smart leak detector to tell you right away when there’s a problem.

Replace old appliances, showerheads and toilets. How old is your toilet? If it’s from before 1990, Cooley said, it could be using up to six gallons per flush. Newer toilets may use as little as 1.28 gallons or less. Cooley says they can save you 33 gallons per household per day. And a new showerhead can save 12. Upgrading your dishwasher and washing machine and any other water-intensive appliance also will pay savings dividends, in both water and energy costs, Cooley said.

Advertisement

Small things can add up. You’ve probably heard these tips before, but consider this a refresher course: Don’t let the water run while you wash dishes in the sink or while washing, brushing or shaving. Only run washing machines and dishwashers when you have a full load. Make peace with the layer of dust on your car. If you’re waiting for the shower to warm up, stick a bucket in it and use that water on your houseplants. Double-check that your sprinkler system isn’t watering your driveway. Use a broom instead of a hose to clean off sidewalks and driveways. Water outdoor plants in the morning or evening so you don’t lose as much H2O to evaporation in the midday sun.

How to fight the drought beyond turning off the tap

There are ways to save water that don’t directly contribute to reducing your residential usage. Sanders said to consider your overall lifestyle water usage.

“One of the things that people can do that’s a little bit more nebulous is to think about their indirect water footprint,” Sanders said. “‘How much water is embedded in the products that I buy? How much water is required to irrigate the fruits and vegetables that I’m eating?’ Meat, beef in particular, is a high-resource food. It takes a lot of water to get a cow from the beginning of its life to the end of its life. It’s a lot of food that has to be irrigated.”

Advertisement

So think carefully about what you consume, both in terms of what goes into your mouth and onto your body. A new cotton T-shirt consumes more than 650 gallons of water on its way to existence. A pound of plastic takes 22. Manufacturing a new smartphone adds up to more than 3,000. It takes more water to make a one-liter single-use plastic water bottle than that bottle can hold.

Agriculture takes a lot of unfair flack when it comes to the drought, Sanders said. We do need to eat. Some crops that are water-intensive, like almonds, are also economically important to the state. Like turning off the tap as you brush your teeth, cutting back on fast fashion and fast food will save water but will be a drop in the bucket compared with our state’s total water needs.

“Individual actions matter, because it’s important to align your behavior with your beliefs,” Mark said. “At the same time, there’s no substitute for political action and civic action.”

Big picture, solutions are going to come from political action. Ask your local and state officials to back water-saving legislation and to enforce it once it passes. Attend a virtual city council meeting and ask what your community’s plans are to improve water conservation. You can start even smaller than that: Ask your HOA to replace lawns with native plants. Submit letters to the editor of your local newspaper about the issues you see in your community, like this one, expressing discontent with a local government approving new surf resorts and an ornamental lagoon. (Here’s how to send one to us.)

Advertisement

“We should — both as individuals, as households — do everything within our power to use less water, use less electricity, use fewer fossil fuels,” Mark said, and “at the same time, do everything that’s within our ability to convince those in power to change the rules of the game.”

So be the drop in the proverbial bucket. Then use that bucket to water your plants.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change published a new report Monday summarizing the latest authoritative scientific information about global warming. Here are five important takeaways.

Blaming humans

The report says almost all of the warming that has occurred since pre-industrial times was caused by the release of heat-trapping gases such as carbon dioxide and methane. Much of that is the result of humans burning fossil fuels — coal, oil, wood and natural gas.

Scientists say that only a fraction of the temperature rise recorded since the 19th century can have come from natural forces.

Paris goals

Almost all countries have signed up to the 2015 Paris climate accord that aims to limit global warming to 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit (2 degrees Celsius) — and ideally no more than 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit (1.5 degrees Celsius) — by the year 2100, compared with the late 19th century.

Advertisement

The report’s 200-plus authors looked at five scenarios, all of which will see the world cross the 2.7-degree threshold in the 2030s — sooner than in previous predictions. Three of those scenarios will also see temperatures rise 3.6 degrees above the pre-industrial average.

Dire consequences

The 3,000-plus-page report concludes that ice melt and sea-level rise are already accelerating. Wild weather events — from storms to heat waves — are also expected to worsen and become more frequent.

Because further warming is “locked in” from the greenhouse gases humans have already released into the atmosphere, some changes will be “irreversible” for centuries even if emissions are drastically cut, the report said.

Some hope

While many of the report’s predictions paint a grim picture of humans’ impact on the planet and its looming consequences, the IPCC also found that so-called tipping points, such as catastrophic ice-sheet collapses and the abrupt slowdown of ocean currents, are “low likelihood,” though they cannot be ruled out.

Big catch

Meeting the most ambitious goal of the Paris accord — keeping temperature increases to 2.7 degrees by the end of the century — will only be possible through what are known as “negative emissions.” That means sucking more carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere than is added, something the report suggests could be done after 2050. The panel doesn’t explain how this can be done, though, and many scientists are skeptical that it’s possible.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hours after the United Nations issued a dire climate report Monday — saying a rise in global temperatures ensured deadlier heat waves, water shortages, wildfires and floods over the next 30 years — the Biden administration called on the world’s leaders gathering at the U.N. climate summit in Scotland this November to take immediate action.

“These extreme events will only become more drastic in the future — this is why we cannot wait,” U.S. climate envoy John F. Kerry tweeted. “Now is the time for action and Glasgow must be a turning point in this crisis.”

The scientific report, which was released by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, or IPCC, found that even if nations impose the strictest cuts to atmosphere-warming greenhouse gas emissions today, global warming is likely within the next two decades to surpass 1.5 degrees Celsius — the more ambitious limit targeted in the 2015 Paris climate agreement.

Using the strongest language yet to describe humans’ role in the crisis, the report’s authors began their summary with the line: “It is unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, ocean and land.” As recently as 2013, when the last report was published, the IPCC had said it was “extremely likely” that emissions from energy and industry were to blame.

Advertisement

“This report tells us that recent changes in the climate are widespread, rapid and intensifying, unprecedented in thousands of years,” said IPCC Vice Chair Ko Barrett, senior climate advisor for the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. “The changes we experience will increase with further warming.”

The world has already warmed about 1.1 degrees Celsius, or roughly 2 degrees Fahrenheit, since the 19th century. And the consequences are evident.

Though it may not seem like much, each half a degree of warming is hugely consequential. A previous U.N. climate report that examined the effects of surpassing 1.5 degrees of warming found that an additional half a degree would expose tens of millions more people to extreme heat, cause coral reefs to “mostly disappear” and result in greater habitat loss for animals that depend on Arctic summer sea ice.

In California, the second-largest wildfire in the state’s history is currently burning, offering no reprieve from last year’s record-setting fire season. An unprecedented drought throughout the Western U.S. has forced California regulators to restrict how much water farmers can take from the largest rivers. And triple-digit temperatures are expected to roast Northern California and the Pacific Northwest later this week.

“Nothing about today’s IPCC report should come as a surprise,” a spokesman for Gov. Gavin Newsom said in a statement. “Even for those that ignored decades of dire warnings from climate scientists, there is no denying what’s right in front of us — a climate crisis.”

The window of time left to prevent even more extreme outcomes is narrowing, but there is still a glimmer of hope.

The 3,000-plus-page report from 234 scientists detailed five possible scenarios depending on how quickly nations cut their emissions.

Advertisement

Each of these cases is built on the prediction that the world will hit 1.5 degrees of warming in the near term, before 2040.

Under the most optimistic scenario, immediate and aggressive emission cuts would limit climate change’s effects beyond 2050. After exceeding 1.5 degrees of warming, global temperatures would likely fall back below this threshold before the end of the 21st century.

But under three other scenarios in which emissions are intermediate, high or very high, climate change would intensify throughout the remainder of the century, very likely blowing past 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) of warming. Global temperatures by 2100 could be 2 to 3.5 degrees Celsius hotter than preindustrial levels under the intermediate scenario. In the worst of all cases, they could be 3 to 6 degrees Celsius higher.

Advertisement

Under all of the emissions reduction scenarios studied in the new report, even the most hopeful, the Arctic is likely to have all of its summer sea ice melt at least once by 2050.

With the crucial international climate negotiations coming up this fall, some world leaders said the report would cause them to try harder to cut carbon pollution. Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken called it “a stark reminder.”

“It is essential that all countries — in particular the major economies — do their part during this critical decade of the 2020s to put the world on a trajectory to keep a 1.5 degrees Celsius limit on warming within reach,” Blinken said.

Alok Sharma, the British government minister who is president of the upcoming climate negotiations in Scotland, urged leaders to do more so they could “credibly say that we have kept [the 2.7-degree limit] alive.”

Advertisement

Earlier this year, President Biden announced that he would double the United States’ original commitment to slashing greenhouse gas emissions, increasing its target to between 50% and 52% by 2030.

Meeting this target would require sweeping changes in how Americans power their vehicles, homes and factories. The bipartisan infrastructure bill currently before Congress would be a down payment toward that effort, but most of the tens of billions of dollars in new spending would go to bridge and road projects. Though there is funding to help communities adapt to climate change, there’s little money to fight it.

Instead, progressives and environmental activists are hoping the president’s more ambitious proposals to curb greenhouse gas emissions can be included in a separate bill that would be fast-tracked through Congress via budget reconciliation. This process would require the support of every Democratic lawmaker, a difficult proposition when some moderates in the party represent states heavily dependent on the oil and gas industry.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Dixie fire is now the second-largest wildfire in California history, burning more than 463,000 acres through a large swath of Northern California and destroying more than 400 homes and commercial buildings as firefighters on Sunday struggled to get the upper hand.

More favorable weather conditions slowed the spread of the fire over the weekend, but it remained a dangerous monster, burning across four counties — Plumas, Butte, Lassen and Tehama. Thousands of residents of small mountain communities remained evacuated and more evacuation orders were issued for Plumas County on Sunday. The fire was 21% contained as of Sunday morning.

Fire officials were concerned a shift in the wind later Sunday could increase fire activity overnight but said it likely wouldn’t be as severe as last week, when red-flag conditions helped send flames racing toward populated areas, decimating the town of Greenville.

“It’s just something we’re hoping goes in our favor,” said Jesse Gomez, a public information officer on the fire.

Advertisement

Still, residents were advised to remain vigilant in case they were told to evacuate.

Although a heavy blanket of smoke covering the area resulted in dismal air quality across the region, it was helping to suppress fire activity by keeping temperatures down, humidity slightly higher and wind speeds a bit lower.

At the same time, it also forced the grounding of some firefighting aircraft, Gomez said.

That was expected to change later Sunday afternoon, when a dry cold front was forecast to pass through and clear out the smoke, allowing the sun to once again heat up and dry out the vegetation.

“‘Cold’ is obviously relative, because it certainly doesn’t mean the weather’s going to be cold,” said Rick Carhart, a public information officer with the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.

“There’s a chance we’ll see more fire behavior today than we saw for the last two days,” he added.

Advertisement

The winds were expected to shift direction overnight, potentially pushing the fire to the south and west rather than to the north and east, where it’s been progressing for the past few days, he said.

“It’s definitely a concern and something we’re watching, but it’s not something that we think we’re not going to be able to handle,” Carhart said.

The fire ignited July 13 near a Pacific Gas and Electric Co. power station in Feather River Canyon and might have been caused by a Douglas fir falling onto a power line, PG&E said. The utility has said its equipment may also be to blame for sparking the Fly fire, which started nine days later and eventually merged with the Dixie fire, as well as a separate wildfire in Magalia that was extinguished July 14 at a quarter of an acre.

Advertisement

Despite the improved weather conditions, crews fighting the Dixie fire remained vigilant. Given the fire’s size and the historically dry conditions — exacerbated by temperatures rising as a result of human-caused climate change — fire officials feared that embers could at any time cross containment lines and ignite spot fires.

The fire was burning through all kinds of terrain — steep, thickly timbered areas as well as flatter brush and grasslands — with its sheer size posing logistical hurdles. The fire on Friday surpassed the Bootleg fire in Oregon to become the largest in the United States this year. On Sunday, it leapfrogged the 2018 Mendocino Complex fire to become the second-largest in California history, behind only last year’s massive August Complex fire, which burned more than 1 million acres.

“It’s just a massive wildfire,” Carhart said, adding that he grew up in the area and has lived there on and off for 40 years, yet it’s difficult even for him to describe just how large the fire has become.

“I’ve camped at Bucks Lake, and we go up to Lassen National Park all the time, but I would never do those two things the same day — they’re a fairly long way apart,” he said. “And yet they’re both affected by this fire, so that just goes to show you the size and the scope of it.”

Advertisement

The fire destroyed the national park’s historic Mount Harkness Fire Lookout, which had been a popular destination for visitors since it was built in 1930, and was threatening other structures inside the park, authorities confirmed.

As of Sunday, four people remained missing, all of them from Greenville, according to the Plumas County Sheriff’s Office.

The Dixie fire was one of 11 large fires or complexes burning in California that were together being fought by 8,574 firefighters, according to Cal Fire. Across the U.S., 107 large fires or complexes have burned a combined total of nearly 2.3 million acres in 15 states, according to the National Interagency Fire Center.

Advertisement

The Monument fire prompted new evacuation orders in Trinity County on Sunday, with the county sheriff telling residents in Junction City and surrounding communities to leave.

The stubborn, lightning-sparked fire that started in the Shasta-Trinity National Forest on July 30 had burned 49,068 acres and was 0% contained.

The fire was progressing steadily to the east and threatening populated areas, where crews were positioned to prepare for its potential arrival, said Tyson Widegren, public information officer on the fire.

It was burning in steep, rugged terrain where it was difficult to get boots on the ground, as well as in a mix of burn scars, including from the 2008 Cedar fire, that are clogged with dead vegetation, Widegren said.

Advertisement

“The weather is so hot and dry,” he said. “The fuels didn’t receive much precipitation this last winter, so all the fuel moistures are extremely dry.”

That has combined with the remote location to make this fire difficult for firefighters to suppress, he said.

“Fire burns uphill, so when drainages and canyons align with the wind and sun, the fire can spread very rapidly up those steep canyons,” he said. “So there’s a lot of different factors. It’s the aligning of the moons that’s making this a hard one.”

About 30 miles southeast, below the town of Wildwood, another lightning-sparked fire, which ignited in the Shasta-Trinity National Forest on July 29, had burned 31,185 acres and was 21% contained. The McFarland fire continued to threaten about 1,540 single-family homes, and Wildwood remained under an evacuation order, according to authorities.

Advertisement

The fire was moving to the southeast, although winds from the west and south — blowing up from the Bay Area and over from the ocean — were swirling over the fire and complicating firefighting efforts, said Kate Kramer, public information officer.

The steep, gorge-filled terrain also posed a challenge, she said.

“It’s pretty tough country,” she said. “In some areas there’s a lot of rock. They can’t use dozers, so it’s a lot of hand line and hand work.”

An inversion layer over the area helped moderate fire behavior somewhat over the past couple days but also precluded the use of water-dropping helicopters and firefighting airplanes, she said.

Advertisement

The fire was bumping up against the burn scar of the August Complex fire to the south, which was helping the firefight there, and crews were working to build line to another recent burn scar to the west, which they don’t expect the fire to move through, she said.

Conditions have been hot and dry, with temperatures expected to rise even higher this week, Kramer noted. Authorities have also faced resource limitations due to the intensity of this year’s fire season, she said.

“Things are thin all across the region, and the country,” Kramer said.

And while crews have made good progress, they’re being careful not to let people back into their homes until it’s safe, she said.

Advertisement

“We don’t want what happened to Greenville to happen here, in which they thought everything was good, they let people back in, and then the fire really kicked up again and people didn’t get out,” she said. “And firefighters were focused on helping to get people out and the town burned down.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kelp forests are a crucial California marine ecosystem. From kelp’s floating canopies to its “holdfast” roots, the giant seaweed — algae, actually — supports greater biodiversity and sequesters more carbon than a redwood grove, while also protecting our coastline from the full force of Pacific storms. Kelp forests shelter fin fish, shellfish, whales, seals, octopuses and sharks — more than 1,000 animal and plant species in all.

Unfortunately, since 2013 the state’s kelp beds have been in an unprecedented state of collapse. From San Diego to Monterey the losses are patchy, but north of the Golden Gate more than 95% of the kelp is now gone. Warming oceans combined with past hunting and fishing practices upset the balance between predators and prey in the kelp forest, with devastating effects.

One possible remedy has a satisfying twist — return the sea otter, the keystone kelp forest predator, to its historical range along the North Coast.

Perhaps 300,000 sea otters once thrived along the north Pacific Rim, from Japan to Baja, until humans hunted them almost to extinction in the 19th century. They’ve rebounded since they were fully protected in the U.S. 50 years ago, and in California they’ve recolonized about 13% of their range, especially in and around Monterey Bay.

Advertisement

Why not farther north? Possibly because they can’t make it past a burgeoning white shark population. If humans help them make the leap, they might be able to protect surviving North Coast kelp beds, and kick-start a more complete restoration.

California’s kelp catastrophe has two immediate causes. In 2013, a marine heat wave that scientists dubbed “the blob” caused ocean temperatures to spike along the West Coast, weakening the kelp, which thrives in cold, nutrient-rich currents. Then a virus — probably supercharged by the warmer waters, according to a 2019 study — allowed purple urchins, voracious kelp eaters, to proliferate.

The virus, known as the sea star wasting syndrome, is on a par with horror movie scourges. It melts the limbs and bodies of what we used to call starfish, including the many-armed sunflower sea star, a purple urchin predator. On the North Coast, with sea otters long gone, sunflower sea stars have been the major purple urchin predator. (Another top urchin predator, commercial fishermen, targets larger, meatier species.)

Since the sea star die-off, the quarter-sized purple urchins have run amok, especially off the Sonoma and Mendocino coast, devouring kelp and replacing the complex near-shore kelp forest habitat with “urchin barrens” — a seabed carpeted with pastel pin cushions.

To combat the devastation, divers — some volunteers and some paid by the state and private donors — have organized efforts to suction up, collect or take hammers to the urchins by the tens of thousands. But there’s no indication it’s helping much. Even as the kelp starts to recover, hungry purple urchins find it and the destruction begins all over again.

Sea otters are nearly as insatiable as purple urchins. They lack the blubber common to other marine mammals and depend for warmth on their luxuriant fur (the prize that led to their slaughter in the 1800s). They run hot; their metabolism requires that they eat up to a quarter of their body weight each day in abalone, crab, octopus — and urchins.

Letting otters expand their range on their own is ideal, but relocating them is possible. It could start with 10 or 12 — a sea otter SWAT team — from what’s estimated to be a California population of about 3,000. In fact, U.S. Fish and Wildlife has years of experience relocating the marine mammals with varying success, often at the behest of the fishing industry, which tends to view otters as competition.

North Coast fishermen, too, may not welcome back otters. On the other hand a lot of science — and in-the-water evidence at the Channel Islands and other MPAs (marine protected areas) — indicates that the more intact the near-shore ecosystem, with a healthy mix of predators and prey, the better the fishing will be in adjacent waters.

Advertisement

It was a remnant population of sea otters from Big Sur that recolonized Monterey Bay. Their presence played a key role in restoring the area’s kelp forests after the closure of Monterey’s polluting canneries. Today the bay and the city are a world center of marine biodiversity, with a thriving economy based on tourism (starring sea otters), marine science and fishing.

Otters could help in the battle to save North Coast kelp, but they aren’t a silver-bullet solution. That’s because the urchin barrens are in part populated by “zombies.” Once purple urchins destroy too much kelp, they turn auto-cannibalistic rather than starve to death; they feed on themselves. Otters aren’t much interested in the shell-like results. Studies in Monterey Bay show that even though otters don’t clear the barrens, they keep proliferating purple urchins in check wherever kelp survives.

Kelp forests are good at reproducing themselves; one hope is that the balance the otters maintain would allow kelp to reseed whenever and wherever a storm or some other natural event — or human effort — scrapes away enough zombies.

Conservationist Aldo Leopold once wrote, “To keep every cog and wheel is the first precaution of the intelligent tinkerer.”

Advertisement

On the North Coast, the way back to a healthy ocean will take planning, funding and cooperation and some intelligent tinkering. Reestablishing sea otters throughout their traditional range could be a start.

David Helvarg is the executive director of Blue Frontier, an ocean conservation and policy group. His latest book is “The Golden Shore — California’s Love Affair with the Sea.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Firefighters are hoping a break in the weather will help them get the upper hand on the massive Dixie fire in Northern California, which as of Saturday had destroyed at least 184 homes and commercial buildings and burned 446,723 acres.

Five people remained unaccounted for Saturday afternoon, although family members of two of them had contacted authorities to say they were OK, the Plumas County Sheriff’s Office said. All but one were from the town of Greenville, which was decimated earlier this week.

Containment of the fire, burning north of Sacramento, dropped from 35% to 21%, but that was a result of the fire’s growth, not firefighters losing ground, officials said. The fire is the third largest in California history and the biggest wildfire currently burning in the U.S.

“Even though we had what would be considered very little fire growth, we still added 13,000 acres to the size of the fire,” said Rick Carhart, public information officer with the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. “So that just speaks to how massive this fire is.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Four firefighters were injured when a tree branch fell on them about 1:30 a.m. Saturday, according to officials. Three were treated and released, and one remained hospitalized in stable condition.

Greenville residents Gould Fickardt, 71, left, and Woody Hovland, 70, sit with their dogs, outside at a friend’s house after their homes were lost in the Dixie Fire. (Mel Melcon/Los Angeles Times)

Fire activity slowed Friday and was expected to remain minimal Saturday, said Edwin Zuniga, another public information officer on the fire. The wildfire is burning in Plumas, Butte, Lassen and Tehama counties.

“Right now we basically have a blanket of smoke covering the fire area, which is shielding us from direct sunlight,” he said.

Although the smoke resulted in dismal air quality across the region, it was helping to suppress fire activity by keeping temperatures down, humidity values slightly higher and wind speeds slightly lower.

“The fire has kind of capped itself,” said Scott Rowe, meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Sacramento.

Advertisement

Cooler temperatures also help keep the atmosphere more stable, meaning there’s less of an opportunity for the fire to send up a large plume of ash and smoke that can generate its own weather and create dangerous firefighting conditions, he said.

“That’s good news for our firefighters on the ground,” Zuniga said. “It gives them the opportunity to be more direct and aggressive when building containment lines.”

At the same time, the smoke was compromising visibility, limiting the use of firefighting aircraft, authorities said.

“It’s definitely a trade-off,” Carhart said. “When we have clearer air, the aircraft can fly and do their work, but we also have the possibility of these more extreme fire conditions.”

The Pioneer Cafe in Greenville were destroyed by the Dixie fire. (Mel Melcon/Los Angeles Times)

Winds were expected to pick up later Saturday afternoon and then again Sunday evening, with gusts of 15 to 25 mph, which could help clear out the smoke from portions of the Sacramento Valley but might also push the fire around, Rowe said. It’s also possible winds could be locally gustier in the area of the fire, he said.

The fire ignited July 13 near a Pacific Gas and Electric Co. power station in Feather River Canyon and might have been caused by a Douglas fir falling on a power line, PG&E said. The utility has said its equipment might also be to blame for sparking the Fly fire, which started nine days later and eventually merged with the Dixie fire, as well as a separate wildfire in Magalia that was extinguished at a quarter-acre July 14.

Despite the improved weather conditions, crews fighting the Dixie fire remained vigilant Saturday. Given the fire’s size and the historically dry conditions, exacerbated by temperatures sent rising by human-caused climate change, fire officials feared that embers could at any time cross containment lines and ignite spot fires that race toward populated areas. That scenario played out Wednesday night when the fire destroyed Greenville more than three weeks after it began.

“The vegetation is extremely dry, extremely receptive to fire,” Zuniga said. “Any little spark can establish a fire and make a run.”

Advertisement

Deer graze along North Valley Road in Greenville which was mostly destroyed by the Dixie Fire. (Mel Melcon/Los Angeles Times)

Crown fires, in which flames travel across treetops — out of firefighters’ reach — have also been posing a challenge, spewing embers and at times forcing crews to withdraw and get out ahead of the fire, he said.

Communities around Lake Almanor remained threatened, especially on the western shore, where the fire was near. Fire crews were assigned to the north end of the Lake Almanor Peninsula, where they were patrolling for embers and building contingency lines in case the fire reached the area, Zuniga said.

They’ve been assisted by airplanes that fly above firefighting aircraft and use infrared cameras to detect spot fires.

“They can spot hot spots that are outside of our containment lines that firefighters on the ground would never be able to find if they weren’t directed to them,” Carhart said.

There were about 5,118 personnel assigned to the fire, down from more than 5,200 days before, but authorities described that as a normal fluctuation made necessary by the fact that the fire has been raging for nearly a month.

“What’s basically happening is some of these resources are going home to do a personnel swap, do a reset or get fresh members on either engines or crews, and come back out to the fire,” Zuniga said.

The fire was burning through all kinds of different terrain — from steep, thickly timbered areas to flatter brush and grasslands — with its sheer size posing logistical hurdles. The fire on Friday surpassed the Bootleg fire in Oregon to become the largest in the United States this year.

“Just trying to make the plans and get everybody to the right places, it’s a huge job,” Carhart said. “I would say that’s the challenge right now, is taking this huge fire and breaking it up into pieces and getting it under control as best we can.”

Advertisement

Time was of the essence, as the favorable weather conditions weren’t expected to last long. A warming trend was forecast to start early in the week, with temperatures pushing above normal by the week’s end, Rowe said.

“It is going to get hot and it’s going to get sunny, and the wind is going to blow so we know that — that’s just life in Northern California,” Carhart said. “So while we have this favorable weather, we’re going to take advantage of it and do everything we can to get as far ahead of the game as we can before the weather turns on us again.”

Meanwhile, a federal judge on Friday ordered PG&E to further explain its role in the ignition of both the Dixie and Fly fires.

U.S. District Judge William Alsup, who is overseeing the utility’s criminal probation stemming from an explosion of one of its gas lines that killed eight people in 2010, also ordered the utility to provide a list by Aug. 16 of all fires its equipment has started so far this season.

In an earlier court filing, PG&E described a series of delays and mishaps that took place in the hours after it recorded a disturbance along a distribution line and a loss of power at Cresta Dam on July 13. As a result, an employee did not reach the site of the malfunctioning equipment and observe flames until about 10 hours later.

In the filing, PG&E provided the following account:

At 6:48 a.m., the same time the dam lost power, PG&E equipment recorded a disturbance along a distribution line. Current levels exceeded the threshold to trip the line, but they were not elevated for long enough for it to be deenergized.

A roving operator was sent to the Cresta Dam and confirmed the outage, but it’s not clear whether that employee checked the fuses.

The company’s control center then dispatched a troubleman. The field order was characterized as nonemergency, and it was initially assigned to a troubleman in the wrong service area before it was reassigned to someone closer more than an hour later.

The troubleman headed over to the dam, addressing another ticket he’d received along the way. Using binoculars, he spotted what appeared to be a fuse hanging down from a pole on the circuit in a remote area across the river. To get there, he had to drive down Highway 70, cross the river and drive up a long, unpaved access road on which he could at times drive no faster than 3 mph.

Advertisement

Two to three miles away from his destination, the troubleman ran into a Butte County road crew that was performing bridge maintenance, blocking the only way in. He returned about an hour and a half later, and though the bridge was still closed, the crew appeared to have finished their repairs, so he drove around the closure sign.

The troubleman finally arrived at the pole at 4:40 p.m. and saw that two conductors were tripped, a tree was leaning against the line, and a 600- to 800-square-foot fire was burning.

When he radioed dispatch operators for help, no one answered. Still, a PG&E worker heard the radio report and notified Cal Fire at 5:06 p.m., the utility said.

Unsure if help was on the way, the troubleman tried to fight the fire himself, taking a fire extinguisher from his truck and sliding 60 to 80 yards down to where the flames were. After he emptied the extinguisher, and a second one, he used a McLeod tool to try to dig a fire break near the access road. By then, he estimated the fire had grown to about 1,200 square feet.

Cal Fire aircraft arrived about 5:30 p.m., and a four-person ground crew was on scene around 7 p.m., according to PG&E. Its truck was unable to cross the closed bridge, so the troubleman drove there and ferried them across, the utility said.

Cal Fire would report later in the evening that the fire had grown to 10 to 15 acres.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than three weeks after it ignited in a remote canyon, the monster Dixie fire continued to break records Friday, leapfrogging Oregon’s Bootleg fire to become the largest burning in the U.S. and the third largest in recorded California history.

As the effects of climate change are felt more intensely worldwide, this singular blaze was raging in four counties — Butte, Lassen, Plumas and Tehama — and had scorched 679 square miles, an area considerably larger than the city of Los Angeles.

Stoked by extreme drought, dry vegetation and gusty winds, it was burning more rapidly and behaving more erratically than even veteran firefighters could recall ever seeing.

After razing the Sierra Nevada town of Greenville, the fire continued to spread and throw off spot fires Thursday, burning through the small community of Canyondam as it grew by 110,000 acres. That was more than double the 50,000 acres by which it expanded the day before, said Rick Carhart, public information officer with the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.

Advertisement

“There have been times during the fire when pretty much every time that an ember would spot and land in grass, it was almost guaranteed to ignite and start another spot fire,” he said.

Firefighters were working Friday to protect homes around Lake Almanor, where fire had reached the western shore but had not yet burned to the peninsula, they said.

No deaths have been reported so far in the Dixie fire, but some residents are taking risks that alarm authorities. Law enforcement has issued evacuation orders for thousands of residents whose communities were under siege, yet some are choosing to stay behind, posing more challenges.

Greg Hagwood, a Plumas County supervisor, said that in the last 72 hours, as fire has swept through or threatened small mountain towns including Greenville, the evacuations have grown tense — in some cases, residents have met law enforcement with weapons.

California California’s wildfire season is here. How to get ready Drought, climate change and an early start to fire season mean this fall could be one of fire, smoke, poor air quality and evacuations in Southern California. Here’s how you can prepare now.

“They are met with people who have guns and [are] saying, ‘Get off my property and you are not telling me to leave,’” he said.

In response to those who flatly refused to evacuate, he said, deputies were asking for next-of-kin information so they would have someone to notify if the holdouts died.

On Wednesday, authorities were forced to establish a temporary refuge area at a high school baseball field for people who had to flee or be rescued after they chose to stay behind in Chester. Some firefighters had to stop beating back flames to take people there, officials said.

Advertisement

Such undertakings carry a cost, said Capt. Mitch Matlow, public information officer on the Dixie fire.

“Then the fire can advance in areas where we might have otherwise been able to stop it, and the lives of the firefighters and the residents that they are moving to protect are put at increased risk,” he said.

On Thursday, authorities arrested three people who stayed behind in an evacuation zone in the Lassen County town of Westwood. All three were taken to jail, cited and released — two on suspicion of entering or remaining in an evacuation area, and one on suspicion of loitering on private property, said Lisa Bernard, public information officer with the Lassen County Sheriff’s Office.

“When we ask people to leave their homes, we take our duty to protect their property very seriously,” Bernard wrote in an email. Those who do stay behind are required to shelter in place inside their homes, and those who are found roaming the streets risk arrest, she said.

Advertisement

Hagwood said that as the former sheriff of Plumas County and a resident of Quincy, its historic heart, he has been on both sides of evacuation orders — issuing them and being subject to them.

A few years ago during the Minerva fire, he was forced to issue an order that covered his own home, as well as his parents’ up the street. Hagwood said the emotional intensity of evacuations on law enforcement and residents can’t be overestimated, especially in rural areas where everybody seems to know one another.

“You are talking about people’s homes, their property, everything they have worked for for their entire lives and sometimes generations,” Hagwood said. “Having the government, whether it’s local, state or federal, coming in and telling you you have to walk away from it is going to be met with some pushback.

“If you are in a large metropolitan area, you are making decisions that are affecting people you’ve never met, that you will never see,” he added. “Here, you are going to see them at the grocery store. You are going to be standing next to them at your kids’ athletic events going into the future.”

Advertisement

Don Guess of Crescent Mills chose not to evacuate because he was tired of it — it was the third time he’d been asked to leave during this fire.

The first time, he went to his father’s home near Lake Almanor. He was told to evacuate from there as well.

This time, he stayed because every two hours, he needed to fill the gas on his generator to keep the sprinklers on at his house.

But on Friday, after he’d been assured that firefighters were going to position in a place that would allow them to protect his home, he was planning to join his wife, who was already in Quincy.

Advertisement

“It’s crazy,” Guess said as he bought a bratwurst from Gigi’s Market, which remained open to supply a steady stream of emergency workers willing to eat whatever its proprietor was able to make. “I’m going to leave after I get something to eat.”

Firefighters were hoping that a break in the weather, with more stable and humid conditions on tap for the next week or so, would help them get the upper hand.

Still, the fire’s containment had fallen to 21% by Friday night, and more than 13,800 structures remained threatened. Smoke was polluting communities downwind Friday, including much of Lake Tahoe.

Advertisement

The Dixie fire ignited July 13 near a Pacific Gas & Electric Co. power station in Feather River Canyon. PG&E has said its equipment might be to blame and might also have started a separate fire nine days later that eventually merged with the Dixie fire.

A perfect storm of conditions has driven the fire’s rapid spread, officials say.

“It’s all of the things together,” Matlow said Thursday. “It’s the heat. It’s the dry fuels. It’s the drought. It’s the wind we saw yesterday. It’s the slope.”

Firefighters were initially challenged by the steep, remote terrain, with some spots so rugged they were unable to get engines close enough to bring in hose.

Advertisement

The fire then moved into areas with heavy timber and no recent burn history, where the undergrowth served as so-called ladder fuel that allowed flames to get up into the crowns of the trees.

“That’s where you also get very extreme fire growth, is from those trees spotting ahead of themselves,” Carhart said.

After the fire grew for roughly three weeks and amid deteriorating weather conditions that saw winds gusting to 40 mph, it met unburned islands of fuel inside the perimeter that threw embers across containment lines firefighters had established, Carhart said. That set off its run toward Lake Almanor, Greenville and Chester, he said.

By then, its sheer size had made it impossible to control, as it sent up a huge plume of smoke and ash that generated its own weather patterns.

Advertisement

“The fire was so big that it was then building on its own,” Carhart said.

As firefighters scrambled to make progress against the behemoth, some residents were allowed back into the ruins of their communities.

Plumas County Supervisor Kevin Goss looks at a friend’s home incinerated in the Dixie fire on Friday in Greenville.

Kevin Goss, a Greenville pharmacy owner and Plumas County supervisor, got his chance to assess the damage in his hometown Friday for the first time since he evacuated.

Advertisement

At the first road checkpoint, Goss met a state trooper who was on duty while his own home in Colfax was under evacuation orders.

Farther up the road, where he had to travel behind a pilot vehicle because the retaining wall of the bridge was still on fire, he came across county Sheriff Todd Johns coming down from the mountain.

Both men had been friends for years, and they were stoic but stunned by the losses they were witnessing.

Goss soon came across another close friend, a state trooper whose home lay in ash less than half a mile from where he was on duty.

Advertisement

The men traded news on where the fire was moving, relentlessly closer to Goss’ home deeper in the valley.

Goss turned on a back road leading into Greenville to check on friends’ homes.

At site after site, houses where he had gathered with friends and family had been reduced to nothing more than molten steel and heaps of ruin.

Advertisement

The fire had incinerated the Hideaway Motel and Lodge, which his parents had owned when they first moved here in the 1970s, down to its giant stone fireplace.

It was a good place to grow up, Goss said, recalling being snowed in one New Year’s when he was 5, when the entire town came on snowmobiles to celebrate the holiday.

Farther down, there were some signs that not everything had burned. A brown-sided home that belonged to his former brother-in-law was unscathed, its satellite dish still pointing toward the sky.

Nearby, two chickens pecked at crab apples that had fallen from a tree, and deer that had survived the blaze were roaming yards where sprinklers had kept grass green.

Advertisement

The road so filled with smoke that it required headlights in the middle of the day. Slowly, Goss was edging closer to what he really wanted to see: the oldest building in town, built in 1860. His pharmacy.

When the property finally came into sight, there was little but shock on his face.

Nothing remained.

At the back edge of the building was a pile of twisted plastic with the remains of an old child’s fire truck. It had been a toy he played with when he was a child, its metal hull now black, its red paint gone.

Advertisement

Standing beside the ruin, Goss could only try to find some humor amid the Dixie fire’s ashes.

“I didn’t even know there were bricks inside some of these walls,” he said, looking at their remains in the rubble. “That’s funny.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In 2019, gray whales inexplicably began to die by the scores along the Pacific coast.

By the end of the year, whale watchers and government scientists were stunned that hundreds were perishing, still with no clear cause. In San Francisco Bay, where I live, 34 had died. That was when Carolyn Cole and I set out to find answers.

Originally, we had a plan to follow the whales on their yearly migration, starting in Mexico’s Baja California Peninsula, where these whales appear every spring to bask and reproduce in warm, protected inlets. Then we would work our way north up the coast.

Advertisement

But after we landed in Loreto, Mexico, on March 5, 2020, nearly everything was upended.

The coronavirus was rampaging worldwide. Cruise ships were the most visible spreaders.

Carolyn and I aborted our plans to drive west, across the Baja Peninsula to see the whales — and instead drove more than 300 miles south to interview passengers disembarking from cruise ships pulling into Cabo San Lucas. No one was wearing masks. Many seemed surprised and incredulous. And after a couple of days, we decided to head back north to the leviathan nursery.

The whales were present, the tourists abundant. In San Ignacio, all of the cabanas at Pachico’s Ecotours were full with visitors from around the world — including a couple that happened to live on the same street as me, in Menlo Park.

The Times’ Susanne Rust checks her cellphone while reporting on gray whale deaths in San Ignacio, Mexico.

(Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

One day, we headed out to see the whales with a group of tourists from Milan, Italy, the European hot spot of the emerging virus. Gloved and masked, Carolyn and I did our best to record the trip. She brought her usual two bags of camera equipment and plunged a GoPro attached to a selfie stick underwater to capture video of the whales, while simultaneously taking images of their surfacing bodies and our fellow passengers. I did my best to lend a hand (unhelpfully pressing “stop” instead of “play” on an audio recorder, and pressing “pause” on the GoPro).

We got good video and flew home in the nick of time — three days before shutdown orders grounded Californians in their homes.

Advertisement

Within days it became clear our plans to physically follow the whale migration would — like a GoPro in my incapable hands — be paused. Canada had closed its borders. California and much of the U.S. had enacted shelter-in-place orders. Researchers up and down the coast faced scientific lockdown.

Searching for new avenues to explore the whales’ saga, we turned to social media and began following avid amateur whale watchers — folks who were doing what they could to monitor the whales.

It’s how we found Scott and Tree Mercer — so determined to observe and record the whales’ journey past their home in Point Arena, Calif., that they defied sheriff’s orders and were ejected, more than once, from their perch near the lighthouse.

It’s how we got word of new strandings — from Southern California to Del Norte County — and built a network of sources, including experts such as Sarah Grimes at Ft. Bragg’s Noyo Center for Marine Science, Bill Keener at the Marine Mammal Rescue Center in Sausalito and Alisa Schulman-Janiger in Dana Point.

Advertisement

As a crazy year got ever crazier, we took to the road to cover the pandemic, wildfires and protests over George Floyd’s murder across much of California and other states, but we kept tabs on the whales as we moved.

Carolyn took trips to Oregon and Washington to capture the migration — unfortunately facing bad weather and photo-reluctant whales at every turn.

And as the year came to a close, and coronavirus restrictions began to loosen, we decided to revisit the whales in Baja — and booked our travel for February, trying to schedule it for the same time we visited the year previously.

Unfortunately, the place we stayed before, Pachico’s Ecotours, was closed.

Advertisement

Times reporter Susanne Rust takes to the waters of the San Ignacio Lagoon in Baja to report on gray whales in 2021. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

So, we booked at Antonio’s Ecotours — just down the road — where getting a reservation was only too easy. The only other visitors at the resort were a French film crew; they left the day we arrived.

It was a stark difference from early 2020, when the resorts were booked to capacity and the communal eating areas packed every night.

Even more concerning was the state of the whales. Like the previous two years, many of the whales were still skinny. And in the Baja lagoons, there were fewer mothers and calves than typically seen.

Advertisement

But there were some healthy ones too. Possibly they had a reprieve from stress due to a decrease in boat traffic and noise pollution.

Now, as we seem to have turned a very tenuous corner with the virus, we’re hoping to visit with the whales later this summer in Alaska — where they journey every year to consume their yearly food supply.

Carolyn and I hope that 2020 — a year of stops, starts and prolonged quiet and reflection — will give us all more perspective on this fragile planet. One in which we as humans can move somewhat freely again, but with more awareness of our impact on these creatures and ecosystems we all share.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The 100-foot-long whale dived and circled in the murky, dark waters of the Santa Barbara Channel, looking for a cloud of krill to scoop and catch inside her 20-foot-long jaws.

As the blue whale began to resurface, whale scientist Brandon Southall was in a boat nearby, and he could feel his throat go dry. The whale was coming up right beneath a 200,000-ton transoceanic cargo ship, named the Maladarko, that was heading east from Hong Kong to its destination in Long Beach Harbor.

“We were plotting the two paths,” said Southall, a researcher at UC Santa Cruz and the president of an Aptos-based marine biology research firm. “It was a straight collision course.”

With the increase of cargo and cruise boat traffic the last several decades, ships have become one of the deadliest threats whales face in open oceans and coastal waters. Ship strikes are not thought to be a predominant cause of the West Coast die-off of gray whales since 2019, but they are a factor, and an increasing concern.

Advertisement

Between 2016 and 2020, at least 1,001 beached or dead whales were identified by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration as having “injuries consistent with ship strikes,” said Michael Milstein, a NOAA spokesman, describing an informal death-by-ship database the agency keeps.

Earlier this year, horrific photos of two fin whales pinned to the hull of an Australian naval ship gained worldwide attention. The vessel had been conducting exercises in the waters near San Diego. The two bodies — one 65 feet long, the other just 25 feet — were draped over the hull.

“Anywhere you have major shipping routes and whales in the same place, you are going to see collisions,” said Russell Leaper, an expert with the International Whaling Commission. “Unfortunately, that’s the situation in many places.”

This deceased fin whale that washed up at Bolsa Chica State Beach on May 20, 2021, is thought to have been struck by an Australian warship. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

While gray whales and humpbacks make up 70% of the reported strikes in the government’s database, it’s the endangered and threatened populations — such as North Atlantic right whales and the gargantuan Pacific blues — that concern scientists the most. For those whales, each death comes with a risk of population or species extinction.

Southall and colleagues, including John Calambokidis at Cascadia Research Collective, examined behavioral differences in whales during day and night.

They discovered that whales tend to hang out closer to the surface at night and for longer periods of time. This was especially true for blue whales, making them particularly vulnerable.

Advertisement

Scientists are unsure if the whales are resting during the night or feeding on food sources that move closer to the surface during nighttime hours — when krill-eating seabirds and other marine animals are sidelined. But these behaviors add to the complexities of avoiding collisions through mitigation measures — such as keeping an eye out for whales while on a moving vessel.

“Having a lookout isn’t going to help,” said Southall, president of Southall Environmental Associates.

What can make a difference, experts agree, is slowing down boat traffic — allowing whales not only the chance to flee, but possibly reducing the potential injury — and altering shipping lanes when whales are present.

Advertisement

Along the U.S. Atlantic Coast, mandatory speed restrictions during certain seasons have helped reduce right whale mortality. Conservation groups are asking the government to extend the regulations to boats smaller than 65 feet, as well as to expand the areas and times for these maximum speed limits.

Others are hoping to create protocols and communications systems that will allow boat captains, mariners and harbor masters to voluntarily reduce speeds and alter routes where whales are present — in real time.

Elliott Hazen, a researcher with NOAA’s Southwest Fisheries Science Center in Monterey, has developed an app that works like Google Maps — except instead of navigating cars and harried drivers around Los Angeles, it helps boats avoid concentrations of whales.

Using data collected from satellites on ocean temperature, food distribution and currents, WhaleWatch can predict “whale hot spots” and warn vessels approaching such critical areas — giving boat captains a tool and an extra incentive to slow down, and possibly alter their route.

Advertisement

“It’s predictive,” said Hazen. “Here’s where you are most likely to have concentration of whales.”

Voluntary limits can only go so far. All researchers interviewed for this story said mandatory speed restrictions and route alterations are the best way to reduce whale mortality.

“One of the difficulties is that these cargo vessels, they have a small window of time to unload cargo,” Hazen added. “If slow speeds are not mandatory, there may be little incentive for them to slow down.”

Advertisement

Slower speeds also reduce the amount of fuel needed — making a voyage cheaper — and reduce the amount of carbon dioxide emitted into the atmosphere. “Slow speeds are a win for all,” said Leaper.

In the case of the leviathan observed in the Santa Barbara Channel, Southall and his colleagues had previously attached temporary trackers, via suction cup, to the female blue whale. The monitors were part of a study they were conducting in 2014 on the behavioral responses of whales to military sonar.

After their experiment was over, they waited around for the trackers to drop off.

“They’re expensive devices,” said Southall, noting their $20,000 price tag and the need to retrieve them.

Advertisement

They kept a safe distance from this whale, whom they had known since 1987. She had been involved in capsizing a 23-foot private vessel off the coast of Shelter Island near San Diego in 2014.

Suddenly, as they waited, they saw her shoot from the depths straight toward the cargo vessel’s trajectory.

“We watched, with our hands over our mouths, thinking, ‘Oh, my God, are we gonna see a strike? Or a pool of blood?’” Southall said.

Advertisement

But then she stopped, mid-swim, and rolled to her side, just a few meters below the hull — presumably to eyeball the behemoth cruising over her.

For the next three minutes, she remained suspended below, only resurfacing after the cargo ship passed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When Californians think of whales, they generally think of the species most sighted off our coasts — gray whales.

Swimming north and south, spouting, popping their heads out of the sea and endlessly curious about humans they encounter, gray whales are awe-inspiring creatures. They also are in trouble. More than 480 have been mysteriously found dead in the eastern Pacific since 2019.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The road home for Kevin Goss was painful and full of no good news.

A Plumas County supervisor and pharmacy owner, Goss represents an area hit hardest by the Dixie fire, one he hadn’t seen since evacuating from Greenville days ago.

Friday, he got his chance.

At the first checkpoint, Goss met a state trooper who was on duty while his own home in Colfax was under evacuation orders. Farther up the road, where Goss had to travel behind a pilot vehicle because the retaining wall of the bridge was still on fire, he came across Plumas County Sheriff Todd Johns coming down from the mountain.

Advertisement

Goss had been friends with Johns for years, and he got out of the car to touch base with the sheriff.

Both men were stoic but stunned by the losses surrounding them. A few miles farther, Goss came across another close friend, a state trooper whose home lay in ashes less than half a mile from where he was on duty.

The men traded news on where the fire was moving, relentlessly closer to Goss’ home deeper in the valley. Goss turned on a back road leading into Greenville to check on friends’ homes.

At site after site, the homes where he had gathered with friends and family had been reduced to nothing more than molten steel and heaps of ruin. The Hideaway Motel and Lodge, which his parents had owned when they first moved here in the 1970s, was nearly completely incinerated, except for its giant stone fireplace. This is the place where Goss remembered being snowed in one New Year’s when he was 5, when the entire town came on snowmobiles to celebrate the holiday.

Plumas County Supervisor Kevin Goss surveys some of the destruction wrought by the Dixie fire in Greenville on Friday. (Anita Chabria / Los Angeles Times)

It was a good place to grow up, he said.

Farther down, there were some signs that not everything had burned. A brown-sided home that belonged to his former brother-in-law was unscathed, its satellite dish still pointing toward the sky. Nearby, two chickens pecked at crab apples that had fallen off a tree. Deer that had survived the blaze were roaming yards where sprinklers had kept grass green.

Advertisement

The road was so filled with smoke that it required headlights in the middle of the day.

Slowly, though, Goss was edging closer to what he really wanted to survey.

It was the oldest building in town, built in 1860. His pharmacy.

“The emotional part is going to come here in a minute, a minute and a half,” he said.

Advertisement

When it finally came into sight, there was little but shock on his face.

Nothing remained.

Standing above the ruin, Goss gave a short and mirthless laugh. “I didn’t even know there were bricks inside some of these walls,” he said, looking at their remains in the rubble. “That’s funny.”

Advertisement

Pointing to blackened steel and plaster, he said, “here’s where we kept all the pills.”

At the back edge of the building was a pile of twisted plastic with the remains of an old child’s fire truck. It had been a toy he played with when he was a child. Its metal hull was now black, its red paint gone.

“You think you are prepared for it, but I guarantee you, you are not,” he told an NBC news crew.

Goss had last been at the pharmacy the night of the fire with his son. Spot fires were everywhere, and he knew it was only a matter of time before the town burned.

Advertisement

With the sheriff, he went to a friend’s house to grab some belongings for her. Everywhere he went, he told people, “Get the heck out of here. It’s coming.”

After 20 years of fighting for new roads, the town had finally had its entire downtown revamped as part of a $15-million project four years ago. Elegant black light posts with bell shades and LED lights were installed, most now twisted and bent like wilted flowers.

Before his return to Greenville, Goss had stopped by the pharmacy in downtown Quincy, where he picked up prescriptions for people he knew who had remained behind.

Before evacuating, Goss had managed to grab his pharmacy’s computer, which contained information on all the prescriptions he had filled.

Advertisement

In Quincy, those prescriptions were filled by the woman who had planned to buy his Greenville pharmacy, before the Dixie fire turned it to ash.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Curtis Machlan alternated between past and present tense as he spoke about Greenville.

The 58-year-old in 2007 moved to the Gold Rush-era town, where the population sign read more than 2,000 people but where the community numbers just over 1,000.

It’s the town where he met his wife, Kimberly, who had moved to the area in the late 1990s from San Jose.

“We’d go to the local grocery store and sometimes it would take over an hour to get out, just to run in and get a gallon of milk or something, because we knew everybody,” Machlan said.

Advertisement

Greenville, nestled in dense forests southeast of Lake Almanor, was decimated Wednesday when the massive Dixie fire swept through three weeks after it ignited near a Pacific Gas & Electric Co. power station in Feather River Canyon. Authorities said the rapid advance of flames was fed by gusty winds and historically dry conditions, with the National Weather Service issuing a red flag advisory warning of severe fire risk.

“It’s the climate change,” Machlan said. “Everybody who didn’t believe it in Greenville is now a climate refugee.”

Crews were still assessing the damage, but it’s believed that three-quarters of the town’s buildings were consumed, fire spokeswoman Serena Baker said Thursday morning. At least 67 structures were destroyed, with more than 12,000 under threat, according to authorities.

The road to Greenville was still on fire Thursday night.

The town was a smoking ruin, its sign melted so that the lettering crackled like glaze. Entire blocks were razed. Flames still flickered where they could find perches on something left to burn. Hulls of cars lined the street, reduced to charred tanks and melted wheels.

The U.S. Postal Service building was standing, but inside, the banks of P.O. boxes lay collapsed on the ground, their doors burned off. The gas station was smoldering, its metal roof twisted and swollen, its pumps burned-out shells.

This is all that is left of Greenville’s Bransford & McIntyre Store, which dates back to the 1870s, was burned during a 1881 fire and now has been destroyed again, along with much of the town. (Anita Chabria / Los Angeles Times)

At Main and Crescent streets, the historic Bransford & McIntyre Store was reduced to its walls and five steel doors that were meant to protect it from just such a fate. A plaque on the front of the building said the store had been built on this site in the mid-1870s but burned in an 1881 fire. It was immediately replaced with a brick building that, according to a plaque, was “built like a fortress,” complete with “steel shuttered doors and windows.”

Advertisement

None of it was enough to save the store from the Dixie fire.

“The whole historic downtown area is gone,” said Kevin Goss, a Plumas County supervisor who owned a pharmacy that was destroyed. It was the oldest building in town and dated back to 1860, he said.

Goss had gone into town Wednesday and saw the fire jump off the hillside, raining sparks and embers around Greenville.

“That’s when the fire came to town,” he said. “It came through there like a blowtorch.”

Advertisement

Fire officials said they battled the blaze in Greenville for hours, and many people — although not all — fled as the flames approached.

But there was much that could not be saved.

The library where Machlan’s wife once worked burned down. The building that housed the auto parts store where Machlan once worked was gone, too.

On Thursday, he heard from a friend who stayed and tried to fight the fire in a pasture behind the Machlan home. He said the house had been reduced to ash. Neighbors’ homes were also destroyed.

Advertisement

The friend described the scene as a “moonscape.”

“It’s tragic for so many people,” Machlan said, adding that the catastrophe came as no surprise because conditions in the Sierra Nevada have been the driest he’s ever seen.

“Even just with that sense that I knew it was coming, it’s like losing a loved one,” he said. “Like a death of a loved one.”

Advertisement

Goss said that authorities had lifted a mandatory evacuation order Tuesday and that people “were just repopulating Greenville when this thing just broke loose.”

“We just weren’t sure what was going on up in the mountain … or else we probably wouldn’t have let people back into town,” he said. “We thought it was taken care of, we thought they had it controlled. They didn’t.”

The fire flowed over a hairpin road system and made a run into Greenville around 4 p.m. Wednesday, said Jake Cagle, operations section chief for the U.S. Forest Service.

“These are not the normal fires anymore,” Cagle said. “It’s just intense fire behavior, and it’s not what we’re used to.”

Advertisement

Goss and his son went around to a few homes and told residents to get out “because the whole thing is going to go up.”

“We pretty much knew there was no saving it,” he said.

As of Thursday, all that was left standing in downtown Greenville was metal and concrete, said Margaret Elysia Garcia, who had an office there for 10 years. Garcia, a reporter for the Plumas News who also teaches creative writing and theater at the California Correctional Center in Susanville, called the little office in the 100-year-old building “my lifeline.”

The museum down the street, which she’d written about when it reopened after COVID-19 closures, was also gone.

Advertisement

It wasn’t the first time Greenville had burned. After it had become a supply depot during the Gold Rush, much of the town burned in the 1881 blaze, according to the Indian Valley Chamber of Commerce.

Still, some residents were surprised Thursday.

“We never thought it would hit the town,” said Garcia, who called it the fire that ate Greenville.

Thursday’s conditions were similar to the night before, when evening winds drove the fire off the mountain and into the town. Crews were bracing for the fire to make another run.

Advertisement

John Castaneda, of the Tallac Hotshots out of South Lake Tahoe, was one of scores of firefighters who tried in vain to keep the fire from racing into Greenville on Wednesday night.

“It’s tough when there’s something you want to do and you just can’t do anything,” he said. “It was just devastating.”

He said he and his crew, who have been out fighting fires since late July, were determined to keep the fire from carving another path of mass destruction Thursday night.

But already, the fire had come down the mountain on Highway 89, leaping over it with a few sparks that turned tall pines into towering flames in a matter of seconds. Crews had beaten the flames back and were trying to hold them to the west side of the highway.

Advertisement

Firefighters were also working to defend nearby communities from a similar fate.

Many of them were patrolling the town of Chester, about 19 miles northwest, to stave off flames that arrived there within the last 12 hours, Edwin Zuniga, a spokesman for the west zone of the fire, said Thursday morning.

Late in the day, the blaze raged near Keddie Ridge, forcing evacuations in Taylorsville and nearby communities, said Tim Jones, a spokesman for the east zone of the fire.

PG&E has said that its equipment may have sparked the fire July 13 but that a worker didn’t get to the site and discover the flames until 9½ hours later.

Advertisement

On Monday, the utility company disclosed that its equipment may also have ignited the Fly fire, which started July 22 off Highway 70 and grew to 4,300 acres before it merged with the Dixie fire two days later.

The utility said it was taking additional safety measures, including attempting to respond to any fault or outage in a high-fire-risk area within 60 minutes or less, in light of this season’s severe burning conditions.

“The fires we’ve seen this summer are not wind-driven events that we typically see in the fall; they are primarily dry fuel-driven events,” Scott Strenfel, director of PG&E meteorology, said in a statement. “Climate change impacts have led to more frequent heat waves, extreme drought, and millions of dead and dying trees, which have created elevated wildfire risk.”

PG&E equipment has already been identified as the source of some of California’s most destructive wildfires, including the 2018 Camp fire, which saw the company plead guilty to 84 counts of manslaughter. Most recently, Shasta County’s district attorney said that the utility is “criminally liable” for its role in sparking the Zogg fire, which killed four people last year, but that her office has not yet decided on what charges may be filed.

Advertisement

The Dixie fire was 361,812 acres and 35% contained as of Thursday evening, making it California’s largest wildfire of the season so far and the sixth-largest wildfire in the state’s recorded history, according to the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.

It was burning amid an unusually early and active season that has already seen 100 large fires burn more than 1.9 million acres in 14 states, according to the National Interagency Fire Center.

About 55 miles southeast, another wildfire had destroyed at least 50 structures and forced 5,200 people from their homes in Nevada and Placer counties, officials said.

The 2,600-acre River fire started at the Bear River Campground on Wednesday afternoon and quickly burned uphill through brush and timber, destroying homes on both sides of the river that serves as the dividing line between the two counties, said Mary Eldridge, public information officer with Cal Fire.

Advertisement

Authorities reported 15% containment as of Thursday evening after bracing for another day of active fire behavior. The cause of the fire remained under investigation.

“The timber is dry. The bushes are dry,” Eldridge said. “We’re looking at the beginning of August, and conditions are like what we would normally see four to six weeks later, without precipitation.”

That assessment was echoed by Garcia, of Greenville, who said that summers have become hotter and precipitation has dwindled since she moved nearly two decades ago.

Since Memorial Day, temperatures reached 105 degrees in three consecutive weeks, she said. Last year had only two good snows and no snowpack, and the river was so low that when she left town in July it looked like it normally would in September, she said.

Advertisement

The town of Greenville, in Plumas County, harks back to California’s pioneer days. But the Dixie fire has now destroyed nearly all of the town. (Anita Chabria / Los Angeles Times)

“You have this perfect storm of climate change and Pacific Gas and Electric not being accountable for their actions,” Garcia said. “I think most of us in the county, no matter what political side we’re on, we’ll agree that we’ve had bad forest management for 100 years.”

In the past, at the end of a school year, residents would look forward to summers. But now, people are just anxious, she said.

“There’s no easy summer anymore,” she said. “People are just, like, can we make it till September? Can we make it till October before something bad happens?”

Advertisement

Garcia and her husband left Greenville on July 15, soon after the fire started, to help her son and his girlfriend with their move down to Mission Viejo.

They thought they would be gone a week.

“We didn’t know we wouldn’t be coming back to anything, so we didn’t pack like it was the last time we’d ever see our community,” she said.

Her 74-year-old mother had evacuated but returned when the evacuation order in the town was lifted. Four hours later, Garcia said, “the fire was out of control and about to hit Greenville.”

Advertisement

Although Garcia was in Southern California, she was still writing for the Plumas News and had been monitoring the wind. When wind speeds reached 40 mph, she told her mother to get out.

Some of the residents of Greenville had moved there after the Camp fire destroyed Paradise, she said. Those living in town included retirees, lower-income residents and others who might not be able to rebuild, she said.

Garcia, who writes under the name Meg Upton, detailed the loss of the town in a piece that went up Thursday, titled “Eulogy for Greenville.” She sent the third version of the story to her editor at 2 a.m. Thursday.

In it, she wrote that her “defiantly quirky, beautiful adopted hometown had turned into a ghost town.”

Advertisement

“We love you, Greenville,” she wrote. “With all our broken hearts, we love you.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Facing criticism over its practice of monitoring some fires rather than quickly snuffing them out, the U.S. Forest Service has told its firefighters to halt the policy this year to better prioritize resources and help prevent small blazes from growing into uncontrollable conflagrations.

The change came days after politicians in California and the West, including Gov. Gavin Newsom, publicly challenged the “let it burn” approach after the Tamarack fire ignited last month, as The Times detailed in a story Sunday.

It also comes as fierce winds are expected to collide with bone-dry conditions at the massive Dixie fire in Northern California, already California’s eighth-largest in recorded history at more than 270,000 acres, leaving firefighters bracing for further spread during a red flag warning that goes through Thursday. Currently, the blaze is 35% contained with nearly 5,000 personnel working to stop its advance.

Instead of letting some naturally caused small blazes burn, the agency’s priorities will shift this year, U.S. Forest Service Chief Randy Moore indicated to the staff in a letter Monday. The focus, he said, will be on firefighter and public safety.

Advertisement

Moore, who took over as head of the agency last month, wrote that the 2021 fire season is “different from any before” and posed a “national crisis” that required the U.S. Forest Service to put on hold its mission to groom forest lands — at times by letting wildfire clear them — to make them more resilient to fires. Instead, he said, the agency will use its strained resources to protect lives and homes as more than 70 large fires burn across the United States, requiring more than 22,000 fire personnel to battle.

“We are in a ‘triage mode’ where our primary focus must be on fires that threaten communities and infrastructure,” Moore wrote, citing drought conditions throughout the West and coronavirus cases among firefighters, reducing ranks further.

Christopher Dicus, professor of fire and fuels at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, called the change “prudent” and said the reevaluation was “not surprising at all” given the “horrific” conditions of drought and weather in the West.

Prior to publication of this story, the U.S. Forest Service did not respond to queries about the shift in policy. In a statement released Thursday, agency officials disputed there was any shift, writing that Moore’s letter “further clarified our existing policy” and that the forest service “has not explicitly managed fires for resource benefit this year” since conditions have deteriorated nationwide, putting the agency on its highest alert level.

“There is a misconception out there that the Forest Service has a “let it burn” policy,” the statement read. “We do not. Every fire has a suppression strategy. In these circumstances, we will continue to aggressively engage all wildfires while prioritizing the safety of our firefighters and surrounding communities. … The reality on the ground is that there is a finite amount of firefighting resources available that must be prioritized, and fires will not always get the resources that might be requested.”

In part to reintroduce fire to landscape after decades of suppression that led to dangerous overgrowth, the Forest Service for many years has allowed some small fires in secluded areas to burn. The Tamarack fire was one of those.

The fire began as a July 4 lightning strike on a single tree in the Mokelumne Wilderness, a rugged area southeast of Sacramento. Forest officials decided to monitor it rather than attempt to put it out, a decision a spokeswoman said was based on scant resources and the remote location. But the blaze continued to grow, eventually consuming nearly 69,000 acres, destroying homes and causing mass evacuations. As of Friday, it was 78% contained.

Advertisement

Speaking to President Biden in a virtual meeting with other Western states’ governors last week, Newsom pleaded for help changing the “culture” of the U.S. Forest Service when it comes to allowing fires to burn.

Newsom said the “wait and see” policy was the “elephant in the room” when it came to wildfires.

“You can’t just walk away, not with this climate, not with this drought,” he said last week while visiting areas of the Tamarack fire. “This is life and death, and we can’t just fight fires the way we did 20, 30, 40 years ago anymore.”

In its statement, the U.S. Forest Service said that the decision to monitor the Tamarack fire by camera and air — rather than initially suppress it — was based on the need to put resources on other blazes that posed greater threats to people and property, as well as the fire’s remote location, “sparse fuels and natural barriers.”

Advertisement

Newsom met Wednesday morning with U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack and Moore at the burn scar of the 2020 August Complex in Northern California, the largest wildfire in California’s recorded history, to discuss how state and federal authorities can better work together on managing forests and fires.

Not far away, the Dixie fire forced more evacuations Tuesday, jumping containment lines and bypassing 230,000 gallons of fire retardant dumped on a main road. At least 45 structures have been destroyed, with more than 12,000 under threat, according to the latest incident report.

In filings to regulators, Pacific Gas & Electric Co. said the Dixie fire may have been caused by a tree falling against its equipment, and later merged with the Fly fire, which also may have been caused by the utility’s power lines.

Vilsack promised more federal aid and cooperation for California’s plight, acknowledging concerns about past practices while also stressing that, with dozens of fires burning across the West and months to go in a prolonged fire season, there are not enough resources to put them all out.

Advertisement

“Candidly I think it’s fair to say, over the generations, over the decades, we have tried to do this job on the cheap,” Vilsack said. “We’ve tried to get by, a little bit here, a little bit there, a little forest management over here, a little fire suppression over here. But the reality is this has caught up with us, which is why we have an extraordinary number of catastrophic fires and why we have to significantly beef up our capacity.”

Vilsack said that the bipartisan infrastructure bill working its way through Congress would provide some of those resources but that ultimately it would take “billions” of dollars and years of catch-up to create fire-resilient forests.

Dicus, the professor, said, “a decade or more is a very reasonable expectation given the degree of the problems and the amount of financial resources” it will require to fix them.

For decades, the federal agencies that manage national forests and grasslands have fallen far behind on reducing brush, dead trees and other fuels for wildfires, in part because of environmental disputes and a lack of funding. Forests are also stressed by an invasion of bark beetles after the last drought, which left millions of dead trees in the Sierra Nevada. Into that volatile mix, climate change, with more intense weather patterns and climbing temperatures, is exacerbating the situation — as is the increase in homes built close to wildlands.

Advertisement

While most experts agree that fire is part of the solution, attempts to use prescribed burns during wetter periods to help return forests to healthier conditions have sometimes been blocked by California air districts, concerned about smoke compounding existing air pollution.

Last year, California signed an agreement to increase the pace of preventive maintenance, such as thinning of forests and more planned burns, but that work remains unfunded on the federal side. Newsom said Wednesday that agreement would cover at least a million acres of forest land each year. The federal government owns about 45 million acres in California, about 45% of the state’s land.

Though the change in policy will affect how Forest Service fires are fought this season, Moore, the chief, said in his letter that the agency could return to letting fires burn when conditions improve — including as soon as the winter months.

Advertisement

Moore stressed that fire remained an important tool, and the agency was not returning to the “10 a.m.” policy, a directive instituted in 1935 that pushed firefighters to put out every fire by the morning after it was reported. That policy, which led to years of aggressive fire suppression, contributed to current conditions.

The Forest Service, Moore wrote, will instead return to using prescribed fire “in the right places and at the right time.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s been a year and a half since California Gov. Gavin Newsom directed oil regulators to consider new health and safety measures to protect people living near oil and gas drilling sites.

But those regulators missed another deadline Monday for releasing the rules, frustrating environmental advocates who say communities can’t wait any longer for change. The California Geologic Energy Management Division, known as CalGEM, hasn’t set a new timeline for the rules, which Newsom originally mandated be out last December. Regulators delayed but said they would come out in the spring.

California is the nation’s seventh-largest oil-producing state and has no statewide rules on how far oil and gas wells must be from where people live, work or go to school. While it has a reputation as a climate leader, other oil-producing states, including Pennsylvania and Colorado, already have such regulations. Even Texas bans wells within 467 feet of a property line.

Advocacy groups point to studies that show living near drilling sites can worsen a slew of health risks, including respiratory problems and birth defects.

Advertisement

“It is clear CalGEM does not respect the urgency needed to prevent further damage and inequity in our communities,” Cesar Aguirre, a community organizer with Central California Environmental Justice Network, said in a statement.

The group is one of dozens in the Last Chance Alliance that sent Newsom an open letter calling for him to immediately mandate a 2,500-foot buffer zone between wells and places like homes and schools and to issue a moratorium on all new drilling permits in those zones. Newsom has previously declined to impose such a mandate in favor of the agency rule-making process.

“Your leadership can deliver equitable and effective relief today,” the letter says.

Uduak-Joe Ntuk, the state’s oil and gas supervisor, was not made available for an interview Tuesday to discuss the delay. Lisa Lien-Mager, a spokeswoman for the California Natural Resources Agency, which oversees CalGEM, said the issue is complex and requires more time.

Regulators “continue to work toward developing science-based health and safety regulations to protect communities and workers from the impacts of oil extraction activities,” she said in an email.

Spokespeople for Newsom didn’t comment on whether he would communicate with regulators about the delay or respond to advocates’ call for him to take immediate action.

But as he faces an expected recall election this year, the regulation of the oil industry places him between two powerful constituencies: environmentalists and some labor unions aligned with the oil industry. Democrats, who control state government, are divided on how much to regulate the industry.

The Western States Petroleum Assn. and the State Building and Construction Trades Council oppose a statewide mandate on buffer zones, saying such a rule would hurt workers and raise the cost of fuel.

Advertisement

Meanwhile, environmentalists have long been frustrated by the state’s oil regulator, saying the agency is too close with the companies it oversees.

Newsom, a first-term Democratic governor, pledged to reform CalGEM in 2019 by renaming it and directing it to focus on health and safety. He told the agency to consider prohibiting drilling within certain distances of homes, schools, hospitals and parks.

Last year, he used executive powers to mandate the draft regulations come out by December. But the agency punted to the spring, saying it needed more time to take feedback from public health experts. Advocates took note when summer began on Monday without the new rules.

Advertisement

“It’s astounding that the state has failed to develop a draft public health and safety rule in over a year and a half,” said Gladys Limon, executive director of the California Environmental Justice Alliance.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A federal appeals court on Friday upheld a $25-million verdict against the maker of Roundup, a weed killer that thousands of litigants blame for causing their cancers.

The three-judge panel of the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals rejected an appeal by Monsanto Co., the manufacturer of the herbicide, ruling 2-1 that $20 million in punitive damages, “while close to the outer limits,” was constitutional.

A jury in 2019 awarded cancer victim Edwin Hardeman $5.3 million in compensation for his illness and $75 million in punitive damages, which are intended to punish a defendant and deter future misconduct. The jury found that punitive damages were required because Monsanto had failed to warn users about its product. A judge later reduced the punitive award to $20 million.

The ruling stemmed from the first trial of about 5,000 lawsuits consolidated in federal court in Northern California against Monsanto. The suits blame glyphosate, the active ingredient in Roundup, for causing non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.

Advertisement

Roundup, the world’s best-known herbicide, has been widely used by both farmers and households. The huge German chemical company Bayer acquired Monsanto three years ago and inherited the legal challenges. Bayer last year agreed to spend more than $12 billion to resolve some of the legal claims.

In suing Monsanto, Hardeman contended that his use of Roundup on his Sonoma County property from the 1980s to 2012 caused his disease. Monsanto said Hardeman’s non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma either stemmed from his hepatitis C or was among the 70% of cases that develop for unknown reasons.

Monsanto, trying to overturn the punitive damages award, said it could not have have known that glyphosate caused cancer in 2012.

The 9th Circuit disagreed, noting that “various independent scientific studies linking glyphosate and cancer were released by 2012.” The court also cited internal emails by Monsanto toxicologists that indicated the company was aware of potential health risks.

“Evidence of Monsanto’s conduct — downplaying concerns and failing to fully assess Roundup’s safety after being alerted to possible risks — supports that Monsanto acted with ‘indifference to or a reckless disregard of the health or safety of others,’” grounds for punitive damages, wrote 9th Circuit Judge Ryan D. Nelson, a Trump appointee. He was joined by Judge Michael D. Hawkins, a Clinton appointee.

The jury’s initial punitive award of $75 million was grossly excessive, Nelson wrote, but the reduced amount did not violate due process rights.

The court cautioned that its decision was based on evidence from Hardeman’s case and that other Roundup trials might involve different facts that could lead to other results.

Advertisement

Judge N. Randy Smith, appointed to the court by President George W. Bush, dissented, arguing that even the reduced punitive award was excessive.

Smith said it remained uncertain whether Roundup actually causes cancer. The punitive award, he contended, should not have exceeded the “substantial” $5.27 million the jury awarded to compensate Hardeman for his disease.

“Monsanto’s conduct is not particularly reprehensible in light of the ongoing scientific debate,” Smith wrote.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The West Coast’s most important estuary is dying, and Gov. Gavin Newsom has hastened its demise.

As he took office two years ago, Newsom promised to generate voluntary agreements among farmers, environmentalists and government officials on the rules for allocating water that flows through the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. One year ago, in a CalMatters op-ed, he said again that agreements were the way forward to “protect, restore, and enhance … the Delta.”

Not only have no voluntary agreements emerged, but conditions in the delta have grown so dire that in March the National Marine Fisheries Service estimated that high water temperatures could kill 90% of endangered winter-run Chinook salmon in the Sacramento River this year.

The delta is California’s hydrological hub. Its sprawling watershed covers 40% of the state, and two-thirds of California’s 40 million residents drink water that flows through it. It generates California’s largest fishery, producing most of the state’s salmon, and it is also a National Heritage Area, a unique combination of multicultural communities whose 500,000 inhabitants include many descendants of 19th century Asian and Mexican laborers.

Advertisement

This enormous nexus of interests — from Eureka salmon fishers to San Diego residential water consumers — merges in a region on life support, increasingly vulnerable to saltwater intrusion, toxic algal blooms, rising sea level, land subsidence, drought and water diversions.

Yet Newsom is showing more concern for a relatively small group of prosperous Central Valley farmers than he is for the tottering delta’s human and animal constituents.

Soon after taking office, Newsom declined to reappoint then-Chair Felicia Marcus to the State Water Resources Control Board. Marcus was responsible for a carefully considered, science-based plan to update outmoded 1995 delta water allocation regulations. Her removal from the board effectively sidelined that plan, and with it minimum delta flows that salmon and other species need for a reasonable chance of survival.

The first of the plan’s two phases — approved but not yet implemented — called for leaving unimpaired 30% to 50% of flows in the lower San Joaquin River Basin at critical times of the year; water districts there had sometimes diverted as much as 90% of flows for municipal users and (mostly) agribusiness.

District officials and Central Valley farmers howled. Newsom, arguing that Marcus’ plan would inevitably be snarled in litigation, advocated voluntary agreements instead. True enough, Marcus’ plan has attracted numerous lawsuits, but voluntary agreements would be just as susceptible to litigation, and in any case, state officials have been trying to negotiate voluntary compromises on the flows for at least a decade with no success.

Meanwhile, the delta ecosystem continues to collapse. So few salmon have returned to the Sacramento River, where most of the state’s salmon spawn, that this year the commercial salmon season probably will be cut in half, and the prospects for salmon survival are hurtling downward. A mere 75 years ago, millions of smelt inhabited the estuary; now, so few have been sighted that scientists worry they may go extinct this year. So much water has been diverted from the delta that in places its flow has turned sluggish or stagnant. That, combined with nutrients in agricultural runoff that collect in the estuary, has provided perfect breeding conditions for algal blooms toxic enough to kill animals and sicken humans. The blooms are an annual phenomenon.

A charitable interpretation of Newsom’s water board moves is that he committed a rookie mistake: He didn’t realize that when he undercut Marcus’ plan, he also dissolved the water users’ motivation to negotiate voluntary agreements. Newsom put forward a compromise plan, but since then, negotiations for voluntary agreements have broken down. The delay benefits farmers because diversions allowed by the 1995 regulations — universally regarded as inadequate to protect or restore the delta — remain in effect.

As the state descends into its latest drought, and with the risk of future droughts intensifying along with climate change, the delta’s situation will only worsen. Water users, especially Central Valley farmers who have been shifting from row crops to more lucrative permanent crops such as almonds, pistachios and walnuts, will continue to pressure politicians for water. Though farmers can cut back on water for row crops by letting fields lie fallow during droughts, permanent crops require water every year, drought or no drought.

Advertisement

Newsom’s aides told the Sacramento Bee in February that compromise was still in the offing, but given the drought and the recall effort targeting the governor, it’s highly unlikely that he’ll risk provoking farmers and municipal users this year by limiting their water allocations. It may not be a coincidence that Stewart and Linda Resnick, billionaire owners of Wonderful Co., which grows pistachios on more than 100,000 acres in the San Joaquin Valley, donated $250,000 in March to Newsom’s anti-recall campaign.

That kind of support gives rise to a more cynical interpretation of the governor’s squelching of the Marcus-led plan: Far from making a rookie mistake, he knew exactly what he was doing.

Jacques Leslie is a contributing writer to Opinion.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@State agricultural officials declared a 60-square-mile quarantine this week after a potentially devastating citrus disease was found in two trees on residential property in Oceanside, its first appearance in San Diego County.

The bacterial disease called Huanglongbing, also known as HLB or “citrus greening,” is spread by the Asian citrus psyllid, a small insect that feeds on citrus tree leaves. The disease has been confirmed in Orange, Los Angeles, San Bernardino and Riverside counties.

Infected trees cannot be cured. They will produce bitter and misshapen fruit and eventually die, with the chance that the insect will spread the disease to nearby trees. Signs include blotchy yellowing of leaves; yellow shoots; small, lopsided fruit; and premature, excessive fruit drop.

“Our goal is to stop this from spreading any further,” San Diego Agricultural Commissioner Ha Dang said in a news release. “By working together, we can all protect San Diego County’s $150-million citrus industry.”

Advertisement

The quarantine area is bordered on the north by Vandegrift Boulevard, on the south by Carlsbad Village Drive, on the east by Melrose Drive and on the west by the Pacific Ocean.

People and businesses within the quarantine are prohibited from moving citrus nursery stock, plant parts and fruit outside the boundaries except for commercially cleaned and packed fruit that adheres to specific requirements. Residential citrus plants and parts may not be moved from the properties where they are grown.

As of April 2020, Orange County had the highest number of HLB detections: 1,370 positive trees out of more than 1,860 found statewide.

Commercial growers in the quarantine area can contact Sandra Zwaal with the California Citrus Pest & Disease Prevention Program at szwaal2@gmail.com for more information.

Diehl writes for the San Diego Union-Tribune.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Karen Colby thought she could make it through an unprecedented Pacific Northwest heat wave with a little help from her neighbor, who dribbled cold water on her head and visited every hour to wrap frozen towels around her neck.

But when temperatures in her tiny fifth-floor studio soared to 107 degrees, Colby stopped responding to questions and couldn’t move from her recliner to her walker. The friend called an ambulance, and Colby, 74, wound up hospitalized for 10 days with heatstroke.

“We had just survived the coronavirus and had been in complete lockdown. We were basically in jail here,” said Joel Aslin, Colby’s longtime friend who lives in the same apartment complex for low-income Portland residents who have a disability or are older than 62.

“We did everything right and she survived,” Aslin said, “and then we had that stupid heat wave and that almost took her life.”

Advertisement

The record-smashing heat that swept through cities from Portland to Vancouver, Canada, at the end of June silently killed scores of the region’s most vulnerable who could not leave their homes, afford air conditioning or get a ride to public cooling centers.

Consecutive days of temperatures as high as 116 degrees in Portland made a folly of years of planning for more anticipated emergencies such as earthquakes and snowstorms — and it was only as the disaster unfolded that authorities gained a sense of how devastating it would ultimately be. Emergency rooms overflowed, 911 calls spiked, and death reports rolled in.

The crisis was a wake-up call for the normally temperate Pacific Northwest about what lay ahead with climate change and was a harsh lesson in how unprepared the region was, particularly when it comes to those living on society’s margins.

The median summer temperature in Oregon could increase as much as 10 degrees by the end of the century, according to the Climate Impact Lab, and extreme weather events like heat waves will become more frequent.

“The really important and complex point is that places that are already hot — and are going to get hotter — are already adapted. They have air conditioning and they have homes built for wind to flow through,” said Alan Barreca, an associate professor at UCLA’s Institute of Environment and Sustainability.

“Definitely the Pacific Northwest is not used to those temps,” he said, “and so they’re more vulnerable.”

Authorities in Portland spent days leading up to the heat wave warning the public, calling and texting hundreds of the most vulnerable, dispatching volunteers with thousands of bottles of water and opening round-the-clock cooling centers.

Advertisement

Still, it was not enough to prevent what officials labeled a mass casualty event.

Although nobody is certain exactly how many died, officials have estimated that the number is in the hundreds in Oregon, Washington and British Columbia combined.

In Oregon, officials say 83 people died of heat-related illness, and the hot weather is being investigated as a possible cause in 33 more deaths. The state of Washington reported at least 91 heat deaths, and officials in British Columbia say hundreds of “sudden and unexpected deaths” were likely due to the soaring temperatures.

Most of the Oregon deaths occurred in Multnomah County, home to Portland, where the average victim was white, lived alone and was 70 years old. There were more heat deaths in Portland in June than in the entire state over the past 20 years, authorities said.

Advertisement

Cassie Sorenson, who heads a nonprofit that does free grocery shopping and delivery for the homebound, said their phone lines were swamped by desperate clients in need of an air conditioning unit or a ride to a cooling center.

“We have clients who are bed-bound or chair-bound on their couches, and they were home in the heat until ‘home in the heat’ became a medical emergency and they were in an ambulance taking them to the hospital. It was a bit of a helpless feeling,” said Sorenson, who runs Store to Door.

The crisis also exposed gaps in planning that stymied those seeking transportation to cooler locations.

Leading up to the heat wave, officials publicized the number of a statewide call center that could direct people to cooling centers or help them get rides — but it was unstaffed for more than 24 hours during the peak heat, which fell on a weekend.

Advertisement

More than 700 callers gave up on hold or in the voicemail system as temperatures hit 112 degrees; it’s unclear how many needed rides or what happened to them.

Portland’s famed light rail system also shut down during the worst heat to reduce strain on the power grid, eliminating one transportation option for low-income people seeking relief. And many homeless people didn’t want to leave their belongings or pets behind to go to a cooling shelter, advocates said.

“This is great that we’re having a conversation around cooling centers, but what are we doing around people who can’t get there? Those are the people who are literally dying,” said Sorenson, who has been involved in discussions about how Portland can improve.

When a shorter and less intense heat wave struck last weekend, authorities applied some of the easiest lessons. Many more cooling centers opened, buses were free for people headed to those facilities, and the statewide call center was staffed 24/7. It included a new option high in the voicemail menu for information on cooling centers.

Advertisement

Oregon Gov. Kate Brown activated an emergency coordination center, making more resources available to tribes and local governments, and authorities held a news conference to urge each resident to check on five people during the peak heat.

“We hadn’t experienced an event like that before, so we were working off potential impacts,” said Andrew Phelps, director of Oregon Emergency Management. “Now, we understand just how deadly these events can be, especially in our urban centers.”

Yet the longer-term solutions needed to prepare the Pacific Northwest for its future climate require much bigger fixes: revising building codes to require air conditioning, installing heat-repelling sidewalks in city centers, and providing subsidies so lower-income residents can afford air conditioning.

Authorities also are looking at using an existing emergency alert system that would send a phone notification or landline message to warn people in real time as temperatures spike, said Dan Douthit, spokesman for the Portland Bureau of Emergency Management.

Advertisement

An “earthquake is a big, looming hazard for Portland, but globally, heat emergencies kill more people than any type of emergency,” he said. “We did more for this heat emergency than any heat emergency we’ve ever responded to, but it doesn’t mean that we did enough.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Graceful, playful and tough, the gray whale is a beloved icon of the Pacific coast. The whales’ annual migration from the waters off Alaska to Baja California is one of the longest undertaken by any mammal, a journey that has happened for thousands of years.

But in the last couple of years, fewer gray whales have made the trip. These magnificent giants are dying in numbers unseen in decades. Nobody knows exactly why, but there are some clues.

Advertisement

Today, we speak with Los Angeles Times investigative reporter Susanne Rust about what’s happening.

Host: Gustavo Arellano

Guest: L.A. Times investigative reporter Susanne Rust

More reading:

Something is killing gray whales. Is it a sign of oceans in peril?

Gray whales: What to know about our West Coast leviathans and their uncertain future

As cargo shipments boom, ship strikes imperil whales in California and worldwide

How we delved into the odyssey of whale deaths even as a pandemic raged


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@President Biden unveiled plans Thursday to strengthen car pollution standards through 2026, putting the United States on a path to reduce greenhouse gas emissions — though not as quickly as many environmentalists say is needed.

The proposed standards, written by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Transportation Department, would replace significantly weaker Trump-era rules that essentially undid the nation’s biggest climate change initiative. In their place, the Biden administration is offering a compromise that it hopes progressives can live with and automakers can follow.

The president also signed an executive order that encourages automakers to produce more zero-emissions vehicles and sets a new goal of making half of all new cars and trucks emissions-free by 2030. This would include battery-electric, plug-in hybrid electric and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.

The future “is electric,” Biden said to supporters gathered Thursday on the South Lawn of the White House, with several electric vehicles, including Ford’s F-150 Lightning, as a backdrop. “There’s no turning back,” he said. “The question is whether we’ll lead or fall behind in the race for the future.”

Advertisement

After signing the order, the president took an electric Jeep Wrangler for a drive around the White House.

Biden’s proposal would tighten pollution standards over a four-year period, beginning with cars coming off the production line in the fall of 2022.

His plan is not expected to cut emissions as significantly as the standards put in place by the Obama administration nearly a decade ago, which required automakers to increase fuel efficiency across their fleets by 5% a year, achieving an average of 54.5 miles per gallon by model year 2025.

But the new targets would greatly exceed those set under former President Trump, who weakened the standards to mandate annual fuel efficiency increases of 1.5%, a level that automakers had already shown they could achieve without regulation. Under his rules, automakers had to reach an average efficiency of about 40 miles per gallon by 2026.

Biden administration officials said the new rule would require car companies to manufacture vehicles with an average efficiency of 52 miles per gallon by model year 2026.

In the first year of the regulation, carmakers would have to cut their emissions by 10% more than the Trump rules required. They would then have to make 5% reductions each year thereafter.

Administration officials said the rule would save drivers money at the pump and would decrease gasoline consumption by about 200 billion gallons over the four years. They estimated the standards would prevent an additional 2 billion metric tons of climate-warming carbon pollution from being released into the atmosphere.

Advertisement

The proposal postpones battles over how much to restrict tailpipe pollution in 2027 and beyond. In the executive order the president signed Thursday, he directed agencies to begin work on the next set of standards.

It remains unclear whether the auto industry will support the newly proposed standards.

John Bozzella, chief executive of the Alliance for Automotive Innovation, an industry lobby group, said in a statement that automakers would work with the administration to evaluate its plan, and called on Congress and state legislatures to invest in the infrastructure needed for the increase in electric vehicles.

In a joint statement, Ford, General Motors and Stellantis — the result of January’s merger of Fiat Chrysler and the French carmaker PSA — declared their “shared aspiration” to make 40% to 50% of new vehicle sales electric by the end of the decade.

Advertisement

Environmental advocates cheered the Biden administration’s pledge to toss out the Trump regulations. But many of those same activists said the administration’s proposed replacement doesn’t go far enough.

In a letter to the president last month, they called for a 60% cut to vehicle emissions by 2030, a goal that would be extremely difficult to meet under the administration’s proposed pollution rules.

Having watched as automakers lobbied Trump to relax the aggressive Obama-era targets, environmentalists are wary of car companies’ promises to gradually phase out the internal combustion engine.

“Today’s proposal relies on unenforceable voluntary commitments from unreliable carmakers to make up to 50% of their fleets electric by 2030,” said Dan Becker, director of the Center for Biological Diversity’s Safe Climate Transport Campaign.

Advertisement

“Global warming is burning forests, roasting the West and worsening storms. Now is not the time to propose weak standards and promise strong ones later,” he said.

Becker and others said that auto companies already have the technology to meet tougher standards than those being proposed by the Biden administration, but that they rarely use it in the United States. Automakers have pushed back, arguing that they’re unable to meet stricter standards because of American consumers’ preference for larger, less fuel-efficient vehicles.

In recent years, some automakers have been able to meet federal standards not by producing fleets of cleaner cars, but by cashing in credits earned by manufacturing a much smaller number of electric vehicles.

The proposed regulations, which have been developed quickly by federal government standards, are a piece of the administration’s broader efforts to push Americans to buy more electric vehicles. Biden has asked Congress for hundreds of billions of dollars to make the vehicles more affordable through tax credits, to electrify 20% of the nation’s school buses and to build half a million chargers by 2030.

Advertisement

Yet the bipartisan infrastructure bill making its way through Congress accomplishes very little of that. The current deal includes $7.5 billion for charging stations, which would pay for only half as many as Biden has called for.

At stake in that bill is the president’s ability to deliver on his promise of eliminating greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 to prevent the worst effects of climate change. Calculating backward, most environmentalists say the only way to meet that goal is to mandate that all new cars be emissions-free by 2035.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@California water regulators took unprecedented action this week, passing an emergency regulation that will bar thousands of Californians from diverting stream and river water as the drought worsens.

The State Water Resources Control Board voted unanimously Tuesday to pass the “emergency curtailment” order for the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta watershed. The watershed encompasses a wide swath of the state, from the Oregon border in northeastern California down into the Central Valley.

The regulation — which gives the state water board the authority to issue emergency curtailments and require reporting on water use — will go into effect about two weeks from now, subject to approval by the state Office of Administrative Law, with the issuing of formal curtailment orders to follow.

California’s complex water rights system is designed to allocate water use during times of shortage, and such curtailments, although rare, are not unheard of. But the scope of Tuesday’s order — which will apply to thousands of senior water rights across a wide swath of the state — goes beyond anything seen in prior droughts.

Advertisement

“The fact remains that water supplies are extremely limited, and we are running out of options,” Ernest A. Conant, Bureau of Reclamation California-Great Basin regional director, said during the meeting, expressing his agency’s support for the emergency regulations.

Some farmers strongly criticized the move, but regulators said it was necessary given the conditions.

Who is affected by the decision?

About 5,700 Northern California and Central Valley water rights holders — who collectively hold about 12,500 water rights — will be subject to the forthcoming curtailments, according to Erik Ekdahl, deputy director of the state water board’s Division of Water Rights. Once the regulation is in place, further curtailments in the delta watershed may be issued as the situation progresses.

“It really depends on compliance with this order, climate hydrology, and what water supply conditions evolve,” Ekdahl said.

The order will largely affect rights holders using water for agricultural irrigation purposes, though some municipal, industrial and commercial entities also will be affected. The regulation carves out an exemption for health and human safety purposes, meaning that water for drinking, bathing and domestic purposes won’t be subject to the curtailment.

The water board previously released a draft version of the proposed order in mid-July, following a notice of water unavailability — which urges, but does not order, people to stop diverting water. That was sent to many rights holders in mid-June.

The curtailments will create hardships for many growers, particularly those without access to well water. But the burden may be lessened by the time of year. Irrigation needs vary widely from farm to farm and crop to crop. Generally speaking, however, the biggest demands for agricultural irrigation in the delta watershed tend to be in the late spring and summer, meaning the bulk of water use for the year is likely behind many growers.

Advertisement

“It’s coming toward the end of the season here. As everything’s dwindling in a very dry year, the curtailments may not make a huge difference for a lot of crop types,” said Chris Scheuring, senior counsel for the California Farm Bureau.

Scheuring said the real question is what happens if drought conditions persist next year.

What prompted the decision?

The bottom line is there isn’t enough water to meet competing demands. The curtailments are necessary, according to the state water board’s finding of emergency, “to avoid catastrophic impacts to reservoir storage needed for human health and safety and other purposes.” Essentially, regulators need to drastically reduce the amount of water being diverted from rivers and streams to ensure that enough water remains for essential purposes and that those who are diverting are doing so legally.

“It’s pretty important for the integrity of the system to curtail water rights when there’s not enough water,” said Jay Lund, codirector of the Center for Watershed Sciences at UC Davis. “Otherwise, it’s just whoever gets their pump in first. And that’s not really a very fair way to do things.” In times of water shortage, rights holders are curtailed in order of seniority.

Advertisement

Drought conditions in the state rapidly worsened this spring, when expected snowpack runoff to the watershed decreased by almost 800,000 acre-feet — an amount nearly equivalent to the capacity of Folsom Reservoir — between April and May.

Gov. Gavin Newsom declared a drought emergency in 41 of California’s 58 counties on May 10. In that same month, many farmers were warned that they would receive little or nothing from two large allocation systems, the federal Central Valley Project and the State Water Project.

What happened to the snowpack?

“The simplest terms are the snow was kind of there and then it wasn’t,” said David Rizzardo, chief of the hydrology branch at the state’s Department of Water Resources.

Rizzardo said it’s not uncommon to lose 10%-20% of the snowpack to normal hydrological processes, particularly following a dry year. But losing just under 80% — let alone in such a short period of time?

Advertisement

“It’s beyond unprecedented,” Rizzardo said. The hydrologic conditions witnessed this year have been forecast in climate change models, but according to Rizzardo, such scenarios weren’t expected for decades from now.

Rizzardo characterized higher temperatures, drier soils and the effect of large-scale fires in the watershed as three of the primary factors driving the loss in projected runoff. (The effect of fires is two-fold, according to Rizzardo. The loss of tree cover and brush puts more direct sun radiation on the snow, which causes it to melt faster. Sooty debris from fires also creates dark surfaces, which absorb — rather than reflect — the sun’s radiation, causing even more melting.)

The delta itself is formed by the convergence of the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers in the western Central Valley, but the sprawling delta watershed stretches all the way from the Oregon border in the northeastern corner of the state to just north of Fresno, encompassing much of the Sierra Nevada, as well as cities like Redding, Chico, Sacramento and Stockton.

Broadly speaking, runoff from the Sierra snowpack, which feeds major Northern California reservoirs and dozens of rivers, travels through the watershed and into the delta, which then connects to the San Francisco Bay. Water from the delta contributes to the water supply for more than two-thirds of Californians and is also used to irrigate millions of acres of farmland.

Advertisement

What about the rest of the state?

In July, Newsom urged all Californians to voluntarily cut their water usage by 15%, but what exactly does that mean for the average California household?

The governor made the request as he extended a regional drought emergency to 50 counties, which comprise about 42% of the state’s population. For many, the talk of water reductions reminded them of the shriveled lawns, attenuated showers and water-bucket toilet flushing of the last devastating drought.

If achieved, a voluntary 15% water reduction statewide would save roughly 850,000 acre-feet of water, which is enough to supply 1.7 million households for a year, according to the governor’s office.

In April 2015, then-Gov. Jerry Brown ordered cities and towns across California to cut water use by 25%, marking the first mandatory statewide water restrictions in state history. Californians came close to meeting the goal, with residents reducing the amount of water they used by 24.5%. Now, a handful of years after the last drought, per-capita residential water use remains about 16% below 2013 levels.

Advertisement

Newsom’s request is intended to bring California water production roughly back to where it dropped to in 2015 and 2016, said Marielle Pinheiro, research data specialist at the State Water Resources Control Board. Pinheiro said the number seemed feasible to the board because the state had been able to maintain those levels during the last drought.

Household water usage varies dramatically across the state based on a number of factors, but speaking in the broadest terms, Pinheiro said a 15% reduction would equate to a cut of roughly 14 gallons a day per person.

Newsom’s drought emergency declaration excludes almost all of Southern California, where the drought picture is much less dire. That’s because the region is mostly supplied by big federal and state water systems, rather than local precipitation.

The Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, which imports water from the Colorado River and the north, says it has sufficient reserves in regional reservoirs and groundwater banks — enough to carry it through this year.

Advertisement

Los Angeles, which is partly supplied by the MWD, similarly doesn’t expect any shortages, officials have said.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As the world staggers through another summer of extreme weather, experts are noticing something different: 2021′s onslaught is hitting harder and in places that have been spared global warming’s wrath in the past.

Wealthy countries including the United States, Canada, Germany and Belgium are joining poorer and more vulnerable nations on a growing list of places suffering extreme weather events that scientists say have some connection to human-caused climate change.

“It is not only a poor-country problem — it’s now very obviously a rich-country problem,” said Debby Guha-Sapir, founder of the international disaster database at the Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters at Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium. “They [the rich] are getting whacked.”

Killer floods hit China, but hundreds of people also drowned in parts of Germany and Belgium not used to being inundated. Canada and the Pacific Northwest of the U.S. had what climate scientist Zeke Hausfather called “scary” heat that soared well past triple digits on the thermometer, shattering records and accompanied by unusual wildfires. Now, Southern Europe is seeing unprecedented heat and fire.

Advertisement

And peak Atlantic hurricane and U.S. wildfire seasons are only just starting.

When what would become Hurricane Elsa formed July 1, it broke last year’s record for the earliest fifth-named Atlantic storm. Colorado State University has already increased its forecast for the number of named Atlantic storms. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will update its season outlook on Wednesday.

For fire season, the U.S. West is the driest it has been since 1580, based on soil-moisture readings and tree-ring records, setting the stage for worsening fires if something ignites them, said UCLA climate and fire scientist Park Williams.

What happens with U.S. hurricane and fire seasons drives the end-of-year statistics for total damage costs of weather disasters, said Ernst Rauch, chief climate and geoscientist for insurance giant Munich Re. So far this year, he said, wealthier regions have seen the biggest economic losses.

When poorer countries are hit, they are less prepared and their people can’t use air conditioning or leave, so there’s more harm to human life, said Hausfather, climate director of the Breakthrough Institute. While hundreds of people died in the Pacific Northwest heat wave, he said the number would have been much higher in poor areas.

Madagascar, an island nation off East Africa, is in the middle of back-to-back droughts that the United Nations warns are pushing 400,000 people toward starvation.

Advertisement

Although it’s too early to say that the summer of 2021 will break records for climate disasters, “we’re certainly starting to see climate change push extreme events into new territories where they haven’t been seen before,” Hausfather said.

The number of weather, water and climate disasters so far this year is only slightly higher than the average of recent years, said disaster researcher Guha-Sapir. Her group’s database, which she said is still missing quite a few events, shows 208 such disasters worldwide through July — about 11% more than the last decade’s average, but a bit less than last year.

Last year, the record-shattering heat that came out of nowhere was in Siberia, where few people live, but this year it struck Portland, Ore., and British Columbia, which is getting more Western media attention, Hausfather said.

What’s happening is “partly an increase in the statistics of these extreme events, but also just that the steady drumbeat, the pile on year-on-year ... takes its cumulative toll on all of us who are reading these headlines,” said Georgia Tech climate scientist Kim Cobb.

Advertisement

Newsletter Toward a more sustainable California Get Boiling Point, our newsletter exploring climate change, energy and the environment, and become part of the conversation — and the solution. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

“This pattern of recent Northern Hemisphere summers has been really quite stark,” said climate scientist Peter Stott of the University of Exeter, in southwest England.

While overall temperature rise is “playing out exactly as we said 20 years ago, ... what we are seeing in terms of the heat waves and the floods is more extreme than we predicted back then,” Stott said.

Climate scientists say there is little doubt climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas is driving extreme events.

Advertisement

Aside from dramatic floods and fires, heat waves are a major risk to prepare for in the future, Guha-Sapir said.

“It’s going to be a very big deal in the Western countries because the most susceptible to sudden peaks of heat are older people. And the demographic profile of the people in Europe is very old,” she said. “Heat waves are going to be a real issue in the next few years.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The water quality of several beaches near Dockweiler State Beach has returned to state standards after a sewage spill, according to the California Department of Public Health.

Beachgoers had been warned against swimming along a stretch of coastline after an emergency discharge from the Hyperion Water Reclamation Plant sent 17 million gallons of raw sewage into the waters off Dockweiler and El Segundo beaches on July 11 and 12.

More than two weeks later, the plant was still discharging partially treated wastewater into the ocean in violation of state and federal water pollution limits.

The L.A. County Department of Public Health had issued warnings late last week for Dockweiler State Beach in Playa del Rey, advising beachgoers not to swim, surf or play in ocean waters surrounding storm drains, including those at Culver Boulevard, Imperial Highway and Westchester.

Advertisement

On Monday, advisories for Santa Monica Beach and Topanga Canyon Beach were lifted. Avalon Beach at Catalina Island remains under an advisory.

Public Health officials said they had not determined whether increased bacterial levels found during testing were caused by the Hyperion spill or by “daily fluctuations of bacteria in ocean water.”

Information about beach conditions is available through the department’s 24-hour beach closure hotline, (800) 525-5662, or on its department website.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amid intensifying drought, state water regulators voted Tuesday to enact a drastic emergency order that will bar thousands of Californians — primarily farmers — from using stream and river water.

California’s complex water rights system is designed to allocate water use during times of shortage and such curtailments, while rare, are not unheard of. But the scope of Tuesday’s order — which will apply to thousands of senior water rights across a wide swath of the state — is unprecedented, officials said.

While the move has been protested by some farmers, irrigation districts and others, California Department of Food and Agriculture Secretary Karen Ross called the decision “a necessary step,” saying the fact that senior water rights holders were included “speaks to the severity of the hydrology and what climate change has presented this year.”

“It is a painful moment. We know the impacts are real,” Ross said during Tuesday’s meeting.

Advertisement

After several hours of public comments, the State Water Resources Control Board voted unanimously to pass the “emergency curtailment” order for the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta watershed. The regulation will go into effect about two weeks from now, subject to approval by state Office of Administrative Law, with the issuing of formal curtailment orders to follow.

About 5,700 Northern California and Central Valley water rights holders — who collectively hold approximately 12,500 water rights — will be subject to the forthcoming curtailments , according to Erik Ekdahl, deputy director of the state water board’s Division of Water Rights.

California Plummeting reservoir levels could soon force Oroville hydropower offline The Edward Hyatt Powerplant at Lake Oroville could go offline as soon as August and trigger a potential power crunch this summer.

The order will largely affect rights holders using water for agricultural irrigation purposes, though some municipal, industrial and commercial entities will also be affected. The regulation carves out an exemption for health and human safety purposes, meaning that water for drinking, bathing and domestic purposes won’t be subject to the curtailment.

The water board previously released a draft version of the proposed order in mid-July, following a notice of water unavailability — which urges, but does not order, people to stop diverting water. That was sent to many rights holders in mid-June.

“It’s kind of the topic of conversation everywhere, whether you’re in the feed store or the grocery store or when I’m at work as a livestock advisor,” said Josh Davy, a small-scale cattle producer in Shasta County.

The perceived comfort of his local irrigation district’s pre-1914 water rights was a key component of Davy’s decision to purchase his ranch two years ago. He’s currently planning to sell his calves early at a loss and fears having to subdivide his property to pay his mortgage. Davy said that without water to irrigate his ranch, the pastures his cows graze on will quickly dry up and the current price of alfalfa negates buying hay as a sustainable option.

Advertisement

“Most of us that went this route, investing in property with these water rights within these districts all did it for very similar reasons in that there was security in that,” Davy said. “And now seeing that security gone, we’re really scared.”

“The state has only curtailed water rights three times before this drought — the ’76-'77 water year, 2014 and then 2015,” said Jay Lund, codirector of the Center for Watershed Sciences at UC Davis. Lund believes that curtailments will become a much more routine practice in the state as the effects of climate change intensify. A separate curtailment order in the Russian River watershed was issued Monday. The board has also issued notices of water unavailability on the Scott River in Siskiyou County.

Karrigan Börk, an acting professor of law at the UC Davis School of Law who focuses on water rights, said he believed the way the state water board had handled the process for this year’s emergency regulation would skirt the legal issues raised in 2015, when a number of irrigation districts sued the state over that year’s curtailments.

“The way they’re doing it now, I think they will be in the clear,” Börk said. “I’m sure someone will challenge them anyway, because this is California and that’s what we do.”

Advertisement

Drought conditions in the state rapidly worsened this spring, when expected snowpack runoff to the watershed decreased by almost 800,000 acre-feet — an amount nearly equivalent to the capacity of Folsom Reservoir — between April and May.

Gov. Gavin Newsom declared a drought emergency in 41 of California’s 58 counties on May 10. In that same month, many farmers were warned that they would receive little or nothing from two large allocation systems, the federal Central Valley Project and the State Water Project.

“The simplest terms are the snow was kind of there and then it wasn’t,” said David Rizzardo, chief of the hydrology branch at the state’s Department of Water Resources.

Advertisement

According to Rizzardo, it’s not uncommon to lose 10-20% of the snowpack to normal hydrological processes, particularly following a dry year. But losing just under 80% — let alone in such a short period of time?

“It’s beyond unprecedented,” Rizzardo said. The hydrologic conditions witnessed this year have been forecast in climate change models, but according to Rizzardo, such scenarios were expected to come to bear decades from now.

Rizzardo characterized higher temperatures, drier soils and the effect of large-scale fires in the watershed as three of the primary factors driving the loss in projected runoff. (The effect of fires is two-fold, according to Rizzardo. The loss of tree cover and brush puts more direct sun radiation on the snow, which causes it to melt faster. Sooty debris from fires also creates dark surfaces, which absorb — rather than reflect — the sun’s radiation, causing even more melting.)

Advertisement

The delta itself is formed by the convergence of the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers in the western Central Valley, but the sprawling delta watershed stretches all the way from the Oregon border in the northeastern corner of the state to just north of Fresno, encompassing much of the Sierra Nevada, as well as cities like Redding, Chico, Sacramento and Stockton.

Broadly speaking, runoff from the Sierra snowpack, which feeds major Northern California reservoirs and dozens of rivers, travels through the watershed and into the delta, which then connects to the San Francisco Bay. Water from the delta contributes to the water supply for more than two-thirds of Californians and is also used to irrigate millions of acres of farmland.

The prospect of salt water intrusion — a kind of tug of war between the tide pushing in from San Francisco Bay and the freshwater flowing through the watershed into the delta and out toward the bay — looms large over drought discussions in the delta.

Without sufficient delta outflow, the sloshing tides can bring seawater further into the delta, threatening the delicate balance at this key nexus of California’s water system. In a worst-case scenario, where salinity intrudes too far into the delta and reaches the pumps, it could endanger the water supply for 25 million Californians and the irrigation supply for 3 million acres of agriculture, according to Ekdahl. Officials are concerned with retaining enough water to maintain sufficient delta outflows if next year is also dry.

Advertisement

The curtailments will create hardships for many growers, particularly those without access to well water. But the burden may be lessened by the time of year. Irrigation needs vary widely from farm to farm and crop to crop. Generally speaking, however, the biggest demands for agricultural irrigation in the delta watershed tend to be in the late spring and summer, meaning the bulk of water use for the year is likely behind many growers.

“It’s coming toward the end of the season here, as everything’s dwindling in a very dry year, the curtailments may not make a huge difference for a lot of crop types,” said Chris Scheuring, senior counsel for the California Farm Bureau.

“For some farmers, it may be pretty difficult to comply with this, but it’s also been signaled ahead of time and anticipated,” said Jeffrey Michael, an economic forecaster and director of the Center for Business and Policy Research at the University of the Pacific in Stockton. “Most farmers have some ability to substitute water supplies, sometimes tapping groundwater or alternative supply.” But both of those options come with their own complications.

Due to the lack of supply, buying water from those who still have access could be prohibitively expensive, and the 2014 passage of California’s Sustainable Groundwater Management Act imposes rules on groundwater use.

Advertisement

Michael said he doubted the board’s decision would have any significant impacts on food prices in the near term.

“I think that many sectors of California agriculture are going to be able to squeak by this year,” Scheuring said. “The real question is, what happens next year, if we have another dry year? That’s the big unknown that’s scared everybody. And I don’t think it’s just agriculture that’s going to need to worry next year if that’s the case.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The bipartisan infrastructure package unveiled by the Senate includes more than $150 billion to boost clean energy and promote “climate resilience” by making schools, ports and other structures better able to withstand extreme weather events such as storms and wildfires.

But the bill, headed for a Senate vote this week, falls far short of President Biden’s pledge to transform the nation’s heavily fossil-fuel powered economy into a clean-burning one and stop climate-damaging emissions from U.S. power plants by 2035.

Notably, the deal omits mention of a Clean Electricity Standard, a key element of Biden’s climate plan that would require the electric grid to replace fossil fuels with renewable sources such as solar, wind and hydropower.

Nor does it include a Civilian Climate Corps, a Biden favorite and a nod to the Great Depression-era New Deal that would put millions of Americans to work on conservation projects, renewable energy and helping communities recover from climate disasters.

Advertisement

The White House says the bipartisan deal is just the first step, with a proposed $3.5-trillion, Democratic-only package following close behind. The larger bill, still being developed in Congress, will meet Biden’s promise to move the country toward carbon-free electricity, make America a global leader in electric vehicles and create millions of jobs in solar, wind and other clean-energy industries, supporters say.

While the bipartisan plan, which calls for nearly $1 trillion in total spending, is “a good start,” lawmakers will “deal with the climate crisis in the magnitude, scope and scale that’s required” in the Democratic-only bill, said Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.).

For now, the focus is on the bipartisan deal, which includes $550 billion in new spending for public works projects, $73 billion of that to update the electric grid and more than $50 billion to bolster infrastructure against cyberattacks and climate change. There’s also $7.5 billion for electric charging stations.

Citing the deadly Texas power outages earlier this year, the White House touted spending to upgrade the nation’s power grid and boost renewable energy. An Energy Department study found that power outages cost the U.S. economy up to $70 billion a year. The bill also invests in demonstration projects for advanced nuclear reactors, carbon capture and storage and so-called clean hydrogen that can be burned with few emissions.

Still, the deadly Texas power outages measure falls far short of meeting Biden’s promise to address the climate crisis, even as triple-digit temperatures across the West caused hundreds of deaths this summer and a busy Atlantic hurricane season causes extensive damage.

“It is clear that the deal does not meet the moment on climate or justice,” said Tiernan Sittenfeld, a senior vice president of the League of Conservation Voters.

“This looks like the Exxon Infrastructure Bill,’' said Janet Redman of Greenpeace USA. “An infrastructure bill that doesn’t prevent a full-blown climate catastrophe by funding a swift transition to renewable energy would kill millions of Americans.”

Advertisement

The bill offers “glimmers of hope” such as a multibillion-dollar commitment to clean up and remediate old oil wells and mines, Redman said, calling on Democrats to demonstrate “the courage to be visionary and go bigger” in the partisan bill expected later this year.

One of the lead negotiators, Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio), acknowledged that no one got everything they wanted in the bipartisan bill. “But we came up with a good compromise that’s going to help the American people,” he said.

“This is about infrastructure,” Portman said at the White House. “This is roads and bridges, but also lots of other kinds of infrastructure, including broadband, our water system and our rail system — all of which is good for the economy. This will lead to more efficiency and higher productivity, more economic growth.”

The plan includes $21 billion to clean up brownfields and other polluted sites, reclaim abandoned mine land and cap orphaned oil and gas wells. The plan will help communities near contaminated industrial sites and rural areas where abandoned oil wells pose a continuing hazard, the White House said.

Advertisement

The Senate voted Friday, 66-28, to advance the bill, but it’s unclear whether enough Republicans will eventually join Democrats to support final passage. Senate rules require 60 votes in the evenly split 50-50 chamber to advance the bill but a simple majority to pass it.

The measure also faces turbulence in the closely divided House, where progressives are pushing for increased spending on climate change and other issues and centrist lawmakers are wary of adding to the federal debt.

Rep. Peter DeFazio (D-Ore.), chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, called the Senate bill inadequate and pledged to push for changes in the House, which passed a separate, $715-billion transportation and water bill in early July. Transportation is the largest contributor to greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S.

Advertisement

DeFazio, the House bill’s lead sponsor, said his bill “charts our path forward,” adding that he is “fighting to make sure we enact a transformative bill that supports our recovery and combats the existential threat of climate change.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The cotton’s gone.

The alfalfa barely exists.

“Can you even call this a farm?” asked Nancy Caywood, standing on a rural stretch of land her Texas grandfather settled nearly a century ago, drawn by cheap prices and feats of engineering that brought water from afar to irrigate central Arizona’s arid soil.

The canals that used to bring water to the fields of Caywood Farms have gone dry due to the drought. In Arizona, 99% of the land is undergoing a years-long drought. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

Advertisement

On the family’s 247 acres an hour south of Phoenix, Caywood grew up tending to cotton and alfalfa, two water-intensive crops that fed off melted mountain snows flowing from a reservoir 120 miles away. She grew up understanding the rhythms of the desert and how fields can blossom despite a rugged, sand-swept terrain where sunlight is a given but water is precious.

Now more than ever. Looking out at her farmland recently, Caywood held back tears.

The eastern Arizona reservoir that provided much of her water was drying up, leaving empty the canals and ditches that surround her property. Bigger-than-usual summer rains did not prove ample to rescue dead fields. The drought was at her door.

Across the U.S. West, shifting climate patterns are wreaking havoc. An early start to fire season is scorching rural Oregon and parts of Northern California. Record temperatures have led to deaths of hundreds of residents of Seattle and Portland, Ore. Lake Mead, the massive Colorado River reservoir outside Las Vegas, is at its lowest point since its 1935 federal construction, threatening water supplies to Arizona, Southern California, Nevada and Mexico.

Saguaros, which can naturally withstand drought better than non-native plants, are still susceptible to damage under extreme conditions. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

In Arizona, 99% of the land is undergoing years-long drought that has accelerated. Large swaths of the region are now in extreme distress and the picture may well get worse, with less reliable mountain snowfall to feed streams and a morphing monsoon season that has only proved a temporary reprieve and even led to flooding. The state, where more than a third of all water can trace itself up the Colorado River to Lake Mead, will also be forced to make do with less beginning next year because of the lake’s dwindling supply.

“Arizona is pretty much an irrigated state and we’ve managed our water resources generally well,” said Stephanie Smallhouse, a fifth-generation cattle rancher on the far outskirts of Tucson who is the president of the Arizona Farm Bureau. “But it’s near impossible to manage yourself out of a drought.”

The history of Arizona is the history of water. Before European colonizers and American settlers moved in, Indigenous people relied on the Gila, Salt and Verde rivers outside Phoenix. The Colorado River flowed on what’s now the state’s western edge, while snowmelt from New Mexico’s Black Mountain Range formed the Gila River that came from the east to meet the Colorado, creating a lifeline for tens of thousands of subsistence farmers in Native American communities.

But as technological advances led to the construction of dams and reservoirs in the early 20th century to divert rivers for new residents — like Caywood’s grandfather — Native land went fallow, leading to sickness and poverty. As cities such as Tucson and Phoenix and farmlands between them grew over the decades, they were aided by another feat in water engineering when construction on the Central Arizona Project launched in 1973. Today, the intricate canal system carries Colorado River water hundreds of miles from Lake Havasu on the California-Arizona border to taps and irrigation ditches across central Arizona.

The Hayden-Rhodes Aqueduct, fed by the Colorado River, runs through Scottsdale, Ariz. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

It’s a history that informs who wins and loses amid drought. The state has dozens of irrigation districts that tax customers in exchange for regulating water flow from different sources. The map they form can at times resemble gerrymandered congressional districts, with it not unusual for neighboring farms to get water from canals that lead to mountains and reservoirs in opposite directions.

Longevity also goes into the equation.

“Water policy in Arizona is also rooted in the idea that a person who comes and diverts water for a beneficial use should have higher priority than the next one who comes along if there is a risk for shortage,” said Sarah Porter, the director of the Kyl Center for Water Policy at Arizona State University.

Advertisement

When it comes to water, one city or farm is not always equal to the other in the state where the $23-billion agriculture industry uses up more than 70% of irrigated water, a large chunk of it on crops the federal government encourages with subsidies, such as cotton. In central Arizona, city dwellers and tribal lands tend to get first dibs on water before farms. Still, nearly everyone is preparing. Cities are raising water prices. The state is locked in a battle with hundreds of lush golf courses over demands that they cut back on water.

Yuma, a major farming region known as the “Salad Bowl” for growing broccoli, lettuce and leafy greens that are shipped across the country each winter, is in many ways spared. It has priority over water from the nearby Colorado River in part because irrigated agriculture has taken place there for more than a century. Vegetables also need significantly less water than crops that are popular inland.

A worker moves irrigation tubes on a farm in Pinal County. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

It’s farmers in the center of the state who are most worried as shortages loom. Among the hardest-hit are those in Pinal County, a largely rural patchwork of farms and cattle and dairy ranches nestled between Phoenix and Tucson where family farmers live alongside exurbs that are rapidly expanding as agriculture recedes.

Along Interstate 10, typically green farms have turned brown, skinny cattle are left with little grass to graze and saguaros lie dead. “For sale” signs advertise desperate owners looking to sell their land at discount for solar power panels and housing developments.

“There’s nothing nefarious about how the water is divided,” said Paul Orme, an attorney who represents several irrigation districts in the county. “But because of agreements that have been negotiated and where these farmers have fell in those, you could see up to 30% of farmland in Pinal County no longer irrigated over the next few years.”

Support our journalism Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Subscribe to the Los Angeles Times. Subscribe

For those like Caywood, that time has already come.

Casa Grande, a city of 55,000 founded in 1879 as a mining town that’s named after a structure built by the ancient Hohokam people, is one of those places at the center of the water crisis. Home to dozens of alfalfa, cotton, wheat and corn farms and as well as dairy and beef ranches, it’s long been sustained by a mix of rains, aquifers and canals drawing on the Colorado River, among other reserves.

Caywood stands in what used to be an alfalfa field. It went fallow after her family lost access to irrigated water from the San Carlos reservoir because its water levels were too low. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

The Caywood farm has a different source. When Caywood’s grandfather, Lewis Storey, established it in 1930, he agreed to pay for water from canals connected to the San Carlos reservoir 130 miles away. Storey thought the reservoir, formed on the Gila River, would be plentiful for generations with its 1.2 million acre-feet supply. An acre-foot covers the amount of water that could seep a foot deep across a football field.

The family had long used that water to grow cotton that made up towels and sheets found in big-box stores. The seeds went separately for cattle feed. Alfalfa was cut and baled for ranches across the Southwest.

This summer, the San Carlos reservoir hit zero acre-feet.

“If you want to eat ice cream, you need people like us growing the feed,” Caywood said recently as she sat in the small, wooden shed on the property where she keeps a digital slideshow of the once-lively green and white fields to show kids who still come by on field trips. All that survived now were old mesquite and cottonwood trees on the edges of the land.

“We’re wiped clean,” Caywood said. “You can’t grow.”

Cattle go up for sale at Marana Stockyards in Marana, Ariz. “If you can’t grow grass, you buy it. But the hay is too expensive because there’s less water to grow it and less water expected down the line,” said Clay Buck Parsons, who runs the auction house with his father, Clay Parsons. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Emaciated cattle are often sold at Marana Stockyards, which has seen an increase in sales amid the decreased feed availability that the drought has caused. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

An hour south of the the Caywood property at the Pinal County line, the ranchers who show up each week at Marana Stockyards are feeling the trickle-down effects of the drought. The Parsons family has auctioned cattle here for 25 years. Business is picking up.

Dozens of men in cowboy hats and leather boots arrive each Wednesday to watch their bulls, cows and calves sold off. Clay Buck Parsons, a third-generation rancher and auctioneer, ushers cattle into holding pens outside the red barnyard-like building while Parsons’ dad mans a computer as locals in the stands make bids and buyers log in online.

Advertisement

“We’ve sold 12,000 more head this year already than last year,” said Parsons, 29. Most go to Texas, Kansas and Oklahoma.

“You can’t feed the animals without grass,” he said, looking out at dozens of black Angus mother cows whose shoulders and ribs jutted out from grazing on dying fields.

“If you can’t grow grass, you buy it. But the hay is too expensive because there’s less water to grow it and less water expected down the line. So the ranchers are cutting down on their herd to maintain smaller numbers where they can still make a profit.”

Clay Parsons owns Marana Stockyards, which he runs with his son, Clay Buck Parsons. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Rancher Mike Mercer, left, regularly buys underweight cows at Marana Stockyards. He feeds them for a few months before reselling them for profit. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Buck said it costs up to $4 a day per cow for hay, four times more than grazing on grass. The cost of raising beef can be several thousand times more than some vegetables, such as lettuce. But ranchers here said family history — and profits — had until recently seemed worth holding on to.

One of the regulars to come that day was Mike Mercer. At 54, he has been ranching since his teens. For many years, his land in Mammoth, a village of 1,650, provided for 700 mother cows. Now, he can’t have more than 100 at a time as grass disappears.

“You can’t run cattle. It’s just — everything’s gone,” Mercer said. “A lot of guys are switching into copper mining or welding or trucking.”

These days, Mercer buys skinny, sickly cows, feeds them for a few months on hay in a covered feedlot, and resells them at a profit. On that day, he sold 88 to buyers in Texas and Oklahoma.

The Parsons family’s auction house has sold 12,000 more cows this year than last year. Many ranchers can no longer afford to feed their cattle because of the drought. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

A Christian who believes God is responsible for the drought, he prayed for a change.

“You just keep saying we can’t have another year this bad and then we have another year even worse.... Leave it in God’s hands. Because I don’t know what else to do. You pray for rain. Oh, God, yeah. Pray for rain.”

Caywood, a former farming teacher at the University of California Agricultural and Natural Resources Division in El Centro, Calif., also questions those who say climate change is to blame for her struggles.

“I don’t believe in it. I believe things are cyclical. But I can’t believe that it’s happening so quickly,” said Caywood, who has a master’s degree in agricultural education.

Nancy Caywood, left, and her grandson Thomas Hartman, 14, stand at the office of Caywood Farms. Hartman is learning to farm, raising steer and chickens. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Her son, Travis, built a home on the farm where he lives with two sons. She is thankful that he has continued in the family tradition. But she is more thankful that he is also a firefighter and paramedic, a job that provides a stable income. Her `14-year-old grandson Thomas is learning to farm, raising steer and chickens. She has encouraged them but also told them to consider backup plans.

In the good years, the farm would easily make tens of thousands of dollars in profits, more than enough to cover $22,000 in annual property taxes. This year, Caywood, who had hoped to retire, may dip into savings to cover the bill.

Recently, her son leased two 80-acre plots in different irrigation districts that have access to canal water from the Colorado River. Just a few miles from Caywood Farms, corn stalks reach 5 feet into the air. They’ll be chopped up for dairy cow feed.

The family didn’t want more farming land but found it necessary to cover the taxes on its dying historic property.

Advertisement

Except there’s one problem.

Because of the drought, Arizona will have 18% less water from the Colorado River next year. Farms like Caywood’s son’s will be hit hardest because of rules governing how water is divided in the state.

“We have no cotton. It’s gone. It’s dead. The alfalfa barely exists,” Caywood said. She may be forced to use her savings to cover taxes on the farm, which isn’t making money anymore. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

“It seems there’s really no way out of drought,” Caywood said the other week, browsing old photos of her parents and son standing by cotton bales.

Sometimes, she felt as though it wasn’t just a farm but a family and way of life slipping away. Her father, Tommy, died in January at 98. Her 94-year-old mother, Sammie, was in and out of the hospital.

All around her, farms were disappearing. Next door, the Wuertzes sold much of theirs for solar panels. Down the street, an abandoned construction project stood where alfalfa once grew. Caywood had gotten offers from buyers too. She rejected them.

She looked at the barren fields where her grandfather taught her how to examine the changing color of a cotton blossom to tell where the plant was in its life span. She thought back to when water flowed freely in the dried-up irrigation canals where she would sneak away to swim as a kid.

Days like those seemed long gone. She prayed for them to come back again.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pari Rahmanian and her daughters were sitting down to dinner in her brother’s third-floor apartment in south Tehran when the ground began to move.

“There was just this rumbling sound. I raced to my daughters to get them out. I was sure it was an earthquake,” Rahmanian, 47, said. When she got to the hallway she realized what actually was happening: The building was settling in shifting soil.

“I’ve never seen anything like that before,” Rahmanian said of the structure, which authorities deemed unsafe to reenter. “It’s no joke. You lose everything you have in seconds.”

The Rahmanian family had become victims last winter of land subsidence — the sudden sinking of the ground, usually due to water depletion — a growing crisis threatening Tehran’s 13 million residents and, increasingly, a problem across Iran, experts say.

Advertisement

Officials and outside experts have long linked subsidence in Tehran to over-extraction of groundwater, with the falling water levels causing the soil to shift and settle in many neighborhoods and at the airport.

“The disaster is rooted in the fact that 4 billion cubic meters of water are annually extracted from 50,000 wells, a third of which are illegal,” Mohsen Tabatabei, an official with the Ministry of Roads and Urban Development, told local reporters in June.

“We’re seeing it [subsidence] in 30 out of the 31 provinces. Most major plains, let’s say 450 of 609, are in critical condition,” Mostafa Fadaeifard, who heads flood assessment operations at the Iranian National Committee on Large Dams, said in an interview.

The problem is particularly acute in the capital and its environs, said Alireza Shahidi, director of Iran’s Geographical Survey and Mineral Exploration.

“In some countries, one inch of subsidence is considered a catastrophe,” Shahidi said in a May interview with the state-run Iranian Students News Agency. “Unfortunately, we have recorded ... 14 inches in the Greater Tehran region.”

By comparison, in Florida’s Surfside, where a condo collapse killed 98 people in late June, scientists put the subsidence rate at 0.08 inches. (Subsidence is thought to be one of the contributing factors to the tragedy.)

The spike in subsidence here has accompanied a sharp increase in water scarcity, itself a result of climate change as well as a poorly maintained water management system.

Advertisement

“We’ve lost 30% of renewable water resources over the last four decades, meaning 35 to 40 billion cubic meters,” Fadaeifard said.

In June, the National Water & Sewage Co. classified some 210 cities as “water stressed.”

“This phenomenon will swallow people’s houses, lands and the country’s infrastructure,” Fadaeifard said.

Advertisement

For months now, protests over escalating water and power shortages have erupted in Khuzestan, the oil-rich province in the country’s southwest where temperatures regularly top 123 degrees. Khuzestan is known for its rivers, but many are now drying out due to climate change and overuse.

Similar demonstrations mushroomed all over the country in recent days, often spurring a deadly response from the government, activist groups claim. Amnesty International said security personnel used live ammunition, killing at least eight people in seven cities between July 15 and 23.

With conditions increasingly untenable, those who can afford it are escaping Iran’s hotter provinces to more temperate areas by the Caspian Sea in the north; others have emigrated to Turkey, adding to the eight-fold increase in the last two years of Iranians purchasing property there.

“Thousands of people, especially from Isfahan, have flocked to the north,” said Moqaddam, a real estate agent based in the resort city of Kelardasht, a stone’s throw from Iran’s northern shore on the Caspian. He gave only his last name for reasons of privacy.

Advertisement

“The price of land has quadrupled here,” he said, adding that illegal deforestation had also increased so developers could build more housing.

The backdrop to the crisis is four decades of Iran’s hostility with the U.S., and the devastating effect of Washington’s sanctions on the country’s economy. With fears of all-out war on their mind, senior officials at the highest levels of government aimed for self-sufficiency, driving a massive food security program that has exhausted underground water resources in this arid country.

The massive agricultural expansion has resulted in roughly 90% of Iran’s total water consumption being used for agricultural purposes. Around 80% of that is drawn from underground aquifers, depleting them at a rate many times over the world average, officials say. Many have turned to illegal wells, with some 30,000 in the capital alone.

Advertisement

Sanctions exacerbated an already bad situation, crippling investment in modernizing the agricultural sector, even as the government pushed more people into farming as the cheapest, easiest way to create jobs for a besieged economy; a “suicidal mistake,” said Jaber Khadivi, an engineer and head of an irrigation-systems startup.

“Unstable agricultural development has been a lurking issue for many years, but its mushrooming effect has surprised officials today,” Khadivi said. “The government has long ignored the fact that Iran’s arid climate and poorly efficient farming sector cannot fit in 5 or 6 million farmers.”

Khadivi also blamed authorities for failing to invest in desalination plants, an integrated cloud-seeding program or smart valves that can measure excessive or illegal water consumption. Instead, the government has doubled down on water management strategies that ignore the country’s changing realities.

Over the last 40 years, for example, authorities have built dozens of dams — Iran now has some 192 of them — to mitigate water shortages. But in the desert climate, a lot of that water evaporates.

Advertisement

Newsletter Toward a more sustainable California Get Boiling Point, our newsletter exploring climate change, energy and the environment, and become part of the conversation — and the solution. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

The problem is likely to get worse, with projections that temperatures will rise by more than 4 degrees over the next 40 years while precipitation falls by around 35%.

For people whose property is damaged by subsidence, there is little option but to move. That’s what happened to Rahmanian’s brother; Tehran city officials evacuated all 10 families in the apartment building and demolished it.

Many other cases go unreported, with owners reluctant to inform authorities so as to avoid having their property torn down.

Advertisement

In 2019, horrible cracks began to appear in the office of Ahmad Reza, a 52-year-old business manager in a one-story building along the capital’s main shopping thoroughfare.

“Our building had slanted a few inches westward,” he said.

Authorities announced subway construction had damaged some structures in the neighborhood. Reza called a government friend who said subsidence could have also been a cause. Pursuing the issue further could have resulted in the building being torn down.

“I didn’t want that happen so I resorted to a private company to fix it.”

Advertisement

So far, the repairs have held up, he said.

“It hasn’t got worse for two years now,” he said. “I have my fingers crossed.”

Special correspondent Khazani reported from Tehran and staff writer Bulos from Beirut.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two lightning-sparked fires burning in remote Northern California forests prompted evacuation warnings and strained firefighting resources already stretched thin by an unusually early and active burning season.

The Monument and McFarland fires were two of at least nine ignited in the Shasta-Trinity National Forest as thunderstorms rolled through Thursday to Saturday.

The Trinity County Sheriff’s Office issued evacuation warnings for the communities of Big Bar and Del Loma on both sides of the Trinity River about 10 p.m. Saturday as the Monument fire grew rapidly, threatening about 22 homes. By Sunday afternoon, the McFarland fire had spurred an evacuation order for residents of the town of Wildwood, which includes about 60 homes.

The fires were burning amid historically dry conditions and a series of heat waves linked to human-caused climate change. It was the area’s third-warmest July on record, with the average high in Ukiah over 100 degrees, according to the National Weather Service. Temperatures there remained about 5 degrees above normal Sunday.

Advertisement

“We’re seeing growth that is really extreme on all of these fires,” said Adrienne Freeman, public information officer for the national forest. “We talk a lot about the probability of ignition, and what that means is: If a source hits vegetation, how likely is it to start a fire?”

The probability, which is based on factors including fuel moisture and wind, has consistently been in the 90th percentile, she said.

“Lightning, cigarettes, hot engines — if there’s a heat source,” she said, “the likelihood that it’s going to start a fire is extremely high.”

The Monument fire was burning on the south side of the Trinity River through low-elevation brush and timber in extremely steep terrain. Infrared mapping put the fire at about 800 acres Saturday night, and it had grown to about 1,800 acres by Sunday evening, according to authorities, who reported 0% containment.

There are no roads that lead to the area, Freeman said, so officials mounted an aggressive initial attack with aircraft and smokejumpers — specially trained firefighters who are dropped in by parachute.

The fire was progressing to the east, pushed by the steep river canyon’s strong daily wind pattern, with winds that blow upslope with the heating of the day and then downslope at night, Freeman said. Although it was burning in the scar of the 2008 Cedar fire, that blaze took place too long ago to have any ameliorating effect on its behavior, Freeman said.

“Since 2008, we have had time to have regrowth,” she said, “especially a brush component in that area.”

Firefighters were also working to protect natural resources.

Advertisement

“The Trinity River is famous for its recreation,” Freeman said, “so the economic impact is a major concern for us, as well as, obviously, life and property safety.”

About 32 miles southeast, the McFarland fire was burning in a densely forested low-elevation area south of Wildwood. As of Sunday evening, about 234 personnel were assigned to the fire, which was 3,200 acres and 5% contained.

That blaze was also being fought aggressively by air and ground crews, Freeman said. It burned actively overnight into Sunday, particularly on the southern and western flanks. Crews were working to construct a “dozer line” around its west side digging such a fire barrier on the east.

Advertisement

The McFarland fire was detected Thursday evening, and the Monument fire was discovered about 6 p.m. Friday.

“I couldn’t tell you exactly when they started, because when they start to send up smoke is dependent on what kind of fuel the lightning hit in,” Freeman said. “If it hit a big mature tree, it might take a while to show smoke.”

All the other fires detected in the forest after the lightning burst were contained at less than an acre except the Underwood fire, which was contained at 1¾ acres, and the Tamarack fire, which was 6½ acres and 65% contained as of Saturday morning, Freeman said. All were believed to have been sparked by lightning except the Underwood fire, the cause of which remained under investigation.

It’s possible that more holdover fires are burning but haven’t been found yet, Freeman said.

Advertisement

Firefighters were hoping to get a break in the weather, with conditions expected to be less windy and more stable starting Sunday, and temperatures expected to drop down closer to normal later in the week.

“It’s still going to be pretty dry out there since it’s pretty far out into the interior mountains, but the temperatures are going to be coming down a few degrees in the afternoon, and relative humidity values are going to be coming up,” said Scott Carroll, meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Eureka.

The possibility of thunderstorms in southern Oregon late Sunday had authorities on edge, particularly in the area of the Monument fire.

“What happens when a thunder cell collapses is it spits out a downburst of wind that is totally erratic, and those downbursts can affect fires from a long ways away,” Freeman said. “Some of our most dangerous firefighting situations have been due to those erratic, strong winds caused by thunder cells collapsing.”

Advertisement

She contrasted that with daily wind patterns, which can push fires around but are at least predictable.

“When you introduce thunderstorms or convective activity,” she said, “that’s a wild card about how it’s going to affect a fire.”

Some 90 miles to the southeast, California’s largest wildfire of the season so far continued to burn in the Lassen and Plumas national forests.

Advertisement

The Dixie fire was 248,570 acres and 33% contained as of Sunday evening, with 5,463 personnel working to keep flames away from populated areas. Earlier in the day, authorities said about 10,435 structures remained threatened.

Pacific Gas & Electric Co. has said its equipment may have sparked the fire in Feather River Canyon on July 13. A worker wasn’t able to get to the site and discover the flames until 9½ hours later, PG&E said.

Firefighters have been challenged by the remote location and conditions conducive to burning.

“We continue to face fire in rugged terrain that’s difficult to get crews to,” said Capt. Mitch Matlow, public information officer on the fire. “The weather is hot and dry, and we tend to have lots of winds in the afternoon.”

Advertisement

Under the right conditions, the fire will build up a large pyrocumulus cloud during the heat of the day that collapses as things cool off, which can generate erratic winds and send embers in all directions, he said.

“So we have lots of changing wind conditions as those develop,” he said.

The fire has destroyed 45 primary structures, which can include homes, commercial buildings and barns, and 22 minor structures, which can include sheds or outbuildings, according to officials. Areas where homes burned included Belden, Rich Bar and Indian Falls, according to a map of the damage, which was being updated as assessment teams were able to get into more communities.

About 16,600 people were under evacuation warnings or orders from the fire as of Sunday morning, although that number declined later in the day after the Plumas County Sheriff’s Office rolled back some of the restrictions.

Advertisement

Still, Matlow said, it’s important for people who have been evacuated to stay out of their homes until officials give them the green light.

“When we get into this phase of the fire, it’s often common for people to say, ‘The fire’s out where I live. Why can’t I go back?’” he said. “There are a lot of things that can contribute: narrow roads, heavy equipment on those roads, maybe the road was damaged by the equipment. Utility crews could be in there fixing or replacing utilities. All of that stuff needs to be completed before we let people back in.”

In Los Angeles, firefighters quickly snuffed out a brush fire Sunday afternoon that scorched half an acre in the Hansen Dam Recreation Area, according to the Los Angeles Fire Department.

Another blaze broke out in nearby Irwindale: The Los Angeles County Fire Department said it had stopped the forward march of that fire in the Santa Fe Dam Recreation Area, which had burned 15 acres as of Sunday evening.

Advertisement

Times staff writer Emily Alpert Reyes contributed to this report.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the Aug. 5, 2021, edition of Boiling Point, a weekly newsletter about climate change and the environment in California and the American West. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.

Way back in 2019, I asked an energy company owned by one of America’s richest individuals to alert me when they were down to one final landowner standing in the way of their plan to send massive amounts of wind power from Wyoming to California.

It had been a dozen years since Phil Anschutz first proposed to build the country’s largest wind farm, as well as a 730-mile transmission line to ferry the clean electricity toward the West Coast. Federal officials had signed off on the power-line route, but Anschutz Corp. still needed to work out financial arrangements with hundreds of private landowners whose properties the towers and wires would cross. I was interested in writing about the final holdout along the route, if the project got that far.

This week, company officials finally had an answer for me. They said the last landowner standing between California and an infusion of climate-friendly power will be a family of Colorado ranchers — working closely with a federal agency.

Advertisement

That’s right: Even as President Biden urges Congress to fund a rapid buildout of clean energy infrastructure to fight climate change, an arm of his administration is helping to block the country’s largest renewable power project.

It’s a conflict that illustrates the difficulty of quickly transitioning away from fossil fuels, especially given the opposition to solar farms, wind turbines and transmission lines that has bubbled up in communities across the West. That opposition is motivated at times by aesthetic concerns and at times by a desire to protect animals and ecosystems from industrial energy development.

Let’s back up a minute.

Anschutz got rich drilling for oil in the Intermountain West decades ago. Today he owns or holds major stakes in the Los Angeles Lakers, L.A.'s Staples Center and the Coachella Valley Music & Arts Festival. Forbes estimates his net worth at $10.1 billion.

Phil Anschutz stands on the field at the Los Angeles Galaxy’s stadium in Carson, Calif., in 2012. He owns the soccer team. (Getty Images)

Since 2008, Anschutz Corp. has spent more than $400 million permitting and preparing to build 1,000 wind turbines on a giant ranch in south-central Wyoming, as well as hundreds of miles of electric wires that would cross through Colorado, Utah and Nevada, ending near Las Vegas. As I’ve written previously, the wind in Wyoming peaks in the afternoon and stays strong into the evening, meaning it could help California keep the lights on after sundown — a challenge recently, as you may have heard.

It sounds like an easy win for California, Wyoming and our planet’s climate. But here’s where things get complicated.

A small handful of landowners are still haggling with Anschutz Corp. over how much they ought to be paid to allow TransWest Express to cross their properties. The company tells me it expects to be able to resolve its issues with every landowner except one: Cross Mountain Ranch, an enormous sheep and cattle operation in northwest Colorado.

Advertisement

Under normal circumstances, Anschutz Corp. might try to invoke eminent domain. But several years ago, the Natural Resources Conservation Service — an agency within the federal Department of Agriculture — spent $3.3 million to help fund a “conservation easement” across 16,000 acres of Cross Mountain Ranch. In exchange for that money, the landowning Boeddeker family agreed not to sell any of the ranch to a developer who might build homes (or anything else). Power lines wouldn’t be allowed.

A portion of Cross Mountain Ranch in northwest Colorado that is protected by a conservation easement. (Erik Glenn)

Conservation easements are meant to preserve rural economies dependent on agriculture, while also protecting farm and ranch lands that provide wildlife habitat. At Cross Mountain Ranch, federal officials said an easement would support the greater sage grouse, an iconic Western bird whose sagebrush habitat has been decimated by residential and industrial development.

“This became quickly one of the highest-priority sage grouse initiative projects in the country, because of the size, the connectivity to the public lands,” said Erik Glenn, executive director of the Colorado Cattlemen’s Agricultural Land Trust, which helped broker the Cross Mountain Ranch easement. “It’s a pretty pivotal migration corridor for mule deer, for elk... You’re frequently going to see sandhill cranes along the Yampa and Little Snake rivers in their migration periods.”

Advertisement

Anschutz’s TransWest subsidiary sued the Department of Agriculture in 2019, arguing that the Natural Resources Conservation Service violated federal law and its own policies when it approved and funded an easement that would block the planned power line. The company wants a judge to throw out the easement. Department of Agriculture officials have countered that they followed the law and were totally in the right to prioritize conservation, regardless of how it might affect the energy project.

Here’s the key point: Regardless of who wins in court, this battle illustrates a tension that is only getting more pressing as America hurries to confront the fires and floods of the climate crisis.

I’m referring to the tension between building renewable energy infrastructure and protecting ecosystems, which I’ve written about extensively. President Biden wants the United States to get 100% of its electricity from climate-friendly power sources by 2035. He’s also endorsed a campaign by scientists and advocates to protect 30% of America’s lands and waters by 2030.

There are ways to meet both of those goals, and they most likely involve carefully studying which landscapes ought to be fully protected and which can be set aside for development. But those strategies won’t resolve every conflict. There will always be difficult value judgments about the appropriate balance between conservation and fighting climate change.

Advertisement

For Anschutz Corp., the facts on the ground at Cross Mountain Ranch clearly weigh in favor of climate. The company points out that its transmission-line corridor would take up just 30 acres of the 16,000-acre conservation easement, and would allow for the delivery of enough wind energy — 3,000 megawatts — to power nearly two million homes.

U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack — who served in that role under President Obama, and now again under Biden — has actually praised TransWest Express, along with six other power lines selected by the Obama administration for accelerated permitting a decade ago. Vilsack said the projects would “help to meet our country’s electric needs in the 21st century.”

“These infrastructure projects will also create jobs and opportunities that will strengthen our economy to benefit households and businesses throughout the country,” Vilsack said in a written statement in 2011.

Anschutz Corp. executive Bill Miller is in charge of developing the Chokecherry and Sierra Madre wind farm at this ranch along the Continental Divide in Wyoming. (Ralph Vartabedian / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

I asked TransWest’s general counsel, Lisa Christian, about one arm of the Biden administration blocking a power line meant to help Western states ditch fossil fuels while most of the rest of the federal government pushes aggressive climate action. She was perplexed, to say the least, telling me the company has “tried repeatedly” to get Biden administration higher-ups to step in.

I also asked Glenn, from the Colorado land trust, whether sacrificing 30 acres out of 16,000 for a power line would really be that big a deal. He pointed me to research suggesting transmission infrastructure can harm sage grouse.

“We’ve got a policy priority of increased renewable energy, and we have a policy priority of increased conservation. Those two are going to continue to butt heads,” he said. “We have to find ways to resolve those conflicts.”

I also reached out to the owners of Cross Mountain Ranch. A 2017 Denver Post story described the property — which had been put on the market at the time, although it hasn’t sold — as “the rural family compound of the late Ronald Boeddeker, the Southern California real estate tycoon renowned for luxury developments like Lake Las Vegas and Waikoloa Beach Resort in Hawaii.”

Advertisement

Boeddeker’s son Matt didn’t respond to my interview requests. But he definitely opposes a transmission line. In a 2019 email cited by TransWest’s lawsuit, he wrote to a Natural Resources Conservation Service official that his family “agreed to permanently restrict (from development and for the protection of important wildlife) a very large part of one of the largest private ranches in Colorado in exchange for the govts part in full protection against power lines and other damaging items of development.”

“It’s impossible for this power line to happen if you take actions,” he wrote.

It’s hard for me to say if TransWest Express and the accompanying wind farm would really be canceled if the company’s lawsuit fails. Anschutz has spent hundreds of millions of dollars and a dozen years on these projects, and construction is still at a very early stage. I wouldn’t be surprised if he were willing to throw some more money and time at trying to reroute the power line.

I should note that the Department of Agriculture didn’t grant an interview request. After this story was published, the department’s press secretary, Kate Waters, told me via email that the Natural Resources Conservation Service “believes there is a path forward to resolve this issue in a way that works for all parties” and “will continue to seek common ground.”

Advertisement

I should also note that another company owned by one of America’s wealthiest individuals — the electric utility PacifiCorp, a subsidiary of Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway empire — also wants to build a transmission line, known as Gateway South, along the same route through Cross Mountain Ranch as Anschutz. PacifiCorp has its own legal action pending over the conflict.

But that’s a story for another day. For now, here’s what’s happening around the West:

TOP STORIES

Inez Salinas bathes her 5-year-old daughter, River, outside their 20-by-8-foot tiny home in Concow, Calif. They get by with a generator and no running water. (Gina Ferazzi / Los Angeles Times)

California’s deadliest wildfire displaced tens of thousands — not just in Paradise, but in poorer, more isolated mountain towns. Three years after the Camp fire, many are still living in the woods with their kids or searching for a safe place to park their RVs as they desperately wait on a payout from Pacific Gas & Electric, my colleague Joe Mozingo writes in this heart-wrenching story, with photos by Gina Ferazzi. In related news, PG&E may have started not one, but both blazes that merged to become the Dixie fire, which is burning through the same region as the Camp fire, J.D. Morris reports for the San Francisco Chronicle.

Advertisement

Before they were flattened to make way for houses and beachgoers, huge rolling sand dunes covered much of California’s coastline, supporting an incredible array of bugs, plants and birds. Restoring some of those “living shorelines” could help protect us against rising seas, according to this beautifully illustrated story by The Times’ Rosanna Xia, Paul Duginski and Sean Greene. It’s a remarkable piece of journalism that will make you rethink everything you thought you knew about the beach.

“Then there were the cattle, thousands of them, some so skinny they looked like skeletons.” We published two powerful stories this week about how climate-fueled drought is decimating farming communities. The first takes place in the Mexican state of Sonora, where reporter Kate Linthicum and photographer Gary Coronado found that tens of thousands of cows are starving to death, threatening to bring an end to the ranching way of life. The second takes place in Arizona, where reporter Jaweed Kaleem and photographer Carolyn Cole talked with family farmers and ranchers who may be forced to sell out as water supplies dry up.

DROUGHT AND FIRES

How bad is the drought in California? It’s so bad that state officials just barred thousands of people, mostly farmers, from pulling water from rivers and streams in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta Watershed. Here’s the story from The Times’ Julia Wick, who notes that officials want to make sure there’s enough freshwater available to flow into the Delta next year to keep salty ocean water away from the pumps that supply much of the state with drinking water. Meanwhile, Rachel Schnalzer writes that visitors to Folsom Lake can now see the remains of Gold Rush towns because water levels at the reservoir have fallen so low.

The U.S. Forest Service will stop letting small fires burn in overgrown forests, at least temporarily, saying there’s too big a risk they’ll become out-of-control infernos. More details here from my colleagues Anita Chabria and Lila Seidman. Putting out all fires as quickly as possible may sound obvious, but letting some burn through dense forest underbrush is to meant improve forest health after decades of over-suppressing fire, in hopes of preventing larger future blazes. But the practice has faced criticism from Western politicians, including Gov. Gavin Newsom, as Anita and Alex Wigglesworth reported just a few days ago.

Advertisement

Newsom is also urging President Biden to continue a program that gives firefighters access to images from military satellites. The governor raised the issue just days after The Times’ Jennifer Haberkorn and Anna M. Phillips reported that the Pentagon might let the FireGuard program expire, despite the fact that it has likely saved lives by allowing for faster evacuations.

THE ENERGY TRANSITION

California’s Lake Oroville stands at 33% full and 40% of historical average on June 30. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Even before the Western drought took a turn for the worse in 2021, hydropower plummeted in California. New data show that generation from in-state hydroelectric facilities was down 44% last year, Rob Nikolewski reports for the San Diego Union-Tribune. Partly as a result, California burned more natural gas, which unlike hydropower fuels climate change. Less water behind hydropower dams is one of several reasons the state could face rolling blackouts in the coming weeks. (For more discussion of the water-energy nexus, see this event hosted by Circle of Blue and the Pacific Institute that I participated in on Wednesday.)

A new law signed by Oregon Gov. Kate Brown requires the state’s largest electric utilities to slash climate pollution 80% by 2030, 90% by 2035 and 100% by 2040. That’s five years ahead of California’s target of 100% clean energy by 2045, if you’re keeping score at home; more details here from the AP’s Sara Cline. Similarly, some clean energy advocates say Colorado now has the strongest policies for reducing climate pollution from gas heating in buildings, Allen Best writes for Energy News Network.

Advertisement

A new book offers a sweeping history of Tesla, largely focused on the smart people not named Elon Musk who helped build the electric car company. My colleague Russ Mitchell wrote a review of “Power Play” by Tim Higgins, and he understandably couldn’t help but lead with a juicy anecdote from the book about Tim Cook floating the idea of Apple buying Tesla.

Newsletter Record heat. Raging fires. What are the solutions? Get Boiling Point, our newsletter about climate change, the environment and building a more sustainable California. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

AND EVERYTHING ELSE

L.A.'s Hyperion sewage treatment plant kept releasing millions of gallons of partially treated wastewater into the ocean weeks after a major spill, in violation of its environmental permit. The Times’ Robert J. Lopez broke this story just one day after public health officials suggested high bacteria levels at beaches probably had nothing to do with the sewage spill because more than two weeks had passed. Officials say water quality has now returned to state standards, Melissa Hernandez reports.

Deadly floods in recent weeks have made clear that China’s Henan province is not prepared for increasingly extreme weather. But rather than engage in a public conservation about climate change, “the ruling Communist Party has restricted information and encouraged nationalistic celebration,” writes The Times’ Beijing bureau chief, Alice Su. Our Middle East bureau chief Nabih Bulos, meanwhile, reports with Omid Khazani that Tehran is slowly sinking due to over-extraction of groundwater, while water and power shortages have sparked protests in another part of Iran where temperatures often reach 123 degrees.

Advertisement

Bringing things back to the U.S., last week was Drought Week on The Times, our daily podcast hosted by Gustavo Arellano. Episode 1 featured our in-house “masters of disasters”; Episode 2 focused on water shortages and right-wing extremism; Episode 3 dealt with the Southwest’s iconic plants, from Joshua trees and saguaro cactuses to, yes, lawns; Episode 4 was all about falling water levels at the West’s largest reservoir, Lake Mead; and Episode 5 somehow brought together drought impacts to carne asada and to our smartphones. I’d highly recommend you subscribe to the podcast and make Gustavo part of your daily routine.

ONE MORE THING

Boat slips are surrounded by dry land July 1 at drought-stricken Folsom Lake. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

I lived in Palm Springs for four years, so it caught my attention that the city just had its hottest July on record, per the Desert Sun’s Tom Coulter — right after its hottest June on record. Jonathan P. Thompson, who writes the Land Desk newsletter, notes that there were 392 all-time high temperatures records tied or broken in the United States in June — all of them west of the Mississippi.

Here at The Times, our photographers documented what the heat looked like and how we coped. But this is one of those strange scenarios where even a great picture doesn’t contain enough multitudes to tell the whole story. The West is getting hotter and drier and more fire-prone, and the only way to fully understand it is to live through it. Which we’re all doing, as best we can.

Advertisement

We’ll be back in your inbox next week with more plum content. If you enjoyed this newsletter, please consider forwarding it to your friends and colleagues.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the July 22, 2021, edition of Boiling Point, a weekly newsletter about climate change and the environment in California and the American West. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.

Only if you close your eyes and cover your ears and avoid going outside is it possible to ignore the rapidly worsening climate crisis.

Massive wildfires are burning out of control, creating their own weather systems and sending smoke as far east as New York. The American West has already baked through four major heat waves this summer, with several states experiencing their hottest June on record. Europe and China are getting slammed by deadly floods, even as California and its neighbors ache for more water.

“The scenes of desperation and devastation in Zhengzhou added to a portfolio of disasters this year that have raised the specter of irreversible climate change as never before and offered glimpses of what it means to live on a warming planet where human survival grows more fraught,” my colleagues David Pierson, Alice Su and Molly Hennessy-Fiske wrote in a gripping piece.

Advertisement

It was against this backdrop that Gov. Gavin Newsom asked his top lieutenants to hurry up on climate action.

Newsom directed the powerful Air Resources Board this month to evaluate strategies for achieving carbon neutrality by 2035, a decade ahead of California’s current goal for emitting no more heat-trapping pollution than it can keep out of the atmosphere. He also requested that the Public Utilities Commission set a more ambitious target for cleaning up electricity supplies by 2030.

That kind of acceleration — if it happens — could help California secure its status as a global leader on fighting climate change, a role critics say the state has at least partially ceded. As I wrote on Earth Day, other governments have been getting ahead of us, and scientists are increasingly calling for the Golden State to do more, faster. Carbon neutrality by 2035 would fit the bill.

And yet ... there was a part of me, reading the governor’s latest directives and trying to conceptualize the years 2030 and 2035 and 2045, that couldn’t stop thinking about a recent report from the think tank RMI. The authors wrote, “The most important year to phase out fossil fuel infrastructure and invest in clean energy solutions is this year.”

The point is that carbon builds up in the atmosphere and stays there for hundreds of years, wrapping the planet in an ever-thicker blanket of heat. So while it’s crucial to make plans to eventually stop adding more carbon, any pollution we can avoid creating today will prevent a lot more death and destruction than the pollution we avoid creating 10 or 15 or 25 years from now.

Helicopters drop water to battle the Dixie fire in California’s Plumas County on July 14. (Paul Kitagaki Jr. / The Sacramento Bee via AP)

I ran this line of thinking past Jared Blumenfeld, secretary of California’s Environmental Protection Agency. I also asked him why Newsom’s administration is only now starting the process of accelerating the state’s climate and clean energy targets, when the governor suggested almost a year ago — during last summer’s record fire season — that those targets were inadequate.

Blumenfeld told me Newsom has asked him the same question. He described the governor as frustrated by the slow pace of change, especially in light of a draft report from an international group of scientists — which was leaked ahead of global climate talks in Glasgow later this year — warning of the potential for dangerous climate “tipping points” in the not-too-distant future.

Advertisement

California’s current targets “were set in a different time, frankly, when there was less definitive science, or less urgent science, when the realities of climate change weren’t what we’ve seen in these last few weeks,” Blumenfeld said.

“You talk to climate scientists, and they say we need to do more as soon as humanly possible,” he said in an interview.

To be fair, Newsom and his appointees are pushing aggressively on some fronts. They’re making plans for the West Coast’s first offshore wind farms and recently ordered utilities and local governments to buy gargantuan amounts of clean energy. Perhaps most consequentially, the budget Newsom signed this month allocates several billion dollars for clean transportation, including funds to replace dirty diesel trucks with electric alternatives and help low-income Californians switch to less-polluting vehicles.

At the same time, some activists say Newsom can and should be doing more. Encouraging developers to build all-electric housing is one thing, they say, but why not ban natural gas hookups in new construction? What’s stopping the governor from requiring new cars to be zero emission sooner than 2035? Why do public health rules designed to protect people living near oil and gas wells keep getting delayed, and why hasn’t Newsom pushed harder to shutter gas storage fields such as Aliso Canyon?

Advertisement

The governor’s recent directives address at least one of those criticisms. I wrote last year about frustration among clean energy advocates that the Public Utilities Commission had set a target reducing carbon emissions from power plants just 25% by 2030 — a slower pace than emissions fell during the previous decade. The agency is already moving toward a stronger target, but now Newsom has formalized that change in direction, asking commission President Marybel Batjer for a more ambitious goal.

Blumenfeld said the governor is interested in seeing California get 90% of its electricity from clean sources by 2030. That would be well ahead of the state’s current mandate of 100% by 2045, and more in line with President Biden’s goal of 100% by 2035.

“If we could really bend the curve down without affecting reliability or cost, why aren’t we doing that?” Blumenfeld asked.

The Sugar fire destroys a home in Doyle, Calif., on July 10. (Noah Berger / Associated Press)

Advertisement

It’s the “reliability” and “cost” parts that can make things difficult, not that they’re necessarily showstoppers. Blumenfeld described keeping the lights on and avoiding too much economic disruption, especially for those who can least afford higher costs, as critical to building a new economy that doesn’t run on carbon. Those challenges require serious analysis, Blumenfeld said — hence Newsom asking state officials to study more aggressive climate targets rather than simply mandating them.

For the Air Resources Board, that will mean using next year’s edition of its twice-a-decade climate “scoping plan” to work through the feasibility of carbon neutrality by 2035. Liane Randolph, the agency’s chair, told me officials will consider a wide range of options for picking up the pace, from carbon capture and storage to programs aimed at helping Californians drive fewer miles.

“The pathway to reducing carbon is about the various strategies that we need to deploy. It’s not just about setting a date,” Randolph said in an interview. “That’s part of the beauty of the scoping plan. It’s really where we roll up our sleeves.”

At the end of the day, it’s hard for me to get too excited about making plans to make plans to slash emissions, even if I understand why it’s necessary. I spent some time in the San Fernando Valley this weekend, and I have no recollection of summer afternoons being so blisteringly hot when I was a kid. I bought an air filtration device last year because I hated the idea of breathing wildfire smoke. I’d be worried about my power going out during the next heat wave if I didn’t already not have AC.

Advertisement

So yes, it seems self-evident that this year is the most important year for reducing emissions.

Blumenfeld certainly thinks so. He also sees long-term goal-setting as crucial for motivating action in the present, because it forces us to work backward and figure out what steps are needed now. While people might be shocked when they realize how much rapid change is needed, he said, only that type of planning will help society develop a “war footing” mentality on climate.

“I really do analogize it to a battle,” he said. “Everyone is realizing the front lines of the battle are a hell of a lot closer than we ever imagined. And the threat from the enemy is real and present.”

And so we go. Here’s what else is happening around the West:

Advertisement

TOP STORIES

Watercraft power up the Colorado River against a backdrop of the Needles, a group of pinnacles in the Mohave Mountains. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

One of America’s hottest cities is down to one water well and is in danger of running dry, even though it sits right on the Colorado River. Here’s the scary and almost unbelievable story from The Times’ Ralph Vartabedian about Needles, Calif., a scenic river town that’s home to Snoopy’s brother Spike in the “Peanuts” comic strip. It’s less than 100 miles downstream from Lake Mead, where a group of farmers and environmentalists from around the West gathered last week to demand that growing cities avoid putting so much pressure on the Colorado as to upend their rural lifestyles. Here’s that story from the Associated Press’ Sam Metz.

A new study finds that higher temperatures significantly increase the risk of injuries for indoor workers, not just outdoor workers. My colleague Anna M. Phillips writes that UCLA and Stanford researchers concluded workplace injuries and accidents in California have increased by as much as 9% on days when temperatures are in the 90s, and as much as 15% on days when they reach triple digits. And the effect has been worse in hotter parts of the state, where lower-income people are more likely to live.

After years of resistance to the idea, Pacific Gas & Electric now plans to bury 10,000 miles of power lines to prevent wildfire ignitions. The company says it figured out while helping to rebuild the town Paradise that it can underground lines en masse for half the cost it previously assumed, J.D. Morris reports for the San Francisco Chronicle. PG&E’s announcement came shortly after it disclosed that its electric infrastructure may have sparked the Dixie fire, just like it did the fire that destroyed Paradise, my colleague Faith E. Pinho reports. Meanwhile, KPCC’s Sharon McNary explains how Acton, a small town in L.A. County’s high desert, fought back against Southern California Edison’s fire-prevention power outages — and may have won at least a partial victory.

Advertisement

DROUGHT CENTRAL

Biologists are trucking endangered Snake River sockeye salmon from the Pacific Ocean to their Idaho spawning grounds, past the dams that impede their movement and rising water temperatures they can’t survive. The tale of their 300-mile truck journey is surprisingly riveting, in a horrible way; my colleague Richard Read brings out the drama in the desperate hunt for chlorine-free ice to keep the fish cool along the route. California has its own efforts to truck fish to safety, as officials warn that unusually hot water could kill nearly all juvenile chinook salmon in the Sacramento River, CNN’s Alexandra Meeks reports.

Drone photos of California’s rapidly diminishing reservoirs are worth way more than 1,000 words about the drought emergency. The Times’ Brian van der Brug captured images of lakes Oroville, Folsom, Trinity and Shasta; check them out here. See also these jarring satellite photos of Shasta Lake in 2019 versus last month, with accompanying words by Hayley Smith. It’s not just water supplies at stake; the hydropower plant at Lake Oroville could go offline for the first time ever as soon as next month, my colleague Julia Wick writes, depriving California of much-needed electricity right when temperatures are typically highest.

Should California have tougher water restrictions in place? The last time drought conditions were this bad, then-Gov. Jerry Brown ordered a 25% reduction in urban use. Some water experts say we need that kind of mandate again, although others think Newsom’s more measured strategy is appropriate, The Times’ Ari Plachta reports. One thing Californians shouldn’t expect anytime soon is new water storage to boost supplies. Although voters approved $2.7 billion to build more dams and groundwater storage banks in 2014, most of those projects are still years away, Dale Kasler and Ryan Sabalow report for the Sacramento Bee.

THE ENERGY TRANSITION

Gerard Barron holds a rock brought up from the sea floor. His company wants to scrape and vacuum part of the Pacific Ocean floor for the metal-rich nodules. (Carolyn Cole / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

The world needs electric cars — and electric car batteries need raw materials. My colleague Evan Halper has a great in-depth story, with photos by Carolyn Cole, about the possible environmental consequences from the Pacific Ocean seabed to the Great Basin desert of vast new mining operations for lithium and other minerals, and the tradeoffs between protecting ecosystems and drawing down heat-trapping emissions. The Biden administration, meanwhile, hopes to dramatically slash the costs of energy-storage systems that can bank clean power for far longer than lithium-ion batteries, the New York Times’ Brad Plumer reports.

A power line buried in a trench at the bottom of the Columbia River could help the Pacific Northwest transition off fossil fuels. But the potential for environmental harm along the region’s most beloved river is generating blowback. Peter Fairley wrote about the proposal for InvestigateWest, talking with an Indigenous activist and others with concerns. In a power-line story with a different twist, a long-planned transmission project designed to move clean energy to Southern California cities is finally finished — and it’s the country’s first power line to be partly owned by a Native American tribe, the Desert Sun’s Amanda Ulrich reports.

Sempra Energy has hired former Trump administration Energy Secretary Dan Brouillette to lead its new infrastructure division. Sempra is the parent company of Southern California Gas and San Diego Gas & Electric, and it’s making a big push to export liquefied natural gas overseas, as I’ve reported previously. Brouillette was an influential supporter of LNG when he worked for President Trump, and he’ll play a key role in Sempra’s export plans, Rob Nikolewski reports for the San Diego Union-Tribune.

Newsletter Record heat. Raging fires. What are the solutions? Get Boiling Point, our newsletter about climate change, the environment and building a more sustainable California. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Advertisement

ON OUR PUBLIC LANDS

“With tales of conspiracy, mishandled funds and even federal neglect, I knew I had found a good story, no matter how buried it was in arcane scientific details.” That’s how my colleague Thomas Curwen described his decision to write about the Calico Early Man Site, a decades-old archaeological dig in San Bernardino County that some experts insist offers proof of human settlement in North American more than 200,000 years ago — a controversial claim. Here is Thomas’ fascinating deep dive on the site, which federal officials are now planning to shut down, along with a behind-the-scenes look at how he reported the story.

A Caltech scientist drilled 29 holes into the Volcanic Tablelands of California’s Owens Valley, just feet from a rock carving that’s part of one of the oldest recorded petroglyph sites in the West. The Times’ Louis Sahagún reports that the university agreed to pay $25,000 to the federal government to cover the costs of repairing the damage. Caltech also issued an apology that starts by downplaying what happened, describing the drilling as “an isolated incident that took place more than four years ago.”

If California wants to reach carbon neutrality by 2035 — or any other year — it will need to grapple with the fact that climate change is reducing the ability of natural landscapes to keep carbon out of the atmosphere. New research out of UC Irvine finds that vegetation losses caused by higher temperatures, wildfires and other climate-related threats could lead to a 16% decline in the state’s natural carbon storage capacity, Ben Brazil reports for The Times. Those losses are already underway.

ONE MORE THING

Jess Due, national director of animal care for Farm Sanctuary, hugs Safran, a rescued dairy cow. Two cows that escaped a slaughterhouse in June now live at the Acton facility. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

I enjoyed this column by my colleague Gustavo Arellano about two cows that evaded capture by an L.A. meatpacking plant, and how they serve as a reminder of Southern California’s ranching history — and the floods and drought that helped destroy it.

That history is on display at Los Encinos State Historic Park in the San Fernando Valley, which I visited for the first time over the weekend. Indigenous people built a village there because of its natural spring, which offered a year-round water source. It was later a part of Rancho El Encino and a stopping point on El Camino Real, which connected Spanish missions. An adobe structure built in 1849 is still standing, and today serves as a small museum. I tweeted a few photos.

I especially loved the water poems that accompanied some of the adobe‘s exhibits. I don’t know who wrote them — someone at the state parks department? — but would love some help figuring it out. My favorite poem, especially during this time of drought:

“Water and earth

Join hands

To become

Adobe,

Feed trees

That become

Roof and floors

Advertisement

Thick adobe walls,

Broad wooden roof.

Sturdy wooden floors —

Encino’s home

Of water and earth”

We’ll be back in your inbox next week. If you enjoyed this newsletter, please consider forwarding it to your friends and colleagues.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the July 8, 2021, edition of Boiling Point, a weekly newsletter about climate change and the environment in California and the American West. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.

To the extent most Californians are thinking about energy right now, they’re probably wondering whether the lights will stay on during the next heat wave.

It’s a reasonable fear, especially after the state’s power grid operator issued an urgent call for electricity supplies last week and warned of possible shortfalls this summer. The California Independent System Operator is seeking bids from power plants that can fire up after sundown, when solar panels stop generating but air conditioners keep humming.

Why the newfound urgency? State officials wrote that California’s ability to produce hydropower could be reduced by as much as 1,000 megawatts this summer as reservoir levels fall due to drought. At least 300 megawatts of gas-fired power won’t be available either due to “unforeseen circumstances.” And a few hundred megawatts of new energy resources that were expected to be ready to go by Aug. 1 — mostly lithium-ion batteries — could be “delayed by one to several months,” officials wrote.

Advertisement

They also pointed to recent heat waves across the American West as evidence California can no longer rely so heavily on electricity imports from other states. Like falling water levels at reservoirs, it’s a problem the climate crisis has worsened.

“Summer has barely begun and we have already had repeated extreme heat events creating dangerous conditions and shattering records,” leaders of the Independent System Operator, the Public Utilities Commission and the Energy Commission wrote in a joint statement. “Climate change is here and with increasing intensity.”

So the next few months could be a wild ride, with more rolling blackouts a possibility.

But the challenge of transitioning from fossil fuels to renewable energy, without sending us plunging into darkness, will extend far beyond this summer. With that in mind, let’s zoom out and look at an enormous solar project in California’s farm country that helps tell the story of the state’s energy future — and its water future, too.

I’m talking about Westlands Solar Park, which is currently being built in the heart of the San Joaquin Valley. I drove up last month, staying the night in Kettleman City, just off the 5 freeway, before heading northeast to the project site the next morning.

The place was a beehive of activity. More than 400 construction workers were keeping busy in the summer heat, many of them unloading solar panels from tractors, methodically placing them on steel racks and screwing them into place.

Here’s what it looked like, from my perspective:

Westlands Solar Park is being built in the heart of the San Joaquin Valley. (Sammy Roth / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

Construction workers at Westlands Solar Park project unload solar panels from a tractor, place them on steel racks and screw them into place. (Sammy Roth / Los Angeles Times)

The developer of Westlands Solar Park has permits to build 670 megawatts. (Sammy Roth / Los Angeles Times)

I’d never been to such a massive construction site before, but then again I don’t know of any other solar farms this big.

The project’s developer, Los Angeles-based real estate firm CIM Group, has permits to build 670 megawatts, which would be nearly 100 megawatts larger than the biggest U.S. solar farm operating today. The developer ultimately plans to install at least 2,700 megawatts by the end of the decade, across more than 20,000 acres — an area two-thirds the size of San Francisco.

Advertisement

CIM started building the first 250 megawatts last year and expects to finish this fall. Interestingly, the developer only has contracts in place for half that power — a sign they’re highly confident they’ll be able to find buyers for the rest at a profitable price.

“We decided to move forward knowing that the need is there,” CIM co-founder Avi Shemesh told me. “The need for power is tremendous, and the commitment (to clean energy), we believe, from the governmental agencies here is unequivocal.”

I sat down with Shemesh outside his company’s office on Wilshire Boulevard near Hancock Park, the week after touring the construction site. He told me CIM expects to spend “substantially north” of $4 billion to $5 billion building Westlands Solar Park.

That confidence was rewarded last month when the Public Utilities Commission ordered utilities and local governments to buy 11,500 megawatts of new, clean power by 2026. It’s a giant batch of energy designed to replace power plants retiring in the next few years, including the Diablo Canyon nuclear reactors and several gas generators along the Southern California coast.

Advertisement

Just adding a bunch of solar power won’t help much on scorching summer nights. But future phases of Westlands Solar Park — and most big solar farms from now on — will almost certainly include battery banks that can store a few hours’ worth of electricity for the evening. And as fossil fuels fade away, the state will need loads more climate-friendly power during the day, too.

“The needs in California are tremendous. And it’s not an issue of you need it tomorrow morning,” Shemesh said.

A view of the construction site of Westlands Solar Park on June 24. (Gary Kazanjian / For The Times)

Another noteworthy facet of the solar project is the identities of the buyers, at least the ones that have signed up so far.

Advertisement

One is the city of Santa Clara, which agreed to buy 75 megawatts. The other is Valley Clean Energy, a government-run “community choice” agency, or CCA, that serves the cities of Davis, Winters and Woodland, and parts of unincorporated Yolo County.

Neither of those buyers is an investor-owned utility — you know, like Pacific Gas & Electric or Southern California Edison. As more local governments go the community choice route, the big utilities are increasingly being pushed out of the business of buying and selling electricity, prompting them to shift their focus to the poles and wires that move power around the state.

When a tidal wave of cities and counties started launching community choice programs a few years ago, skeptics were concerned they would be disruptive — and not in a good way. What if local governments didn’t have the financial wherewithal to withstand swings in energy markets? Would they be able to sign long-term contracts and get solar and wind farms built without long credit histories? What if they had to set electricity rates higher than expected, sending customers streaming back to the big utilities?

Thus far, those fears mostly have not come to pass. Severin Borenstein, an energy economist at UC Berkeley who worried early on that community choice could do more harm than good, now says the programs “are actually doing something useful” by providing competition in the energy marketplace. While he’s still concerned about the potential for bankruptcies — Western Community Energy in Riverside County became the first CCA to close its doors last month — he thinks the sector is in good shape.

Advertisement

“Now that this is a serious industry, they are starting to adopt serious industry practices,” Borenstein said.

For the Westlands Solar Park team, negotiating power sales with local governments has become a fact of life in California.

“We and our lenders are underwriting the specific risk of each CCA on its own. But we think they’re here to stay, with some exceptions,” Shemesh told me.

CIM’s solar project could also help California resolve one of its thorniest water challenges.

Advertisement

San Joaquin Valley farmers have been overpumping groundwater for decades, resulting in sinking land, buckling canals and household wells running dry, and threatening a future of severe water shortages, especially as climate change dries up rivers and snowpack. The situation is especially bad on “drainage-impaired” farmlands where the soil is loaded with crop-killing salts — and toxic selenium — because clay layers beneath the dirt prevent irrigation water from percolating into the underground aquifer.

The federal government has been fighting with Westlands Water District over the future of those troublesome lands for decades, ever since it was discovered that the original solution to the drainage problem — sending irrigation runoff to Kesterson National Wildlife Refuge east of San Jose — was killing ducks and other waterfowl and causing grotesque birth defects in birds.

The 20-megawatt Maricopa West solar project, surrounded by almond groves, in California’s Kern County. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

Solar offers at least a partial solution, giving Westlands Water District a good economic reason to take land out of agricultural production and not make the drainage problems worse. For CIM, the availability of so much land — without the environmental conflicts that have plagued renewable energy development elsewhere — helped to make the giant investment worthwhile.

Advertisement

“Being in a position of this scale, it just gives us a platform to really contribute to where the state is going in terms of decarbonization,” Shemesh said, referring to the process of drawing down planet-warming carbon emissions.

More broadly, experts say farmers may need to take more than half a million acres out of production in the San Joaquin Valley to comply with the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act. Solar could help replace some of the lost jobs and tax revenues.

The California grid operator estimates that about 2,000 additional megawatts are needed to limit the risk of rotating outages this summer. It’s yet to be seen whether power companies will step forward with that much energy. A lot may depend on circumstances elsewhere in the West. The recent unexpected shutdown of a unit at New Mexico’s San Juan coal plant, for instance, is the kind of event that could further limit California’s ability to import power from other states during the next big heat wave.

Longer term, California’s ability to keep the lights on — and the rest of the country’s willingness to follow its lead — will depend on an unprecedented infrastructure buildout, from giant projects like Westlands to lots more solar systems on rooftops. The alternative is a future of heat waves that will make the temperatures records of the last few weeks feel quaint.

Advertisement

Here’s what else is happening around the West:

TOP STORIES

Ammon Bundy is running for Idaho governor on a platform of taking over federal lands and building housing. Details here from my colleagues Anita Chabria and Hailey Branson-Potts, who report that Bundy is warning that dense cities — which experts say will be key to reducing emissions — destroy “conservative, traditional values.” Bundy is best known for his role in an armed confrontation with federal agents in Nevada, and for leading a takeover of an Oregon wildlife refuge. For a study in contrasts, the Washington Post reports that Senate Republicans are opposing Biden’s nominee to lead the Bureau of Land Management, Tracy Stone-Manning, calling her an extremist in part because she mailed a letter on behalf of anti-logging eco-saboteurs in college.

Hospitals in the Pacific Northwest were overwhelmed by patients during last week’s heat wave, with emergency room doctors saying they’d never seen anything like it. The Washington Post’s Sarah Kaplan wrote about what it was like inside a Portland hospital, and quoted a scientist describing the hot spell as “well beyond what climate models suggest.” As more people buy air conditioners to cope with rising temperatures, the New York Times’ Brad Plumer writes that some cities want them to consider electric heat pumps, which could help reduce the need for polluting gas furnaces by providing both cooling and heating.

A 200-foot-long, 165-foot-wide bridge over the 101 freeway — designed to create a safe crossing for cougars and other wildlife — would be the largest of its kind in the world. So writes The Times’ Louis Sahagún, describing an $87-million project that could help save local mountain lion populations by connecting habitats separated by highways. Down south, the San Diego Zoo is racing to save a rare butterfly threatened by climate change and fire, the San Diego Union-Tribune’s Jonathan Wosen writes.

Advertisement

DROUGHT AND FIRE

Water levels at Lake Shasta are low as drought conditions persist. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Over the rain year ending June 30, L.A. got just 5.82 inches — the seventh-driest total on record. “This is not climate change in the future. This is climate change right now,” oceanographer Bill Patzert told my colleagues Rachel Schnalzer and Lila Seidman. Conditions are even worse up north, where California’s largest reservoir, Lake Shasta, was at 38% of capacity last week; The Times’ Brian van der Brug took stunning drone photos showing how far the lake has fallen. And lest we forget that extreme heat isn’t helping with our water problems, Maddie Capron reports for the Sacramento Bee that Death Valley had its hottest June on record.

Firefighters thought they had stopped the Lava fire in its tracks. But the blaze may have kept smoldering in the root systems of trees embedded in ancient lava beds, aided by dry conditions; it eventually exploded into California’s largest wildfire this year, my colleague Alex Wigglesworth reports. Alex also talked with a man whose family had just 10 minutes to flee the Salt fire, only to learn the next day their home was gone. In British Columbia, more than 180 fires were burning, NPR’s Jeannette Muhammad reported, including one that forced the evacuation of the village that broke Canada’s all-time temperature record last week.

Latinos are twice as likely to live in the areas most threatened by fires, according to a new analysis. Politico’s Zack Colman reports that many of them have been pushed into dangerous areas by high housing costs elsewhere — another reminder that housing and climate are closely intertwined. In a tangentially related story, my colleague Matt Pearce wrote about the (extremely bad) L.A. tradition of Fourth of July fireworks setting palm trees on fire. In addition to date palms not being native to L.A. and not providing shade as the planet heats up, Matt notes that Latino tree trimmers frequently die pruning them, which I didn’t know.

Advertisement

THE ENERGY TRANSITION

A first-of-its-kind battery-powered train was just tested from Barstow to Stockton. The technology could (eventually) play a role in reducing climate pollution from freight and passenger rail, The Times’ Ralph Vartabedian reports. Orange County, meanwhile, is finally getting its first light rail system. It’s only four miles long and avoids upscale areas, my colleague Hannah Fry reports. But it’s still a big deal for a county that’s gone on a freeway-building binge and shunned rail in recent decades.

A gas-fired power plant owned by AES Corp. in Huntington Beach was the only one of the four coastal gas plants that was fully available during last month’s heat wave. (Allen J. Schaben / Los Angeles Times)

Three of the four coastal gas plants that California allowed to keep operating past 2020 — precisely so they could help keep the lights on during a heat wave — weren’t fully available during last month’s heat wave. Politico’s Colby Bermel had the scoop, reporting that several gas units were out of commission in Long Beach, Oxnard and Redondo Beach. (See my piece from April on efforts to shut down the Redondo Beach plant.) In related news, a 100-megawatt battery system just debuted in Oxnard after activists defeated plans for a new gas-fired power plant there, Wes Woods II reports for the Ventura County Star.

General Motors is making a multimillion-dollar investment in a proposed lithium and geothermal energy project near the Salton Sea. The Desert Sun’s Janet Wilson has the details on GM’s investment in Controlled Thermal Resources. This is a huge deal for the dream of a “Lithium Valley” in California’s Imperial County, which could fuel domestic battery production and give California a 24/7 clean energy source. For background, see my piece from March on the race for “white gold” at the Salton Sea.

Advertisement

POLITICAL CLIMATE

President Biden’s choice to lead the U.S. Forest Service is Randy Moore. He’ll be the first Black American to run the agency, which is the country’s second-largest landowner, and confronting wildfires will be one of his most important jobs, Paul Rogers reports for the Mercury News. Moore currently heads the Forest Service’s Pacific Southwest regional office out of Vallejo, Calif.

The National Park Service calls Mt. Rushmore a “shrine of democracy.” But some Indigenous activists say it should serve as a monument to the history of genocide against Native Americans, with one member of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe saying it should “be turned into something like the United States Holocaust Museum,” Annette McGivney writes for the Guardian. In another complex Indigenous issue out of the Dakotas, the people of the Fort Berthold reservation produce huge amounts of oil, complicating the Biden administration’s plans to limit fossil fuel extraction, Matthew Brown and Felicia Fonseca report for the Associated Press.

The budget passed by California lawmakers would restore electric vehicle rebates that critics say mostly go to higher-income people who don’t need them. Equity-focused EV incentives will get less funding, the San Francisco Chronicle’s Dustin Gardiner reports. Supporters of the rebates say they’ve played an important role in driving demand for cleaner vehicles.

ONE MORE THING

A brown pelican injured by a fish net recuperates at Wetlands and Wildlife Care Center in Huntington Beach. (Irfan Khan / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

My colleague Leila Miller reported last month that 22 brown pelicans have been brought to a wildlife hospital in Orange County with severe wing fractures in recent months. Now she writes that the Animal Legal Defense Fund is offering a $5,000 reward for information on who might be responsible. It’s a disturbing story, to say the least. If you know something, say something.

We’ll be back in your inbox next week. If you enjoyed this newsletter, please consider forwarding it to your friends and colleagues.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the July 1, 2021, edition of Boiling Point, a weekly newsletter about climate change and the environment in California and the American West. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.

June has barely come to an end, and parts of California and the West are already suffering through unprecedented heat, punishing drought and rapidly spreading wildfire — a harrowing preview of life on a planet that is only getting more chaotic.

In Vancouver, police responded to 65 sudden deaths over four days as temperatures soared. A town even farther north obliterated Canada’s all-time temperature record with a 121-degree reading, which also would have shattered the record high in Las Vegas.

Portland broke its heat record three days in a row, ultimately reaching 116 degrees. In Seattle, where fewer than half of homes have air conditioning, the mercury hit 108 degrees, also an all-time high. There are at least 80 deaths being reported as potentially heat-related in the Pacific Northwest, and I’d be stunned if that number didn’t grow. Pay close attention to Spokane, in eastern Washington, where thousands of people lost power as the heat forced an electric utility to implement rolling blackouts.

Advertisement

It was so hot that roads buckled in Washington, and a Portland-area transit agency was forced to suspend light-rail service.

Then there are the fires. We’re not yet seeing the kinds of landscape-devouring, sky-turns-orange mega-blazes that made last summer so nightmarish, but we’re already ahead of last year’s pace in terms of acres burned in the West. In Northern California’s Siskiyou County, the lightning-sparked Lava fire forced thousands of people to evacuate and is growing. The Inyo Creek fire closed the Mt. Whitney trailhead, and the Willow fire in Los Padres National Forest, near Big Sur, led to this stunning photograph:

Captain Justin Grunewald of the Mill Creek Hotshots takes a short rest amid his battle against the Willow fire. (U.S. Forest Service)

The captain pictured is part of a hotshot crew. They’re the country’s most elite firefighting teams, but the federal government has had trouble keeping them staffed because pay is so low and the job is more grueling than ever. President Biden this week boosted firefighter pay to at least $15 an hour, up from as little as $13 today, my colleagues Chris Megerian and Anna M. Phillips report.

You probably don’t need me to tell you that climate change is the underlying condition connecting all these threads. It’s why so many scientists say we must rapidly move toward eliminating emissions from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas.

It’s also why fires, droughts and heat were on my mind as I explored a new analysis from the National Parks Conservation Assn., finding there are more than 31,000 “orphaned” oil and gas wells within 30 miles of national park sites nationwide.

These are wells that are no longer producing and yet haven’t been properly plugged, and whose operators are defunct or can’t be found, and thus can’t be forced to pay for cleanup. As The Times detailed in an investigation last year, California is littered with idle wells at risk of becoming orphaned, and cleaning them up could cost taxpayers billions of dollars. Left unplugged, they can spew planet-warming methane into the atmosphere, expose communities to toxic fumes and contaminate groundwater aquifers.

It’s no huge shock that many of these risky wells are near national park sites, considering how many park units there are — more than 400 overseen by the National Park Service, from name-brand parks such as Yosemite to national monuments, historic sites and scenic trails. Working with FracTracker Alliance, and using state-by-state orphaned-well data, the National Parks Conservation Assn. estimated there are 214,538 orphaned wells across the country, including 31,737 within 30 miles of a national park.

Advertisement

What really caught my eye was the park with the most risky wells nearby: Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area. I hike in the Santa Monica Mountains all the time, and I definitely wouldn’t have guessed there are 5,705 orphaned oil and gas wells within 30 miles — nearly twice as many as the park with the next most, Harry S Truman National Historic Site in Missouri.

The Santa Monicas are truly a national treasure, stretching from Point Mugu on the coast to the Hollywood Hills, and offering jutting sandstone cliffs, foggy ocean views and a feeling of immense wilderness just steps from a sprawling metropolis.

“People go to the Santa Monicas to get into nature, to get away from the normal urban ills that we deal with day to day,” said Dennis Arguelles, a senior program manager at the National Parks Conservation Assn. “But to think that so close to the mountains there are all these wells contributing to poor air quality in the region, contributing to climate change — it’s just a stark reminder that ... it’s hard to leave behind all the damage we’ve done to the environment over the decades.”

Here are some views from Nicholas Flat Trail, which I hiked two weeks ago:

Advertisement

The fog begins to clear as Nicholas Flat trail ascends from Leo Carrillo State Park into the Santa Monica Mountains in June 2021. (Sammy Roth / Los Angeles Times)

A view from Nicholas Flat trail in the Santa Monica Mountains. (Sammy Roth / Los Angeles Times)

National parks advocates worry that abandoned oil and gas wells could pollute air and water within parks and in surrounding towns. They also know that rising global temperatures are already beginning to decimate beloved landscapes, causing ice to melt in Glacier National Park, snowfall to plummet in Yellowstone and Joshua trees to start dying off in the park that bears their name.

The Santa Monica Mountains are no exception. A recent climate change planning document from the National Park Service features a photo of the burn scar from the 2018 Woolsey fire in the Santa Monicas, alongside a warning that, across the country, “it will not be possible to safeguard all park resources, processes, assets, and values in their current form or context over the long term.”

Advertisement

In addition to growing fire risk in the Santa Monicas, global warming could limit the range’s suitability for dozens of bird species and potentially harm plant life, mountain streams and natural ecosystems more broadly, according to the park service.

Here are the 10 national parks with the most orphaned oil and gas wells within 30 miles, per the conservation group’s analysis:

— Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area (California): 5,705

— Harry S Truman National Historic Site (Missouri): 2,962

— George Rogers Clark National Historic Park (Indiana): 2,873

— Channel Islands National Park (California): 1,920

— Scotts Bluff National Monument (Nebraska): 1,751

— President William Jefferson Clinton Birthplace Home National Historic Site (Arkansas): 1,588

— Theodore Roosevelt National Park (North Dakota): 1,585

— Mammoth Cave National Park (Kentucky): 1,313

— Fort Scott National Historic Site (Kansas): 1,189

— Big South Fork National River and Recreation Area (Tennessee): 1,187

You can scroll through an interactive map of parks and orphaned wells here. Zooming in on Southern California, it becomes clear why the Santa Monica Mountains top the list. The park is sprawling, and drawing a 30-mile buffer zone around it encompasses the entirety of Los Angeles, as well as the oil fields of Ventura County. If you ever need a reminder that L.A. is an oil town, this is it.

Advertisement

The remains of Southern California’s first commercial oil well, Pico No. 4, were moved from their original location years ago and reconstructed for posterity. (Glenn Koenig / Los Angeles Times)

America Fitzpatrick, energy program manager at the National Parks Conservation Assn., cautioned that the analysis is based on state-specific data that vary in quality, and that some states probably do a better job tracking abandoned wells than others. It’s also worth keeping in mind that in a place like Southern California, the freeway capital of the world, orphaned oil and gas wells are likely only a small contributor to air pollution and climate emissions.

Still, these abandoned wells are a problem worth tackling — and by some estimations, an economic opportunity.

Researchers from Columbia University and the think tank Resources for the Future found last year that the federal government could create as many as 120,000 jobs through a program to plug half a million orphaned wells, potentially keeping oil and gas workers employed as the fossil fuel industry shrinks. Some estimates of the total number of orphaned wells are much higher.

Advertisement

Colorado Sen. Michael Bennet reintroduced a bill last week that would put $8 billion toward cleaning up orphaned wells over the next decade and require oil and gas companies to set aside more money for cleanup before they’re allowed to drill.

“It’s really unfortunate that the American taxpayer has (had) to address the cleanup that these oil and gas companies should really be responsible for,” Fitzpatrick said. “But we do have this moment where we can provide for the cleanup of these wells, and also reform the system so we’re not continuing to dig ourselves into this hole.”

As for the Santa Monica Mountains, there are only a few orphaned wells within the park’s boundaries, per the interactive map. But in an interesting twist, the proposed Rim of the Valley expansion — which I wrote about last year, and is currently working its way through Congress — would add the site of Southern California’s first commercial oil well, known as Pico No. 4, to the park.

Whether that oil well ultimately serves as a monument to a long-gone era of fossil fuel extraction — or as a cruel reminder of our inability to save ourselves, and our parks, from a grim reality of worsening heat, drought and fire — is yet to be seen.

Advertisement

For now, here’s what else is happening around the West:

TOP STORIES

The Russian River, just north of drought-stricken Lake Mendocino in Ukiah, Calif. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Folks along California’s Russian River know climate change is worsening droughts, fires, floods and heat — and they’re determined to find a way to live with it. My colleagues Diana Marcum and Brian van der Brug paddled down the Russian River, producing powerful words and pictures about a region where residents are being asked to cut water use by 20% to 40%, and where as many as 2,300 wineries and farms may have their supplies cut off. It’s just one manifestation of a climate emergency in a state that could once again suffer its worst fire season on record, as The Times’ Faith E. Pinho and Alex Wigglesworth report.

President Biden and a bipartisan group of senators agreed on a nearly $1-trillion infrastructure deal. It includes a bunch of climate-related stuff, including $7.5 billion for electric car chargers, $49 billion for public transit and $55 billion to replace lead pipes and upgrade water systems — investments Biden is eager to highlight, my colleague Eli Stokols reports. But it’s still unclear whether the package will be approved — and even if it is, it’s a far cry from the much larger clean energy plan Biden originally proposed. The fate of ambitious climate action may rest in a separate bill that Democrats hope to pass without Republican votes.

Advertisement

It may be a while before we know whether saltwater intrusion from rising seas contributed to the horrifying Florida building collapse. But the disaster — more than 150 people are feared dead — has residents up and down the Sunshine State’s low-lying Atlantic shoreline nervous about what comes next as the ocean continues to rise, The Times’ Jenny Jarvie reports.

DROUGHT IN THE WEST

“Drought, The Everything Disaster.” So reads the headline of this Brett Walton piece for Circle of Blue, and I’m not sure truer words have ever been written. Drought is drinking water supplies contaminated by sediment flushed out of burned forests after brutal fires. It’s household wells going dry, and an entire town in the San Joaquin Valley going without running water during a heat wave. It’s a plague of voracious grasshoppers, and it’s rattlesnakes slithering into cities — just what we need now that rising temperatures have helped make California a hot spot for disease-carrying mosquitoes, as Times columnist David Lazarus writes.

In a tiny bit of good news, drought also means less polluted beaches in Southern California. My colleague Rosanna Xia wrote about Heal the Bay’s latest beach record card, which found a big reduction in pollution last summer — seemingly because there wasn’t much rain to flush trash, pesticides and bacteria to the ocean through storm drains. Heal the Bay also published its third annual River Report Card, which is a good resource to have on hand if you enjoy fishing, swimming or kayaking in local streams.

The U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear an an appeal filed by Imperial Valley farmer Mike Abatti in a dispute over who controls the largest share of Colorado River water in the American West. The high court’s decision means the publicly owned Imperial Irrigation District will continue to shepherd the region’s 3.1 million acre-feet, the Desert Sun’s Janet Wilson reports. I wrote last year about how the case could affect the 40 million people across seven states who depend on the Colorado.

Advertisement

THE ENERGY TRANSITION

The Chevron oil refinery under storm clouds in El Segundo, Calif. (Genaro Molina / Los Angeles Times)

Oil companies face growing pressure from investors to do more on climate — but whether they’re responding is another question. L.A. Times columnist Michael Hiltzik wrote about what investors are demanding, noting that 60% of Chevron shareholders voted for the company to “substantially” reduce its greenhouse gas emissions. A few weeks before that, an Exxon Mobil lobbyist acknowledged in a private meeting — which was actually a sting operation by Greenpeace UK — that the company is working to weaken federal climate action despite its public pledges of support, as the New York Times’ Hiroko Tabuchi reports.

Returning to abandoned oil and gas wells, an artificial island off the coast of Ventura County tells the story of how drilling companies can often walk away from huge liabilities. The Desert Sun’s Mark Olalde found that taxpayers have footed millions of dollars in offshore cleanup costs as a result of the island’s operator using bankruptcy to avoid paying the full bill.

California officials are ordering utilities to buy 11,500 megawatts of new clean power. That is a staggering amount, and it’s designed to help replace the Diablo Canyon nuclear reactors and several coastal gas plants, which I wrote about in May. Canary Media’s Jeff St. John notes that the requirement includes 1,000 megawatts of long-duration storage (which will make the Eagle Mountain pumped hydro folks happy) and 1,000 megawatts of 24/7 zero-carbon power (which will make the Imperial County geothermal folks happy). In Oregon, meanwhile, lawmakers passed a bill requiring the state’s major electric utilities to eliminate carbon emissions by 2040 — five years ahead of California’s timeline, as Dirk VanderHart reports for Oregon Public Broadcasting.

Advertisement

Newsletter Toward a more sustainable California Get Boiling Point, our newsletter exploring climate change, energy and the environment, and become part of the conversation — and the solution. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

POLITICAL CLIMATE

Are Republicans in Congress ready to get to work on climate? I’ve seen a bunch of headlines suggesting they are, spurred by the formation of a Conservative Climate Caucus with more than 60 members. But when methane rules largely supported by the oil industry came to a vote this week, exactly 12 House Republicans voted for them, per the AP’s Matthew Daly. And lest anyone get the idea that climate advocates are totally satisfied with the White House, the New York Times’ Hiroko Tabuchi writes that the Biden administration’s defense of the Line 3 pipeline in Minnesota, which is furiously opposed by local tribes, “has disappointed those who had hoped that the U.S. would finally start taking aggressive steps to ward off the worst effects of global warming.”

Of the nearly 60,000 properties that received federal grants to prepare for disasters over the last two-plus decades, just 48 were on tribal lands. That remarkable statistic comes from this investigation by Christopher Flavelle and Kalen Goodluck for the New York Times, who write that Native Americans were originally forced onto some of the country’s most undesirable lands by the federal government, and are now being displaced again, this time by climate change. In another challenge for tribes, my colleague Celina Tebor reports that Native American households are 19 times more likely than white households to lack indoor plumbing.

Toyota sided with President Trump against California in a dispute over fuel efficiency rules — and now it’s the largest corporate donor to Republicans who voted to overturn the election. More details here from Times columnist Michael Hiltzik.

Advertisement

ONE MORE THING

Two things you definitely shouldn’t do:

— Set off illegal fireworks, especially when fire risk is so high. Hayley Smith reports that L.A.'s city attorney, Mike Feuer, is trying to crack down on illegal firework sales. Let’s all make his job easier.

— Chop down Joshua trees without permission. Lila Seidman writes that a Morongo Basin couple has been fined $18,000 for bulldozing and burying 36 Joshua trees to make way for a new house. Joshua trees are currently a candidate for California Endangered Species Act protection, and it’s illegal to cut them down without a permit.

Stay safe, everybody.

Advertisement

We’ll be back in your inbox next week. If you enjoyed this newsletter, please consider forwarding it to your friends and colleagues.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the June 24, 2021, edition of Boiling Point, a weekly newsletter about climate change and the environment in California and the American West. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.

Hundreds of feet above the ground, suspended by ropes and battered by powerful winds, Matthew Kelly is living his best life.

Kelly is a wind turbine technician, and my colleague Brian van der Brug recently took pictures of him repairing a fiberglass blade at a wind farm in California’s Montezuma Hills, at the northeastern end of the Bay Area. Brian’s pictures are worth a thousand words and then some. Here’s a shot of Kelly perched on the damaged blade, putting his rock climbing background to good use:

Rope Partner’s Matthew Kelly repairs a 148-foot-long fiberglass turbine blade. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

And here’s Kelly lowering himself to the ground after 10 hours suspended from the top of the 262-foot tower:

Matthew Kelly lowers himself to the ground from a wind turbine. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

These photos took my breath away. They also made me think about two topics I’ve covered recently: The future of energy jobs as the United States transitions from fossil fuels to renewables, and how wind and solar farms can dramatically reshape landscapes.

Let’s start with jobs.

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that wind turbine service technician will be the country’s fastest-growing occupation this decade, with employment expected to increase by 61%, from 7,000 to 11,300 jobs. (Solar panel installer is third on the fastest-growth list, with a projected 51% increase in jobs.) Median pay for a wind turbine technician is $56,230 per year, or $27.03 per hour — well above the national median wage of $41,950, or $20.17 per hour, according to the federal agency.

Kelly works for Rope Partner, which is based in Santa Cruz and was founded by rock climber Chris Bley in 2001. Bley was inspired by a chance encounter in Joshua Tree National Park with two German climbers who made a living scaling construction sites and churches that needed repairs. His timing couldn’t have been better, given the rapid growth of the American wind energy industry.

Kelly found his way to the “rope access” profession in 2018, after graduating college with a degree in environmental science and policy. Here he is again on that blade at the Shiloh II wind farm, which is owned by San Diego-based EDF Renewables, a subsidiary of the French electric utility EDF. You can see the repair-in-process Kelly has been working on below his feet:

Matthew Kelly adjusts a positioning ring line. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

Rope Partner has a roster of about 100 technicians, according to the company’s vice president of business development, Lucas Llado. Many of them are climbers, rafters, skiers and other adventurous outdoors types who spend part of the year scaling wind turbines. The winter months are the slowest for repairs, with jobs picking up as the weather improves in the spring.

“These guys are nomadic by nature,” Llado said. “It’s kind of a lifestyle alignment that allows these technicians to make a living working off of rope, and also getting to see parts of the country or the world, wherever we’re working.”

At the high end, Llado said, top-level technicians can make six-figure salaries, often without a college education. And the work is crucial to the clean energy transition. Wind turbine blades erode over time, reducing power production. They can crack from the stress they’re under, or suffer damage during transportation. Lightning strikes can also require fixes.

“It’s like your car. You need to maintain it to perform,” Llado said. “You can do it preemptively and avoid a large bill or wait for something to break.”

Advertisement

That’s where Kelly and his coworkers come in. Here he is climbing a ladder within a 262-foot tower at Shiloh II. Once he emerges at the top, he’ll rappel down the length of the 148-foot blade in need of repair:

Matthew Kelly climbs a ladder inside a 262-foot-high tower at the Shiloh II wind farm. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Here he is alongside the fiberglass blade, preparing to receive a bucket of tools and supplies being lifted from below:

Matthew Kelly guides a bucket of tools and supplies. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

And here’s his colleague Lloyd Hardin down on the ground, helping to manage the ropes as the bucket gets lifted up:

Rope Partner’s Lloyd Hardin helps manage the ropes. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Kelly told me this is his “fourth season” scaling wind turbines, and it’s safe to say he enjoys his job. He likes being able to work half the year and “explore other things” the rest of the time. He’s also a fan of the sweeping views from the tops of the towers.

“It’s pretty great to turn my back or turn my head and have a little lunch break right up in the air,” he said. “It’s a pretty unparalleled situation. And just being at the whims of the element — the winds, the rains, the cold, the hot.”

Advertisement

I recently wrote in this newsletter about the aesthetics of wind and solar farms, and talking with Kelly brought me back to that debate. Are large-scale renewable energy facilities a beautiful sign of a better future, or ugly eyesores on otherwise gorgeous landscapes? And will opposition to these facilities based on their visual impacts slow the transition away from fossil fuels?

Admiring Brian’s photos, it’s hard for me not to think the wind machines look nice — especially with sheep in the foreground, and later with the blood moon lunar eclipse in the background:

Sheep graze at the Shiloh II wind farm. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Turbines spin as the blood moon lunar eclipse sets behind the towers of the Shiloh II wind farm on May 26, 2021. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

That said, I live in a big city, not a rural town where people expect uninterrupted viewsheds. There’s an incredible diversity of opinions on this topic, as the responses I received to last month’s newsletter showed. I shared many of the responses in this Twitter thread, from the emailer who compared opposing renewable energy over visual impacts to “complaining that your tea has gone cold while the Titanic sinks” to the many readers who argued that solar panels should go on rooftops, not wild landscapes.

“A core part of being an environmentalist is preserving the natural beauty of the scenic landscape for present and future generations,” one person wrote. “I’d like to see the reaction of all the environmentalists if they proposed building wind turbines and small solar panel farms in the San Francisco Bay and the surrounding hillsides of Marin County and Berkeley.”

Several emailers pointed out that those suffering the most from energy production aren’t the largely white towns seeing solar farms and wind turbines go up, but rather communities of color breathing polluted air and drinking contaminated water from the extraction and processing of coal, oil and gas. Those fossil fuel facilities aren’t known for enhancing the scenery, either.

“Who consulted poor communities about their aesthetics before smelly particulate-spewing coal plants were sited?” one emailer asked. “We white folks really are snowflakes who can’t stand any change and can’t sacrifice one iota for the common good. Sad.”

Advertisement

A rural road runs near the Shiloh II wind farm. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Several readers sounded off on ocean wind turbines — a technology Kelly is familiar with, having scaled towers at America’s first offshore wind farm, in the Atlantic waters off Rhode Island. At least one reader, an avid hiker, was feeling conflicted.

“I firmly support wind and solar development, and the sight of wind and solar in most environments fills me with joy as I realize that we are getting closer to minimizing carbon outputs,” they wrote. “However, the thought of seeing turbines off the coast.... I am TRYING to embrace that for the greater good, but am having trouble doing so.”

The sun sets behind wind turbines at the Shiloh II wind farm. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

What will the clean energy future look like? Nobody knows for sure. But we do know there are tens of thousands of wind turbines in the United States, and many tens of thousands more planned. Brian’s photos are a good starting point to try to wrap our heads around the visual changes on the horizon, and the jobs behind the transition.

Here’s what else is happening around the West:

TOP STORIES

Native Americans across the West are seeing their cultures imperiled by climate-fueled drought — and sometimes by efforts to fight climate change. My colleague Anita Chabria went to the Klamath Basin, on the California-Oregon border, to talk with tribal members who fear not only for endangered suckerfish but also for their own safety as anti-government extremists threaten to take water for farmers by force; here’s her story. The Nevada Independent’s Daniel Rothberg, meanwhile, wrote about the Indigenous communities whose sources of food and traditional medicine are threatened by a proposed lithium mine.

Last week’s record-breaking heat wave was especially dangerous for outdoor workers, people without homes, and seniors and others who can’t afford air conditioning. The New York Times’ Jack Healy wrote a gripping account of a 115-degree day in Phoenix, focused on construction workers putting their lives at risk and rising housing costs that are pushing people to the streets. The Guardian’s Gabrielle Canon wrote a similar piece about Las Vegas, noting that many of Clark County’s cooling centers close after dark even when overnight temperatures hardly drop — a serious concern in the concrete oasis, and in other big cities.

Advertisement

A stunning investigation finds Gov. Gavin Newsom grossly exaggerated California’s progress on wildfire prevention work ahead of the worst fire year on record. Newsom claimed the state treated 90,000 acres with fuel breaks and prescribed burns as part of 35 “priority projects,” but the actual number was 11,399 acres, CapRadio’s Scott Rodd found. Additionally, the number of acres treated by Cal Fire fell by half in 2020. In the meantime, fires are burning across the West; two national forests in Arizona are closed completely to human visitors, and the Mt. Whitney trailhead is under evacuation orders, The Times’ Hayley Smith reports.

DROUGHT IN THE WEST

Diamond Valley Lake in Riverside County. (Robert Gauthier / Los Angeles Times)

Despite exceptionally dry conditions across the region, Southern California doesn’t appear to be at risk of running out of water anytime soon. Why? In great part because of Diamond Valley Lake, which was built 21 years ago and is still mostly full. My colleague Louis Sahagún wrote about the “inland ocean” that is the Metropolitan Water District’s largest reservoir, with gorgeous photos by Robert Gauthier. And here’s a big-picture Western drought and climate update from The Times’ Celina Tebor.

Native vegetation has declined by 37% across nearly 5,000 square miles of Southern California desert since the 1980s. That’s the finding of a study out of UC Irvine focused on the Sonoran Desert, and it’s especially alarming because desert plants are some of the world’s hardiest. Rising temperatures and reduced rainfall are taking a toll, the Desert Sun’s Janet Wilson reports.

Advertisement

Resolving long-term tensions on the Colorado River won’t be possible without long-term fixes for the Salton Sea, a shrinking lake in the Southern California desert. State officials have focused on patch-up projects to limit public health and environmental damage, but they’re also studying elaborate proposals to pipe in water from Mexico’s Sea of Cortez or the Pacific Ocean, the Desert Sun’s Mark Olalde reports. Whether any of those proposals is actually feasible is a matter of fierce debate.

POLITICAL CLIMATE

We’ve got a nominee for Bureau of Reclamation commissioner. President Biden has tapped Camille Touton to lead the agency, which oversees water and energy systems in the West, the Associated Press reports. She’s a Nevadan who has worked on water for congressional committees and in the Obama administration, and she’ll be a key player on the Colorado River if confirmed.

Gov. Gavin Newsom’s administration has again delayed public health rules meant to protect people living near oil and gas wells. Newsom originally ordered California’s oil regulator, CalGEM, to draft such rules by December 2020. On Dec. 31, CalGEM promised the regulation would be drafted by spring. Now it’s summer, and the agency still has nothing to show, the AP’s Kathleen Ronayne reports. Environmental justice activists continue to demand buffer zones between fossil fuel extraction and homes.

President Biden endorsed a goal of protecting 30% of America’s lands and waters by 2030. But when his Interior Department released the “Conserving and Restoring America the Beautiful” report last month, it suggested lands being farmed, grazed and logged could be counted toward the 30% target, frustrating some conservationists, Wufei Yu reports for High Country News.

Advertisement

Newsletter Toward a more sustainable California Get Boiling Point, our newsletter exploring climate change, energy and the environment, and become part of the conversation — and the solution. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

THE ENERGY TRANSITION

Scenes like this, of an empty southbound 110 Freeway at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, are no more. (Robert Gauthier / Los Angeles Times)

L.A. traffic is roaring back post-pandemic, bringing with it more lung-damaging pollution and planet-warming emissions. Traffic isn’t quite as bad as it was before, but it may be getting there, even with a public transit expansion in the works, The Times’ Hayley Smith reports. Hayley also covered the groundbreaking for a transit project that will finally link Los Angeles International Airport to the region’s growing rail network. Having driven to the airport in bumper-to-bumper traffic, and taken the shuttle bus, and used rideshare apps, and asked friends and family to drop me off... I personally cannot wait to take the train to LAX.

Wind farms off the California coast would reduce the area available to commercial fishers. That doesn’t necessarily mean they won’t be able to catch as much, but it does mean their costs might rise, Mackenzie Shuman reports for the San Luis Obispo Tribune. This is just one example of the kind of conflict that can slow or derail renewable energy. In Anaheim Hills, for instance, homeowners are fighting a small solar farm over property value concerns, per the Orange County Register’s Alicia Robinson.

Advertisement

I reported last year that Culver City officials were working on a plan to phase out fossil fuel extraction from their portion of the Inglewood Oil Field. By a 4-1 vote last week, the City Council is now moving forward with that plan, which would require all oil drilling to end by 2026, the Culver City Observer reports. Don’t be surprised if the company that owns the oil field files a lawsuit.

ONE MORE THING

Disney has used characters from Disney+ shows, including “Loki,” in promotional campaigns for Hyundai. (Photo illustration by Nicole Vas / Los Angeles Times; David Zalubowski / Associated Press; Marvel Studios)

I couldn’t help but note that the plot of last week’s episode of “Loki,” the new Marvel TV show on Disney+ — spoiler alert if you haven’t watched yet — hinged on there being repeated climate-related disasters from 2047-2051. Not what I expected!

I also couldn’t help but think back to this piece by my colleague Ryan Faughnder about Disney partnering with Hyundai to produce ads — starring the character Loki — for a compact SUV that runs on oil. You know, one of the major drivers of the climate crisis.

Advertisement

To be fair, Hyundai recently unveiled a plug-in hybrid version of its Tucson compact SUV. And I wrote earlier this year about Disney using “Star Wars” and other popular stories to help Chevrolet sell electric cars. Still, there’s a cognitive dissonance on climate that’s not hard to grasp, and that’s not limited to Disney. For many companies, the gap between words and action is yawning.

Last week’s newsletter referred to the proposed Thacker Pass lithium mine in Nevada facing a setback related to the Endangered Species Act. The proposed mine in question was Rhyolite Ridge.

We’ll be back in your inbox next week. If you enjoyed this newsletter, please consider forwarding it to your friends and colleagues.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is not a drill. California is poised to lose the Western monarch butterfly and its mysterious annual migration from the continent’s Western regions to the coastal areas between Baja and Mendocino.

The list for blame is long — habitat destruction, insecticides, herbicides and, yes, good intentions, because if you’ve ever planted a showy orange milkweed in Southern California with the goal of helping the monarch, consider yourself part of the problem.

So why should we care? First off, caterpillars are a critical food source for most songbirds, which rely heavily on the insects to feed their young. Second, butterflies, like bees, are important pollinators. Adult monarchs sip nectar from many blossoms, and as they flit among flowers, they are also spreading pollen, helping the plants produce seeds, which also feed birds and other wildlife and, of course, help the plant reproduce.

And third, butterflies are just plain beautiful, especially the monarch with its orange wings rimmed in black with white dots. Can our world really afford to lose something so miraculous?

Advertisement

Fortunately, there are things SoCal gardeners and plant parents can do to help monarchs survive, such as eliminating any use of pesticides or herbicides on their property — but first a little background:

Eastern monarch butterflies are well known for their famous migration from the Eastern and Central regions of the United States to Mexico each winter, where they congregate by the thousands to mate and stay warm. Their numbers have dropped significantly, from 384 million in 1996 to 60 million in 2019.

But their cousins, the Western monarchs, have seen a more terrible decline.

Western monarch numbers have been steadily dropping for decades, from 1.2 million in 1997 to 30,000 in 2019, but the most recent results from the 24th Western Monarch Thanksgiving Count are staggering — just 1,914 butterflies total, down from the millions that used to migrate from the Pacific Northwest and Central California to overwinter along the coast from Mendocino in Northern California to Ensenada in Baja California.

One of the most disturbing finds from last fall came after wildfire ripped through the area around Pacific Grove, a.k.a. Butterfly Town, USA, in the midst of traditional migration season. During the Thanksgiving count, not a single monarch was found in Pacific Grove, a tourist mecca for people who come to marvel at the swarms of Western monarchs that congregate during the winter, clinging to eucalyptus and pine branches to find protection from the cold and wind.

Western monarch butterflies clustering at Pacific Grove Monarch Butterfly Sanctuary in 2016, when 17,100 monarchs were counted at the sanctuary. (Connie Masotti)

Monarch numbers have been dwindling for decades in Pacific Grove, said Caleb Schneider, the city’s environmental programs manager and manager of the Pacific Grove Monarch Butterfly Sanctuary, and he believes the ill-timed fires contributed to last year’s decline.

Advertisement

“In 1997 there were 45,000 butterflies at our sanctuary, and now there’s zero,” Schneider said. “I’ve been here six years, and I never got a chance to see what butterfly clustering in Pacific Grove really looked like — where historically the branches were getting ripped off the trees because there were so many butterflies. I’m watching the extinction of a natural phenomenon.”

Lifestyle No yard? No problem. Help save the world by growing native plants in pots The new wave in landscaping is building habitat by growing native plants, but you don’t need a yard to promote biodiversity. Hummingbirds, butterflies, bees and other pollinators are happy to dine on native plants growing on balconies or patios.

The U.S Fish and Wildlife Service announced in December that while the monarch butterfly meets the criteria to be listed as an endangered species, it isn’t being added to the list because the agency must first complete plans to save 161 other endangered species. Basically, the agency is required to address those other species first, and it doesn’t have resources to do more.

The agency will review the monarch’s status each year “until it is no longer a candidate,” the announcement said. “Our conservation goal is to improve monarch populations, and we encourage everyone to join the effort.”

Advertisement

Bottom line: Right now, folks, it’s up to us.

Western monarch butterflies clustering on a pine bough at Pacific Grove Monarch Butterfly Sanctuary in 2016. (Connie Masotti)

Good news: There are things we can do as individuals, from creating habitats in our yards and windowsills to lobbying our leaders.

Frustrating news: You may need to rip out the milkweed plants you thought were helping.

Advertisement

Here’s why:

Monarch caterpillars eat only one plant — milkweed — and many Californians have planted the showy tropical milkweed (Asclepias curassavica) to help. Indeed, most SoCal nurseries offer only tropical milkweed, a handsome non-native plant with feathery purplish-green leaves and deep orange flowers.

But well-meaning gardeners who plant this kind of milkweed are actually harming, not helping.

Advertisement

The problem is that tropical milkweed doesn’t die back during the winter in temperate climates like Southern California’s, according to the Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation. That permits protozoa parasites (Ophryocystis elektroscirrha, or OE) to multiply on the plants, which are eaten by the caterpillars when they hatch.

When the caterpillars consume too many OE parasites, scientists believe it sickens and weakens adult monarchs, messing up their migration patterns, mating success, flight ability and lifespan. And having milkweed that blooms through the winter also disrupts the butterfly’s migration patterns, experts say.

In other words, those evergreen tropical milkweed do more harm than good in Southern California, says Ron Vanderhoff, general manager of Roger’s Gardens nursery in Corona del Mar. That’s why the nursery stopped selling tropical milkweed a couple of years ago.

Moreover, the nursery has started a milkweed exchange program. When native milkweeds are available in the spring, Roger’s Gardens will provide a free native milkweed plant to customers who bring in a tropical milkweed they’ve pulled from their yard (only one free plant per person).

Advertisement

Vanderhoff said he understands how hard it is to pull out established plants that seem to be helping butterflies. “Monarchs are a very emotional topic with many people, and there is a large and vocal audience of folks who think they are doing the right thing,” he wrote in an email to The Times. “It’s a lot like feeding ducks a bag of breadcrumbs every Tuesday at the local park. The ducks love it and it ‘feels’ like you are really doing a loving and wonderful thing, but you are not. You are harming the ducks.”

If you can’t bear to pull out your tropical milkweed, cut it down to the ground around Thanksgiving and keep it trimmed low until April to kill any overwintering parasites, said Travis Longcore, urban ecologist and science director for the Urban Wildlands Group.

And don’t despair. Here are six things individuals can do to help monarchs survive and thrive. For more information, check out the Xerces Society’s guide “Western Monarchs Are in Trouble. This Is How You Can Help.”

Advertisement

1. Grow native milkweed

Check with garden centers, especially native plant nurseries, to see when their native milkweed goes on sale — generally in April. Check the Western Monarch Milkweed Mapper and plant varieties native to your area. You don’t need a yard to do this. You can do this in pots on a balcony, window sill or front porch. The most prominent native varieties sold in Southern California include narrow-leaf milkweed (Asclepias fascicularis), with clusters of tiny pink flowers, California milkweed (Asclepias californica), with purplish flower clusters, and woollypod milkweed (Asclepias eriocarpa), with hairy pinkish or ivory buds. You can also purchase seed and sow in a prepared garden bed or container in late winter or very early spring, especially before a rain, since milkweed germinates poorly when it’s hot. Sowing tip: Mix these small seeds with sand to make them easier to disperse.

2. Make sure it’s organic

Anyone who’s grown milkweed knows the plants are a magnet for bright orange aphids, so much so that some wholesale growers use systemic pesticides to produce lovely bug-free plants, said Vanderhoff, general manager at Roger’s Gardens. The problem is that homeowners take their plants home, unaware they’re laced with pesticides that will be toxic to any caterpillars that eat them. “There is no way to look at a plant in a nursery and tell if it’s been treated or not,” he said, so seek out organically grown plants. (P.S. The aphids may look unsightly, but they won’t really hurt the plant or the caterpillars, experts say. If they bother you, wash them off with a strong stream of water or — deep breath — smoosh them with gloved fingers.)

Advertisement

3. Lobby your garden center

If enough people start asking for native milkweed and stop buying the tropical variety, nurseries will respond. Just remember you can’t buy native milkweed in the winter because it’s dormant, so ask for seed too.

4. Plant lots of nectar flowers

Unlike the one-plant caterpillar, adult monarchs happily sip the nectar from many flowers. The Xerces Society has created a list of monarch nectar plants for Southern California that includes drought-tolerant natives attractive to many butterflies, such as black sage, bluedicks, sunflowers, seaside fleabane and the dainty fairy-cap flowers of manzanita. Another good choice: native buckwheats, whose flowers support a number of pollinators. And again, you don’t need a yard to do this. A window box of lovely blooms can do the trick.

Advertisement

5. Don’t try to “rescue” monarchs

Scientists are still trying to understand how monarchs know when and where to migrate each year, but they have found that butterflies raised indoors seem to lose their innate navigation system and can’t migrate properly, said Urban Wildlands’ Longcore. So if you raise monarchs, put the enclosure outdoors. The same applies to moving monarchs from one location to another in the hopes of helping their survival, Schneider said. “We’ve had people literally pick up monarchs in the Bay Area and drive them down to our sanctuary [in Pacific Grove] to release them, but by manually migrating them you might be doing more harm than good,” he said, by introducing diseases to the wild population and further disorienting the butterflies.

6. Don’t use pesticides or herbicides

Milkweed used to grow wild in agricultural areas or alongside roads, but the use of herbicides to kill weeds has destroyed much of the monarch’s food source, said Longcore. The advent of genetically modified crops that can withstand herbicides has made it easier for farmers to get rid of weeds, but it’s also wiped out beneficial “weeds” that support pollinators such as butterflies and bees. Longcore said insecticides such as neonicotinoids — designed to kill sap-sucking insects such as aphids — appear harmful to butterflies and other pollinators, since the toxic residue accumulates in the pollen and nectar of treated plants. The best action, he said, is to avoid using these chemicals in our yards and to lobby our representatives and government agencies to phase out their use because they are devastating the beneficial insects that pollinate our food.

Advertisement

“We’re poisoning our insects away, but the system doesn’t work without them,” Schneider said. “Unless you want to teach hundreds of thousands of kindergartners to go around with paintbrushes and sample pollen from one flower to another, it’s not going to work.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Native plants are the new darlings of the landscaping world, which is shifting its focus from ornamentals to building habitat to help hummingbirds, butterflies, bees and other beneficial pollinators find the food they need to survive.

But — news flash!—you don’t need a yard or vast tracts of land to promote biodiversity. Pollinators are more than happy to dine on native plants growing in pots on balconies or patios.



For the record: An earlier version of this story failed to credit photographer Genny Arnold for the image of the wildflower mix on the balcony. An earlier version also used an image of a miniature Joshua tree (Sedum multiceps) instead of the kind of Joshua tree (Yucca brevifiolia) found in California deserts.

If every balcony in L.A. sprouted at least one native plant, “we could create green buildings supporting the entire food chain in a very small space,” said Evan Meyer, executive director of the Theodore Payne Foundation for Wild Flowers & Native Plants in Sun Valley.

Even a pot of California buckwheat, with its showy white flowers and abundant seed pods, can provide lots of food for beneficial insects and birds. “It does great in containers,” Meyer said. “It takes full sun.”

Advertisement

Urban development has destroyed much of the habitat and food sources for native animals that evolved to eat and live among particular native plants. But Meyer said studies have shown that once you introduce native plants into a city matrix, “all of a sudden the pollinators will come. We’re talking about charming insects — not mosquitos or cockroaches who don’t need help living in an urban environment — but butterflies and native bees who are not only amazing pollinators but beautiful in their own right. And they support the food chain by feeding birds and larger animals.”

The Theodore Payne Foundation is one of several nurseries devoted to growing native plants and rebuilding habitat in Southern California. Its nursery has even developed wildflower seeds meant to be sown and grown in balcony pots.

Growing even a few native plants in pots “is really a way for individuals to participate in restoring nature,” Meyer said. “Our mission is to create conditions where nonhuman life can thrive along with human life in our city. We know there’s a path to get there, and this is the path.”

Late fall and early winter are the best times to start growing native plants in Southern California because the cooler, wetter months give them time to get established before things get too hot.

Before you start, here are a few important tips:

Consider your space

Some native plants require full sun, others prefer full or partial shade. Figure out how much sun your balcony or patio receives, then take that information with you to the nursery. For instance, white sage is a total sun lover, but hummingbird sage, its sweetly fragrant cousin, prefers shade.

Choose the correct soil

You don’t want to plant in a richly amended organic soil. Native plants are used to dry, nutrient-poor soil that drains quickly, said Flora Ito, Theodore Payne’s nursery manager. A soil with rich organic material holds on to its moisture for a long time. That’s fine for some garden plants, but it promotes root rot in native plants. Theodore Payne makes its own soil mix for native plants, but any nursery should sell good potting soil for cactuses and succulents that crumbles easily and drains quickly.

Pot size matters

Many native plants send out deep roots, so a deep pot will be your goal. When plants are young, you want to start with a pot about double the depth and width of its original container. Otherwise you have too much soil that never dries, encouraging root rot, Ito said. You could move a plant in a 4-inch pot into a gallon-size pot, Ito said, but nothing much bigger until its roots are pushing against the sides of the pot. Transplanting in the fall or early winter is best, when the cool weather will make it easier for the plant to adjust to its new home.

Advertisement

Spare the fertilizer

Native plants in the ground don’t need any fertilizer besides what they get from decomposing leaves, etc. But because nutrients are leached out of pots with repeated watering, Ito recommends a light application of fertilizer, diluted to quarter strength, once or twice a year at the beginning of the growing season. Do not fertilize after transplanting or when plants are dormant.

Water with care

Most California native plants don’t need much water in the ground because they have evolved to live in dry conditions. But plants in pots dry out more rapidly, so they will need regular watering. Ito recommends using your fingers to probe the soil to check for moisture. It’s OK for the top inch or two to be dry, but the soil should be moist farther down. When you water, soak the soil until water drains from the bottom. Never let the plant sit in water, which can cause it to “drown.” Ito recommends adding pebbles, rocks, wood mulch or even corks to the top of the soil to help it retain moisture and add color and interest to the overall display.

Want to know more?

Visit nurseries (or their websites) that specialize in selling native plants. There are several in Southern California besides Theodore Payne, such as the California Botanic Garden in Claremont, Tree of Life in San Juan Capistrano and Artemisia Nursery in Los Angeles.

Here are Theodore Payne’s picks for 12 native plants that can be grown easily in containers. But Meyer and Ito also encourage experimentation. For instance, Ito said, white sage will grow in pots, but it can also get very large, so be prepared to keep it trimmed. When possible, we’ve paired young plants with older ones in these photos, so you can see how they grow.

Advertisement

Hummingbird sage (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

Hummingbird sage (Salvia spathacea) is fragrant and low growing, with spikes of deep magenta flowers that bloom from March to May. The plant prefers shade or partial shade.

St. Catherine’s lace (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

St. Catherine’s lace (Eriogonum giganteum) is a rare, endangered buckwheat with gray-green leaves and clusters of large, creamy pink blooms that turn to rust as they age. It grows quickly in full sun.

Advertisement

Giant chalk dudleya, a..k.a. Britton’s dudleya (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

Giant chalk Dudleya, a.k.a. Britton’s Dudleya (Dudleya brittonii ) is a large, showy succulent with chalky blue leaves tipped in pink and large clusters of yellow flowers. Prefers part shade; keep out of direct afternoon sun.

California buckwheat (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

California buckwheat (Eriogonum fasciculatum) is a sun-loving shrub with clusters of white and pink flowers that are highly attractive to butterflies and native bees.

Advertisement

‘Emerald Carpet’ manzanita (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

‘Emerald Carpet’ manzanita (Arctostaphylos ‘Emerald Carpet’) is a low-growing shrub with glossy green leaves, red stems and white flowers that bloom in January and February. It prefers sun in coastal areas but part shade in inland locations with intense afternoon sun.

Chaparral yucca (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

Chaparral yucca (Hesperoyucca whipplei) is a round succulent with spiky, silver-green leaves and a tall, cream-colored bloom that looks like a feather duster. It grows in full sun.

Advertisement

Wildflower balcony mix (Genny Arnold)

Wildflower balcony mix is designed by the Theodore Payne Foundation to be grown in pots 12 to 14 inches wide and at least 6 inches deep. A packet includes at least five flowers — red maids, foothill poppy, bird’s-eye gilia, goldfields and baby blue eyes. Grow in sun or part shade.

Shaw’s agave (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

Shaw’s agave (Agave shawii) is a dramatic succulent with textured, deep-green, serrated leaves edged with sharp magenta “teeth.” It blooms with red and yellow flowers on a tall stalk and likes full sun.

Advertisement

Catalina currant (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

Catalina currant (Ribes viburnifolium) is a bright green shrub with red stems, a citrus fragrance and reddish flowers that attract butterflies. It prefers part shade.

Joshua tree (Maria Astrid Gonzalez)

Joshua tree (Yucca brevifolia) is a slow-growing succulent with spiky leaves ending in sharp, dark points. The plant prefers full sun and grows to a tree in the wild, but its size is stunted in containers. It produces creamy conical blooms.

Advertisement

Island snapdragon (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

Island snapdragon (Gambelia speciosa) is an easy-to-grow perennial with vine-like branches, bright green foliage and deep-throated red flowers that attract hummingbirds and other pollinators. Can grow in full sun to part shade.

Oregon grape (Marie Astrid Gonzalez)

Oregon grape (Berberis aquifolium) has deep green, holly-shaped leaves that turn purple and red in the winter, as well as clusters of yellow flowers and purple berries that look like grapes. The plant grows in sun and full and partial shade.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Imagine kale that doesn’t taste like a punishment for something you did in a previous life. Envision leafy greens that aren’t limp from their journey to your plate. Anticipate the intense flavor of just-picked herbs that kick up your latest culinary creation a notch or three.

Then consider the possibility that such advancements will play a role in altering the face of agriculture, becoming sources of flavorful, fresh produce in “food deserts” and making farm-to-table restaurant cuisine possible because produce is grown on the premises, even in urban areas.

This is the potential and the promise of hydroponics (a term that also includes aeroponics and aquaponics systems), the soil-less cultivation of crops in controlled environments. It’s a growing industry — $9.5 billion in sales is expected to nearly double in the next five years — that stems, in part, from concerns about growing enough food to feed a worldwide population expected to hit 10 billion in the next 30 years.

The growing method isn’t new. The Hanging Gardens of Babylon, dating to the 6th century B.C., may be a precursor to today’s hydroponics, if they existed. (Historians disagree on that as well as where the gardens were.) Then, as now, technology is a key to giving growers, not Mother Nature, more control over production.

Advertisement

Advertisement

The size of today’s systems varies. They might be as simple and compact as an in-home system that’s about the size of a couple of loaves of bread stacked on top of each other. Some of the growing popularity of those units may be connected to the pandemic, according to Paul Rabaut, director of marketing for AeroGarden, which produces systems for in-home crop production.

“As soon as the pandemic was declared in mid-March and the quarantine took effect, we saw immediate growth spikes, unlike anything we’d ever seen before,” he said. Those spikes resulted, he said, from the need for entertainment beyond Netflix and jigsaw puzzles, a desire to minimize trips to the grocery store and the promise of teachable moments for kids now schooled at home.

At the other end of the spectrum are large urban farms. Plenty, for instance, has a South San Francisco hydroponics growing facility where a million plant sites produce crops, some of which are sold through area grocery stores. The company hopes to open a farm in Compton this year that’s expected to be about the size of a big-box store and will grow the equivalent of 700 acres of food.

Plenty scientists, engineers and growers at work in their South San Francisco hydroponics growing facility. (Plenty)

“It’s a super vibrant community with a rich agricultural history,” Nate Storey, a cofounder of the vertical farming company, said of the Compton facility. “It also happens to be a food desert.

“Americans eat only about 30% of what they should be eating as far as fresh foods,” he said. “We started this company because we realized the world needed more fresh fruits and vegetables.”

Advertisement

As different as hydroponics growing systems are, most have this in common: The plants thrive because of the nutrients they receive and the consistency of the environment and can produce crops of fresh leafy greens and other vegetables, various herbs and sometimes fruits.

Such controlled-environment agriculture is part of the larger trend of urban farms, recognized last year by the May opening of the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production. The farms’ proximity to larger markets means produce can be delivered quickly to consumers, whether they’re grocery shoppers, airline passengers, students or communities in need or restaurants, an industry that has been devastated in the last year.

Today’s micro- and mega-farms have taken on increased importance, partly because of world hunger, which will increase as the population grows.

Add increasing urbanization that is gobbling available agricultural land in many countries, mix in climate change and the scramble for water to grow crops — as much as 70% of the world’s water is used for agriculture — and the planet may be at a tipping point.

No single change in the approach to feeding the world will shift the balance by itself.

Hydroponic farming is “a solution,” said Alexander Olesen, a cofounder of Babylon Microfarms in Virginia, which uses its small growing units to help corporate cafeterias, senior living centers, hotels and resorts provide fresh produce, “but they are not the solution.”

Babylon Microfarms in Virginia provides fresh produce for corporate cafeterias, senior living centers, hotels and resorts. (Babylon Micro-Farms Inc.)

For one thing, not all crops are viable. Nearly everything can be grown using hydroponics but some crops, such as wheat, some root vegetables (including carrots, beets and onions), and melons and vining crops, are impractical. The easiest crops to grow: leafy greens, including spinach and lettuce; microgreens; herbs such as basil, cilantro, oregano and marjoram; some vegetables, such as green peppers and cucumbers; and certain fruits, including tomatoes and strawberries.

Although hydroponic farming means crops grow faster — thus increasing output — the process comes with a significant carbon footprint, according to “The Promise of Urban Agriculture,” a report by the Department of Agriculture/Agricultural Marketing Service and Cornell University Small Farms Program. Lights generate heat, which then must be removed by cooling. Lettuce grown in traditional greenhouses is far cheaper, the report says.

If these crops can be grown traditionally — in a garden or in a commercial field — why bother with growing systems that are less intuitive than planting seeds, watering and harvesting? Among the reasons:

Advertisement

Climate control: Such indoor agriculture generally means consistent light, temperatures, nutrients and moisture for crops no longer held hostage by nature’s cycles of drought, storms and seasons.

Environmental friendliness: Pesticides generally aren’t used and thus create no harmful runoff, unlike field-grown crops.

Productivity: Leafy greens tend to be cool-season crops, but in a controlled environment, it’s an any-time-of-year crop without the worry of depleting the soil because of overuse because, of course, there is no soil.

Use of space: AeroFarms, a former steel mill in Newark, N.J., boasts that it can produce 2 million pounds of food each year in its 70,000 square feet, or about 1.3 acres. California’s Monterey County, by contrast, uses nearly 59,000 acres — out of 24.3 million acres statewide of ranches and farms — to grow its No. 1 crop, which is leaf lettuce valued at $840.6 million, its 2019 crop report showed.

AeroFarms in Newark, N.J. boasts it can produce 2 million pounds of food each year at its 70,000-square-foot facility in Newark, N.J. (AeroFarms)

Food safety: In E. coli outbreaks in late October and early November of last year, fingers pointed to romaine lettuce that sickened consumers in 19 states, including California. In November and December of 2019, three other outbreaks of the bacterial illness were traced to California’s Salinas Valley. A Food and Drug Administration study, released in May with results from that trio of outbreaks, “suggest(s) that a potential contributing factor has been the proximity of cattle,” whose feces often contain the bacteria and can find its way into water systems.

That’s less of an issue with crops in controlled-environment agriculture, said Alex Tyink, president of Fork Farms of Green Bay, Wis., which produces growing systems suitable for homes and schools.

“In the field, you can’t control what goes where,” he said, including wildlife, livestock or even birds that may find their way into an open growing area.

And as for workers, “The human safety approaches that we take [with] people in our farm make it hard for them to contaminate even if they wanted to,” he said.

“Before people walk in, they gown up, put their hair in nets, beards in nets, put on eye covering and bootie covers for their shoes, then walk through a water bath.”

Advertisement

::

None of the statistics matter, though, unless the quality of soil-less crops matches or exceeds that produced traditionally.

Not a contest, new-age growers say. Flavors of leafy greens, for example, tend to be more detectable and, in some cases, more intense.

So much so that when AeroFarms introduced its baby kale in a New York grocery store, Marc Oshima, a cofounder and chief marketing officer, says he saw a woman do what he called a “happy dance” when she sampled this superfood. The version that AeroFarms produces is lighter and has a “sweet finish,” Oshima said, compared with adult kale grown in traditional ways that some say make the superfood fibrous and bitter.

Storey, the cofounder of Plenty, judged his Crispy Lettuce mix successful when his children got into a “rolling-on-the-floor fistfight” over a package of it.

Some credit for that flavor can be attributed to the time from harvest to market. Arizona and California are the top lettuce producers in the U.S., but by the time the greens get to other parts of the country, they have lost some of their oomph. AeroFarms and Plenty, for instance, distribute their commercial products to nearby grocery stores in New York and the Bay Area, respectively, where their time to market is significantly reduced.

And when was the last time you had a salad on an airplane flight that didn’t taste like water gone bad? Before the pandemic constricted airline traffic, AeroFarms was growing greens to be served to passengers on Singapore Airlines flights from New York’s JFK. The fresh vegetables traveled just five miles from the warehouse to Singapore’s catering kitchen, a new twist on farm to (tray) tabletop.

Because the turnaround from harvest to market is shorter, Storey said his products often last several weeks when refrigerated.

Leafy green vegetables grown by AeroFarms. (Emily Hawkes)

And perhaps best of all? Growers say that because the greens have a flavor — some peppery, some like mustard — salad dressing may be optional, perhaps dispossessed in favor of the flavor of naked greens.

Getting consumers interested in vegetables and incorporating those foods into their diets is especially important, growers say, because of skyrocketing rates of obesity, diabetes and heart disease, especially for populations in food deserts.

Advertisement

Tyink grew up in rural Wisconsin but moved to New York to pursue a career in opera. By chance, he sampled some produce from a rooftop garden that he called life-altering. “My eating habits changed because [the greens] changed my emotional connection to food,” he said.

His exposure to homelessness and poverty on the streets of New York also focused his attention on what people consume and why. Price and convenience often drive bad food decisions and unhealthy habits.

Young farmers in training can help change those habits; some of Fork Farms’ systems are used in schools and other nonprofit organizations for children. Kids become accidental ambassadors for the nutrient-rich crops, and the fruits of their labors go to school cafeterias or to local food distribution centers in their communities.

“I really think when you lose fresh, locally produced food, you lose something of [the] culture,” said Lee Altier, professor of horticulture at Chico State University, where he has been working with students to develop its aquaponics program. “I think it is so important when communities have an awareness … that this is for their social integrity.”

As for the future, much still needs to be done to put such products in the right hands at the right time. That requires investment, innovation and technology to perfect the systems and keep costs under control, never mind persuading buyers and consumers that food that’s healthy can also be satisfying.

Is it a puzzle worth solving? Storey thinks so. “I want to live in a world where [we create] delicious, amazing things,” he said, “knowing that they are not coming at a cost that we don’t want to pay.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The German government agreed Tuesday to provide $68 billion to help rebuild regions hit by devastating floods last month.

Chancellor Angela Merkel and the heads of Germany’s 16 states approved the state flood aid package, which still needs parliament’s endorsement.

“This is significantly more than we had for previous floods,” Merkel told reporters in Berlin.

More than 180 people died in Germany and hundreds more were injured in the July 14-15 floods, which also claimed lives in neighboring Belgium. Heavy rainfall turned small streams into raging torrents, sweeping away houses, bridges and cars.

Advertisement

A United Nations science panel released a report this week predicting that such extreme weather events will become more frequent as the planet heats up further.

The cost of the German aid package — agreed just weeks before the country’s national election on Sept. 26 — will be shared evenly by the federal government and states, with the latter’s payments spread over 30 years.

The two sides also agreed to establish a nationwide siren network and introduce a system that will allow authorities to send push messages to people’s cellphones to warn them of possible disasters. Prosecutors are investigating whether officials failed to adequately alert residents on the night of the floods.

The government will also examine the possibility of introducing a compulsory insurance for floods and other weather-related damages.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After Pacific Gas & Electric equipment sparked a massive fire that burned much of Paradise, Calif., and killed 86 people in 2018, the utility vowed a safety campaign aimed at preventing similar disasters.

PG&E said it would bury some power lines snaking through Northern California forest land, significantly reducing the risk of wildfires caused when winds damage equipment. Among the power lines set to be buried was a 10-mile stretch that may have started this year’s destructive Dixie fire, now the second largest in California history.



For the record: An earlier version of this article said the U.S. Forest Service approved the line burial project in July 2020 and the California Department of Transportation granted a permit in October. Those approvals were for work on a different section of the line.

The situation underscores the rising scrutiny PG&E is facing this summer as a string of huge fires across Northern California have raged amid hot, dry conditions. PG&E power lines might have been responsible for at least three of those fires, according to documents the utility has filed with state regulators and a federal court. Legal liability from the devastation in Paradise and other wildfires pushed PG&E into bankruptcy and brought vows that the utility would fix its power grid. But the new fires have brought new outrage and demonstrate that there is still much work to do.

The Dixie fire has now burned more than 480,000 acres in four counties, destroying over 400 homes and commercial buildings

Advertisement

The line burial project remains in progress, with no estimated completion date, said James Noonan, spokesman for PG&E.

“This project will require CalTrans and other governmental agency permits, FERC review, and other land/environmental dependencies,” Noonan wrote in an email (FERC is the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission). “The final completion date for this project is dependent upon the timely fulfilment of these various requirements.”

PG&E’s Wildfire Risk Governance Steering Committee had approved the work in January after considering public safety power shutoff decisions, ingress and egress issues, and tree-fall risk along the power line, which was considered moderate, Noonan said.

“We are taking steps every day to improve the safety and reliability of our electric system,” Noonan wrote. “This includes working with customers and communities to manage trees and other vegetation located near power lines that could cause a wildfire or power outage.”

On July 13, a Douglas fir fell onto the line, and two fuses were blown, according to documents PG&E filed in federal court. In the filings, the utility described a series of mishaps and delays that resulted in an employee not reaching the site until about 10 hours later, by which time a 600- to 800-square-foot fire had ignited.

Before the fire, there were no issues with the equipment on the span of line that had been identified but not fixed, nor were there trees that had been targeted for trimming or removal on which the work hadn’t yet been performed, Noonan said. A vegetation management inspection took place Jan. 14 but did not flag the tree that’s believed to have fallen on the line as needing work, he said.

Advertisement

PG&E had also inspected the two poles between which the tree was found leaning May 13 and found nothing that required corrective action, Noonan said.

Nine days after the Dixie fire started, PG&E equipment might have ignited the Fly fire nearly 30 miles to the northeast — disturbances were recorded on a circuit around the same time the fire broke out, and a tree was later found resting on a conductor, the utility said in a report filed with the California Public Utilities Commission. That fire grew to more than 4,300 acres before merging with the Dixie fire, which on Sunday leapfrogged the 2018 Mendocino Complex fire to become the second largest in California history.

District attorneys in two counties — Butte and Plumas — are investigating PG&E for potential criminal liability in the fire.

“It’s literally torn our county in two,” said Plumas County Dist. Atty. David Hollister, who has partnered with the office of Butte County Dist. Atty. Mike Ramsey and the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection to conduct the investigation. “We’ve lost most of the northern part of our county.”

Advertisement

Investigators have visited the origin sites of both the Dixie and Fly fires to gather PG&E equipment and trees that might have fallen into the lines for a forensic examination, Ramsey said. They are examining whether adequate vegetation management was done there and whether equipment was maintained, as well as the amount of time it took the utility to realize there was a problem with the line after a disturbance was recorded, he said.

“As we all know, that canyon where the Camp fire started is extraordinarily dry,” Ramsey said. “We know; they should know.”

The Dixie fire started in the same canyon, he noted.

Ramsey’s office previously secured a deal in which PG&E pleaded guilty to 84 counts of manslaughter and one count of reckless arson in connection with the Camp fire, which destroyed the town of Paradise. The utility received the maximum fine of $3.5 million, which Ramsey called “woefully underwhelming.”

Advertisement

“But more important was the fact that they were held responsible for the first time for killing folks,” he said, noting that PG&E had been previously prosecuted for regulatory violations when its equipment caused deaths.

Although no deaths have yet been reported in the Dixie fire, prosecutors are exploring other avenues as well, they said, noting that Section 452 of the California Penal Code sets forth crimes concerning reckless burning.

But with the fire just 21% contained and authorities still scrambling to make sure everyone is safe, it remains early in the investigation.

Advertisement

Tehama County Dist. Atty. Matthew Rogers said his office is not investigating PG&E at this time. Lassen County Dist. Atty. Susan Rios said she may ask to join the investigation later if the county sustains losses attributable to the fire but noted that there hasn’t been a damage assessment conducted there yet.

“They’re just trying to save lives and save towns,” said Rios, whose own home remained under an evacuation warning Monday.

The events come as the latest blow to the beleaguered utility, which is also facing a criminal investigation for its role in sparking last year’s Zogg fire. That fire killed four people, destroyed more than 200 homes and burned 56,000 acres.

In addition, a federal judge last week ordered PG&E to explain its role in potentially igniting the Fly fire, and to provide more information about the Dixie fire, including drone video taken the day it ignited.

Advertisement

A drone seen flying over the fire in the hours after it started is rumored to have been operated by PG&E or one of its contractors, Ramsey said. The sighting grounded firefighting aircraft for the evening, he said.

“The air assets had it pretty well blocked in with retardant at less than one or two acres,” Ramsey said. “The drone showed up, and those air assets had to be taken out, and that night it burned through the retardant lines. And now we have the monster that we have.”

Records show that all the drones authorized to fly on PG&E’s behalf on July 13 in Butte or Plumas counties had completed their flights by about 12:30 p.m., Noonan said.

U.S. District Judge William Alsup, who is overseeing the utility’s criminal probation stemming from an explosion of one of its Bay Area gas lines that killed eight people in 2010, also ordered PG&E to provide a list by Aug. 16 of all fires its equipment has started this season.

Advertisement

The utility has already disclosed that its equipment might have ignited a third fire: the Bader fire, which burned a quarter-acre in Magalia on July 14. One stem of a two-stemmed black oak was found leaning on a power line that had snapped, according to court documents.

And in April, Sonoma County Dist. Atty. Jill Ravitch charged PG&E with five felony and 28 misdemeanor counts over its role in the Kincade fire, which badly injured six firefighters in 2019.

PG&E is an investor-owned utility that is overseen by the California Public Utilities Commission. It is required to make certain disclosures as a result of its criminal probation, as well as a 2018 law passed by the state Legislature that requires utilities to submit annual plans to mitigate the risk of wildfire in their service territories and file quarterly updates on their progress.

PG&E has consistently failed to meet targets it has committed to in those disclosures for things like vegetation management and equipment inspections, advocates say.

Advertisement

“The challenge is that every time we see a third-party inspection report, either from the Public Utilities Commission or the federal court monitor, we see that over and over again, PG&E has failed to trim the vegetation in the highest fire risk zones like they were supposed to, that they failed to inspect all of their transmission towers and equipment they were supposed to,” said Mark Toney, executive director of the Utility Reform Network, a San Francisco-based consumer advocacy group. “It’s very concerning that we have so much money being spent and not the kind of results that people expect and deserve.”

The California Public Advocates Office, a consumer watchdog agency, identified so many deficiencies in PG&E’s wildfire mitigation plan this year that in June it submitted a response urging the PUC to issue a finding that the utility was no longer in good standing for the remainder of 2021.

Two years ago, the Legislature adopted a bill that includes a provision laying out a six-step process that will result in PG&E being converted from a private corporation to a quasi-public entity called Golden State Power if it is unable to meet safety standards. PG&E is currently at step one.

“The higher the PUC moves them up, the greater the chance that PG&E will cease to exist as we know it,” Toney said. “I wouldn’t be surprised to see the PUC looking at moving PG&E up that ladder, given the more recent events, particularly after Cal Fire issues its report.”

Advertisement

Public utilities differ from investor-owned utilities mainly in that they are not-for-profit so they’re beholden only to customers, said Barry Moline, executive director of the California Municipal Utilities Assn., a trade group for public utilities.

At the same time, he said, it’s important to note that just because PG&E’s equipment might have sparked a wildfire doesn’t mean the utility is necessarily at fault.

“While I think everybody is eager to jump on PG&E, I think that it’s really difficult to understand the exact circumstances without an investigation and trying to figure out what happened,” he said. “I believe that PG&E is highly focused on maintaining their system and doing what they can to minimize any ignition of a fire.”

Should it be unable to get a handle on wildfire mitigation, PG&E could also lose the confidence of its investors, in addition to potentially losing the franchise to provide power, Toney said.

Advertisement

“If they get further downgrades in their credit, and end up at junk bond status, it’s always possible they could end up in bankruptcy again,” he said. “That would be a terrible outcome for everyone involved, quite frankly.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Problems at a Los Angeles sewage treatment plant that caused a massive spill into Santa Monica Bay last month have severely reduced the region’s water recycling ability, forcing officials to divert millions of gallons of clean drinking water at a time of worsening drought conditions, The Times has learned.

Even as California Gov. Gavin Newsom urges a voluntary 15% reduction in water usage, the Hyperion Water Reclamation Plant‘s inability to fully treat sewage has forced local officials to divert drinking water to uses normally served by recycled water. Among those is an effort to protect coastal aquifers from seawater contamination, as well as the irrigation of parks, cemeteries and golf courses across southwest Los Angeles County.

The sudden loss of millions of gallons of recycled water has alarmed experts and raised new questions about the plant’s ability to function in a warming climate.

“This is water we can’t afford to spare,” said Loyola Marymount University professor emeritus John Dorsey, a wastewater treatment and watershed management researcher.

Advertisement

He and others describe the events at Hyperion on July 11 and 12 as a bad domino effect: widespread — and unexplained — flooding at the facility triggered one of the largest sewage spills in Santa Monica Bay in a decade and knocked out pumps and electrical equipment, causing the plant to continue discharging millions of gallons of partially treated wastewater into the ocean as well as creating problems with water recycling efforts.

“The chain reaction that occurred that day and the longevity of the impacts have been stunning,” said Mark Gold, an adjunct professor with UCLA’s Institute of the Environment & Sustainability.

Each day, the Hyperion plant sends a portion of its treated wastewater to a nearby facility operated by the West Basin Municipal Water District, where crews further treat the water so it can be used for irrigation and industry — a process critical to extending the region’s water supply.

But because of damage to key sewage treatment equipment, the Hyperion facility has been producing wastewater with excessive levels of solid particles, in violation of its environmental permit, records show.

As a result, West Basin crews have used millions of gallons of drinking water each day since July 15 — enough to supply about 4,000 average households for a year — to blend with recycled water, according to interviews with top officials from the agency.

Timeyin Dafeta, Hyperion’s executive plant manager, said the plant could resume normal operations before the end of the month.

Advertisement

“We want to learn from this and get to a better place,” Dafeta told reporters as he led a recent tour of the facility.

After the flooding, sludge built up for three weeks in the primary treatment tanks that hold tens of millions of gallons of wastewater, resulting in foul odors that led to headaches, burning eyes and skin rashes for neighbors in El Segundo, as well as causing the plant to violate its environmental permit, according to Dafeta.

Records show that the plant continues to violate permit requirements for solid particles and oxygen levels in its wastewater.

The latest figures for wastewater discharge show that the plant was meeting its permit requirements for solids that settle at the bottom of the water. However, the most recent average weekly level for solids suspended in the water, posted Saturday, was still more than four times above the allowable limit, according to the records on the Hyperion website.

Advertisement

The Hyperion Water Reclamation Plant suffered a damaging flood of raw sewage last month. (Gary Coronado / Los Angeles Times)

The solid particle levels have been the main problem for West Basin, which provides drinking water and recycled water to 17 cities and unincorporated areas in the county.

The wholesaler purchases wastewater from Hyperion and operates a pumping station at the plant, directing the water through a 3-mile pipe to its Edward C. Little Water Recycling Facility in El Segundo.

Last year at this time, West Basin was pumping approximately 38 million gallons a day from Hyperion, but the diminished quality of the wastewater has required additional treatment measures, forcing the agency to cut back to about 13 million gallons daily since July 15, according to West Basin officials.

Advertisement

West Basin crews have had to use more chemicals to treat the water and remove sediment, but that has created problems with turbidity, or water clarity, said Barkev Meserlian, executive manager of engineering and operations for the water district.

Last summer, an average of three to four dump trucks a day hauled away solids removed from the wastewater at the West Basin recycling plant. Currently, six truckloads a day are taking away solids, even though crews are recycling about one-third the amount of Hyperion wastewater, according to officials with West Basin.

“It’s been tough. It’s been challenging,” Meserlian said.

Advertisement

The complications, he said, have resulted in the West Basin district repeatedly violating its permit level for turbidity since July 30.

The agency began relying on drinking water around the same time it declared a level-one water shortage, urging customers to voluntarily conserve water because of the increasing severity of the drought.

Acting General Manager E.J. Caldwell said the West Basin district has had no choice but to purchase millions of gallons of drinking water to blend with its recycled water — costing the agency nearly $500,000.

“At this point,” Caldwell said, “we need to do what needs to be done.”

Advertisement

As a result of the poor quality of the Hyperion wastewater, West Basin has stopped using it to produce millions of gallons of purified, or drinking-quality, water needed for a seawater barrier project operated by Los Angeles County — substituting non-recycled water instead.

High-pressure pumps inject the purified water into the ground along the coastline, stretching roughly from El Segundo to the Palos Verdes Peninsula. The injected water creates a barrier that prevents salt water from seeping into a huge aquifer, according to water officials. County officials say they have used about 260 million gallons of drinking water to replace the recycled water.

Timeyin Dafeta, executive manager of the Hyperion Water Reclamation Plant, points to a series of eight filter screens that became clogged during a flood of raw sewage last month. (Jason Armond / Los Angeles Times)

Even though a month has passed since the Hyperion incident, sanitation officials have been unable to determine the cause of a sudden and unexpected deluge of sewage, which triggered a massive failure of eight huge bar screens — each 22 feet tall and 9 feet wide — that rake the incoming sewage and remove materials such as plastics, paper and other objects.

Advertisement

The breakdown resulted in sewage flooding about half of the plant, which sits on about 145 acres in Playa del Rey, across from Dockweiler Beach.

Crews scrambled for their lives as the sewage water overran the building that houses the bar screens and flooded other buildings, including a two-story pumping structure that filled with sewage water.

To avoid a much larger environmental disaster, officials say, sanitation crews directed about 17 million gallons of raw sewage through a 1-mile pipe into the waters off Dockweiler and El Segundo beaches during an emergency operation that lasted about 12 hours.

Sanitation officials said Hyperion is capable of handling more than three times the 260 million gallons of sewage that flowed into the plant the day of the flooding. Officials also note on the Hyperion website that the screening bars have removed a bowling ball, a 17-foot utility pole and even a motorcycle.

Advertisement

Experts say one of the most troubling aspects is that the plant was overwhelmed on a warm summer afternoon when sewage flows were low.

The breakdown raises questions about whether the facility will be able to handle deluges resulting from heavy downpours, which are expected to increase as climate change continues to alter weather patterns, experts say.

In the past five years, the city has invested $1.2 billion in improving the entire sewage treatment system and more than $550,000 to upgrade the Hyperion plant, according to sanitation officials. The bar screens that failed were installed just two years ago.

Gold of UCLA said it’s difficult to understand why the flooding occurred, given the upgrades to the system.

Advertisement

“What happened at that facility was just an absolute utter shock to me,” he said.

Sanitation officials initially told The Times that flooding was caused by construction material, including concrete and wood, but they said in a statement this week that “the majority of the materials could be characterized as trash.”

Traci Minamide, chief operating officer for the city’s Sanitation and Environment Department, said crews have been inspecting hundreds of maintenance holes along Los Angeles’ 6,700 miles of sewage lines.

Using cameras, the crews are trying to find out what caused the flood of large debris, said Minamide. She added that the city is hiring an outside firm to assist with the investigation and prepare a report in the next several months.

Advertisement

“Hopefully we’ll get something that will clue us in,” Minamide said.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@People headed to cooling centers Wednesday as the Pacific Northwest began sweltering under another major, multiday heat wave just over a month after record-shattering hot weather killed hundreds of the region’s most vulnerable people.

Temperatures soared to 95 degrees by midafternoon in Portland. In a “worst-case scenario,” the temperature could reach as high as 111 in some parts of western Oregon this week before a weekend cool-down, the National Weather Service said. It’s more likely temperatures will rise to 100 or above for three consecutive days, peaking around 105 on Thursday.

Sizzling weather also was expected in other parts of the country. The weather service said heat advisories and warnings would be in effect from the Midwest to the Northeast and mid-Atlantic through at least Friday.

The high temperatures in Portland, part of a usually temperate region, would break records this week if the late June heat wave had not done so already, meteorologist Tyler Kranz said. Seattle will be cooler than Portland, with temperatures in the mid-90s, but it still has a chance to break records, and many people there, as in Oregon, don’t have air conditioning.

Advertisement

The forecast was hotter than for Phoenix, a desert city notorious for its blistering summertime temperatures.

“We’ll often hear people say, ‘Who cares if it’s 106 or 108? It gets this hot in Arizona all the time.’ Well, people in Arizona have air conditioning, and here in the Pacific Northwest, a lot of people don’t,” Kranz said. “You can’t really compare us to the desert Southwest.”

People began coming into a 24-hour cooling center in North Portland before it opened Wednesday. Volunteers and county employees set up cots and stacked hundreds of bottles of water in the air-conditioned center in a vacant building.

The first few people in were experiencing homelessness, a population vulnerable to extreme heat. Among them was December Snedecor, who slept two nights in the same center in June when temperatures reached 116.

She said she planned to sleep there again this week because the heat in her tent was unbearable.

“I poured water over myself a lot. It was up in the teens, hundred-and-something heat. It made me dizzy. It was not good,” Snedecor said of the June heat. “I’ve just got to stay cool. I don’t want to die.”

Gov. Kate Brown has declared a state of emergency over the heat and activated an emergency operations center, citing the potential for disruptions to the power grid and transportation. Besides opening cooling centers, city and county governments are extending public library hours and waiving bus fare for those headed to cooling centers. A 24-hour statewide help line will direct callers to the nearest cooling shelter and offer safety tips.

Emergency officials have sent alerts to phones, said Dan Douthit, spokesman for the Portland Bureau of Emergency Management.

Advertisement

“We don’t know exactly how hot it will get,” he said, “but we’re planning for a worst-case scenario.”

The back-to-back heat waves, coupled with a summer that’s been exceptionally warm and dry overall, are pummeling a region where summer highs usually drift into the 70s or 80s. Both the heat and a historic drought across the American West reflect climate change that makes weather more extreme in the historically temperate region.

The June heat in Oregon, Washington and Canada’s British Columbia contributed to the deaths of hundreds of people and was a wake-up call for what’s ahead in a warming world. It was virtually impossible without human-caused climate change, a scientific analysis found.

Advertisement

In Oregon, officials have released the names of 96 people who died of heat-related illness, and the hot weather was being investigated as a possible cause in many more deaths. Washington state reported more than 100 heat deaths, and officials in British Columbia said hundreds of “sudden and unexpected deaths” were likely due to the soaring temperatures.

The toll exposed huge blind spots in emergency planning in a region unaccustomed to dealing with such high temperatures, said Vivek Shandas, a professor of climate adaptation at Portland State University.

Most of those who died in Oregon were older, homebound and socially isolated, and many were unable, or unwilling, to get to cooling centers.

Advertisement

The call center designed to provide information about cooling centers was unstaffed during part of the peak heat, and hundreds of callers got stuck in a voicemail menu that didn’t include a prompt for heat-related help. Portland’s famed light-rail train also shut down to reduce strain on the power grid, eliminating a transportation option for low-income residents seeking relief.

This time, local and state officials have added more cooling centers and included a prompt in the call center voicemail.

“We knew a week in advance. What would happen if we knew an earthquake was going to hit us a week in advance?” Shandas said. “That’s the kind of thinking we need to be aligned with.”

Even younger residents struggled with the heat in June and were dreading this week’s sweltering temperatures.

Advertisement

Katherine Morgan, 27, has no air-conditioning in her third-floor apartment and can’t afford a window unit on the money she makes working at a bookstore and as a hostess at a brewery.

She’ll have to walk to work Thursday, the day when temperatures could again soar.

“All my friends and I knew that climate change was real,” Morgan said, “but it’s getting really scary because it was gradually getting hot — and it suddenly got really hot, really fast.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Another heat record has fallen at a resort town on Lake Tahoe, marking the 13th time since mid-June that the community has tied or set a new high.

The temperature reached 90 degrees Thursday in South Lake Tahoe, Calif., which sits at an elevation of 6,237 feet on the Nevada line.

That topped the previous record of 89 degrees set in 1990, the National Weather Service in Reno said Friday.

Scientists say climate change has made the Western United States warmer and drier in the last 30 years, and it will keep making the weather more extreme as the Earth continues to warm.

Advertisement

U.S. weather officials announced Friday that July was the hottest month on Earth in 142 years of record-keeping.

As extreme heat waves struck parts of the United States and Europe, the globe averaged 62.07 degrees Fahrenheit last month, beating the previous record set in July 2016 and tied in 2019 and 2020, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said. The margin was just 0.02 degree.

The last seven Julys, from 2015 to 2021, have been the hottest seven Julys on record, said NOAA climatologist Ahira Sánchez-Lugo. Last month was 1.67 degrees warmer than the 20th century average for the month.

At South Lake Tahoe, the monthly average temperature of 60.8 degrees as 5.5 degrees hotter than normal for July.

South Lake Tahoe tied or set new records on five of six days from July 7 to July 12.

The nine new, outright records set there since mid-June began June 17, when the high of 91 degrees smashed the previous mark of 85 degrees set in 1985.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Earth sizzled in July and became the hottest month in 142 years of recordkeeping, U.S. weather officials announced Friday.

As extreme heat waves struck parts of the United States and Europe, the globe averaged 62.07 degrees Fahrenheit (16.73 degrees Celsius) last month, beating the previous record set in July 2016 and tied again in 2019 and 2020, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The margin was just .02 degrees (.01 Celsius).

The last seven Julys, from 2015 to 2021, have been the hottest seven Julys on record, said NOAA climatologist Ahira Sanchez-Lugo. Last month was 1.67 degrees (0.93 degrees Celsius) warmer than the 20th century average for the month.

“In this case first place is the worst place to be,” NOAA Administrator Rick Spinrad said in a statement. “This new record adds to the disturbing and disruptive path that climate change has set for the globe.”

Advertisement

Newsletter Record heat. Raging fires. What are the solutions? Get Boiling Point, our newsletter about climate change, the environment and building a more sustainable California. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

“This is climate change,” said Pennsylvania State University climate scientist Michael Mann. “It is an exclamation mark on a summer of unprecedented heat, drought, wildfires and flooding.”

Earlier this week, a prestigious United Nations science panel warned of worsening climate change caused by the burning of coal, oil and natural gas and other human activity.

This map from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration shows how much temperatures in July varied from the historical average. (NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information via Associated Press)

Warming on land in western North America and in parts of Europe and Asia really drove the record-setting heat, Sanchez-Lugo said. While the worldwide temperature was barely higher than the record, what shattered it was land temperature over the Northern Hemisphere, she said.

Northern Hemisphere temperatures were a third of a degree (0.19 degrees Celsius) higher than the previous record set in July 2012. For temperature records, that’s “a wide margin,” Sanchez-Lugo said.

July is the hottest month of the year for the globe, so this is also the hottest month on record.

Advertisement

One factor helping the world bake this summer is a natural weather cycle called the Arctic Oscillation. It’s sort of a cousin to El Niño, and in its positive phase, it’s associated with more warming, the NOAA climatologist said.

Even with a scorching July and a nasty June, this year so far is only the sixth warmest on record. That’s mostly because 2021 started out cooler due to a La Niña cooling of the central Pacific that often reduces the global temperature average, Sanchez-Lugo said.

“One month by itself does not say much, but that this was a La Niña year and we still had the warmest temperatures on record ... fits with the pattern of what we have been seeing for most of the last decade now,” said University of Illinois meteorology professor Donald Wuebbles.

The world set a record in July, but the United States only tied for its 13th hottest July on record.

Advertisement

Even though California, Nevada, Oregon and Washington had their hottest Julys, slightly cooler than normal months in Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Arkansas, Missouri, Alabama, Maine, Vermont and New Hampshire kept the nation from approaching record heat levels.

The last time the globe had a July cooler than the 20th century average was in 1976, which was also the last year the globe was cooler than that normal.

“So if you’re younger than 45 you haven’t seen a year (or July) where the mean temperature of the planet was cooler than the 20th century average,” said Princeton University climate scientist Gabriel Vecchi.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The death toll from floods and mudslides in northern Turkey rose to at least 38 on Friday, officials said, as emergency crews searched collapsed buildings, swamped homes and submerged basements for more victims and survivors. An opposition politician said more than 300 people may be unaccounted for.

Torrential rains that pounded the Black Sea coastal provinces of Bartin, Kastamonu, Sinop and Samsun on Wednesday caused the flooding that demolished homes and bridges and swept away cars. More than 1,700 people were evacuated across the region, some lifted from rooftops by helicopters, and many were being temporarily housed in student dormitories.

Health Minister Fahrettin Koca announced on Twitter late Friday that 32 people died in Kastamonu and six in Sinop.

In Kastamonu, a stream burst its banks and inundated the town of Bozkurt. Raging floodwaters demolished one waterfront building and severely damaged two neighboring buildings. A number of bodies washed up on the Black Sea shore, Halk TV reported, airing footage of people carrying a body bag on a beach in an unidentified province.

Advertisement

The floods struck on the heels of wildfires in southern Turkey that devastated forest lands in the seaside provinces of Mugla and Antalya that are popular with tourists. At least eight people died and thousands of residents were forced to flee.

Scientists say there is little doubt that climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas is driving more extreme events, such as heat waves, droughts, wildfires, floods and storms. Such calamities are expected to happen more frequently as the planet warms.

Hasan Baltaci, an opposition party lawmaker who represents Kastamonu, told Halk TV that residents had contacted Turkey’s Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency, or AFAD, seeking information about 329 people feared missing. He cautioned that some of the names could be duplicates and that others could be of people who were unable to contact loved ones.

The missing include 12-year-old twin sisters and their grandparents, who were trapped inside the eight-story building that collapsed in Bozkurt. Emergency crews were seen sifting through the rubble searching for survivors.

The girls’ mother, Arzu Yucel, told the DHA news agency that she had left the apartment building after authorities advised residents to move their vehicles to higher ground. When she returned, water surrounded the building and prevented her from entering. From another building, she watched her daughters wave at her.

“We spoke by phone. They waved from the balcony. They said, ‘Don’t worry, Mommy, we are fine,’” Yucel said. “They told us ‘Move your cars higher.’ They didn’t say, ‘Save your lives, save your children.’ I could have gotten them out of there.”

Speaking in Bozkurt late Thursday, Interior Minister Suleyman Soylu described the scenes as “the most severe flood disaster I have seen.” On Wednesday, he said, flood waters reached 10 to 13 feet high in some areas.

Advertisement

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who canceled celebrations marking his ruling party’s 20th anniversary, visited the area on Friday and promised to reconstruct demolished homes, roads and bridges.

“With God’s permission, we will overcome this disaster as well. We will do whatever it takes as a state ... and hopefully, we will rise from our ashes,” Erdogan said.

The Turkish leader referred to the recent wildfires and floods that happened elsewhere.

Advertisement

“Like many parts of the world, our country has been struggling with natural disasters for a while. It’s the same in America, Canada, Germany and other parts of Europe,” Erdogan said. “Our hope is to escape these disasters with the least damage possible.”

Bozkurt resident Yilmaz Ersevenli told NTV that he left his house to move his car to a safe area as the floodwaters began to rise but soon got swept away. He said he managed to save himself by holding onto a tree that had also washed away.

“I nearly lost my life trying to save my car,” he said.

In Bartin province, at least 13 people were injured when a section of a bridge caved in. AFAD said 10 people are currently hospitalized.

Advertisement

In total, five bridges collapsed in the floods while two others were damaged, AFAD said. Dozens of villages are still without power and several roads remain blocked. Helicopters were evacuating villagers Friday from areas where there was no access by road.

Erdogan said Thursday that at least 4,500 personnel, 19 helicopters and 24 boats were involved in the search-and-rescue operation.

Turkey’s Black Sea region is frequently struck by severe rains and flash flooding. At least six people were killed in floods that hit the eastern Black Sea coastal province of Rize last month.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tropical depression Fred was moving along Cuba’s northern coast and could regain tropical storm status as it pulls away from the island on Friday, ahead of its projected track toward the Florida Keys on Saturday and southwest Florida on Sunday, forecasters said.

Meanwhile, still east of the Caribbean Sea, forecasters were watching a disturbance that they said would likely become Grace, the seventh named storm of the Atlantic hurricane season. Island governments issued a tropical storm watch for Antigua and Barbuda, St. Kitts and Nevis, and Montserrat. Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands also were warned to monitor its progress.

The Miami-based National Hurricane Center said Fred had maximum sustained winds of 35 mph and was dropping heavy rain over parts of Cuba, where the main threats were rain and flooding. A tropical storm warning was issued Friday morning for the Florida Keys and Florida Bay, and a watch was in place for southwest Florida.

The hurricane center said 3 to 7 inches of rain were expected across the Florida Keys and southern peninsula by Monday, with isolated maximums of 10 inches.

Advertisement

No evacuations are planned for tourists or residents in Monroe County, Keys officials said Friday. The county’s emergency management officials are advising people in campgrounds, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, live-aboard vessels and mobile homes to seek shelter in a safe structure during the storm.

Once a tropical storm, Fred weakened back to a depression by its spin over Haiti and the Dominican Republic, where it knocked out power to some 400,000 customers and caused flooding that forced officials to shut down part of the country’s aqueduct system, interrupting water service for hundreds of thousands of people. Local officials reported hundreds of people were evacuated and some buildings were damaged.

Fred’s center was about 245 miles southeast of Key West, Fla. That was also about 40 miles east-southwest of Caibarien, Cuba. It was still headed west-northwest at 12 mph.

The system was expected to produce 3 to 5 inches of rain across the Dominican Republic and the western Bahamas, as well as 1 to 3 inches over Haiti, the Turks and Caicos, the eastern Bahamas and Cuba.

Fred became the sixth named storm of the Atlantic hurricane season late Tuesday as it moved past the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A metal roof sits atop the burned remains of a homestead on the once-lush slopes of Hawaii’s Mauna Kea — a dormant volcano and the state’s tallest peak. Charred cars and motorcycles lie strewn about as wind-whipped sand and ash blast the scorched landscape.

Generations of Kumu Micah Kamohoalii’s family have lived on these lands reserved for Native Hawaiians, and his cousin owns a house destroyed by the state’s largest-ever wildfire, which is still burning.

“I’ve never seen a fire this big,” Kamohoalii said. “Waimea has had fires, many of them before and some maybe a few hundred acres, but not this size.”

The fire has burned more than 70 square miles in two weeks. It wasn’t the first time this area has burned, and won’t be the last. Like many islands in the Pacific, Hawaii’s dry seasons are getting more extreme with climate change.

Advertisement

“Everyone knows Waimea to be the pasturelands and to be all the green rolling hills. And so when I was young, all of this was always green,” Kamohoalii said. “In the last 10 to 15 years, it has been really, really dry.”

Huge wildfires in the western U.S. have highlighted the dangers of climate-change-related heat and drought. But experts say relatively small fires on typically wet, tropical islands in the Pacific are also on the rise, creating a cycle of ecological damage that affects vital and limited resources for millions of residents.

From Micronesia to Hawaii, wildfires have been a growing problem for decades. With scarce funding to prevent and suppress these fires, island communities have struggled to address the problem.

“On tropical islands, fires have a unique set of impacts,” said Clay Trauernicht, an ecosystems and wildfire researcher at the University of Hawaii. “First and foremost, fires were very rare prior to human arrival on any Pacific island. The vegetation, the native ecosystems, really evolved in the absence of frequent fires. And so when you do get these fires, they tend to kind of wreak havoc.”

But it’s not just burned land that is affected. Fires on islands harm environments from the top of mountains to below the ocean’s surface.

“Once a fire occurs, what you’re doing is removing vegetation,” Trauernicht said. “And we often get heavy rainfall events. All of that exposed soil gets carried downstream and we have these direct impacts of erosion, sedimentation on our marine ecosystems. So it really hammers our coral reefs as well.”

Advertisement

Pacific island reefs support local food production, create barriers to large storm surges and are a critical part of tourism that keeps many islands running.

The wet season on tropical islands also causes fire-adapted grasses to grow tall and thick, building fuel for the next summer’s wildfires.

“Guinea grass grows six inches a day in optimal conditions, and a six-foot-tall patch of grass can throw 20-foot flame lengths,” said Michael Walker, Hawaii’s state fire-protection forester. “So what we have here are really fast-moving, very hot, very dangerous fires.”

Walker said such non-native grasses that have proliferated in Hawaii are adapted to fire, but native species and shrubs are not.

Advertisement

Newsletter Record heat. Raging fires. What are the solutions? Get Boiling Point, our newsletter about climate change, the environment and building a more sustainable California. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

“While [these wildfires] may not compare to the size and duration of what folks have in the western [continental] United States, we burn a significant portion of our lands every year because of these grass fires, and they’re altering our natural ecosystems and converting forests to grass,” he said.

The latest wildfire on Hawaii’s Big Island burned about 1% of the state’s total land. Other islands in the Pacific, such as Palau, Saipan and Guam, burn even more — up to 10% in severe fire years.

On average, Guam has nearly 700 wildfires a year, Palau about 175 and Saipan about 20, according to data from 2018.

Advertisement

Guam, like many other places, has long used fire as a tool. Farmers sometimes use it to clear fields, and hunters have been known to burn areas while poaching.

World & Nation Tiny Pacific island finds itself in the crosshairs of North Korea. Why Guam? After President Trump threatened nuclear-armed North Korea with “fire and fury” — and after Kim Jong Un’s hermit kingdom replied with a bombastic warning aimed at a speck of U.S. territory in the vast western Pacific — many Americans got busy Googling “Guam.”

The U.S. territory’s forestry chief, Christine Camacho Fejeran, said fires on the island are mostly caused by arson. “So all of Guam’s wildfires are human-caused issues, whether it’s an intentional or an escaped backyard fire or another [cause],” she said.

On average, Fejeran said, 6,000 to 7,000 acres of the island burn each year, amounting to about 5% of its land.

Advertisement

While no homes have been lost to recent wildfires on Guam, Fejeran believes that good fortune will come to an end unless more is done to combat the fires.

The island has made some changes in fire legislation, management, education and enforcement. Arson has become a chargeable offense, but Fejeran says enforcement remains an obstacle in the tight-knit community.

In Hawaii, last week’s blaze destroyed three homes, but the fire threatened many more.

Advertisement

Mikiala Brand, who has lived for two decades on a 50-acre homestead, watched as flames came within a few hundred yards of her house.

As the fire grew closer, she saw firefighters, neighbors and the National Guard racing into her rural neighborhood to fight it. She had to evacuate her beloved home twice in less than 24 hours.

“Of course it was scary,” she said. “But I had faith that the strong, the brave and the talented, and along with nature and Akua, which is our name for the universal spirit, would take care.”

Advertisement

While fires are becoming more difficult to fight because of dry and hot conditions associated with climate change, experts say the Pacific islands still can help prevent these blazes from causing ecological damage and property losses.

“Fire presents a pretty interesting component of kind of all these climate change impacts that we’re dealing with in the sense that they are manageable,” said Trauernicht, the University of Hawaii wildfire expert.

In addition to education and arson prevention, he said, land use — such as grazing practices and reforestation that reduce volatile grasses — could help.

“It’s within our control, potentially, to reduce the impacts that we’re seeing with fires,” Trauernicht said, “both in terms of forest loss as well as the impacts on coral reefs.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than a month after it ignited near a Pacific Gas and Electric Co. power station in Feather River Canyon, the relentless Dixie fire shows no signs of slowing down as it continues to threaten homes and strain firefighting resources.

The fire had burned 540,581 acres, destroyed at least 738 residences and commercial properties and forced nearly 29,000 people from their homes as of Saturday morning, authorities said. Nearly 15,000 structures remained threatened.

The fire made a number of significant runs Friday, sending up multiple large columns of ash and smoke that in at least one case generated its own lightning, officials said. Its ferocity has stunned even veteran firefighters, adding an element of unpredictability that makes it difficult to determine when they’ll be able to get the upper hand.

“‘Typical’ is a challenging word for us,” said Dan McKeague, public information officer with the U.S. Forest Service, noting the massive fire is unusual in both its sheer size and its erratic behavior. “When you have the combination of this active a fire over this big of a landscape, there’s not much typical about it.”

Advertisement

The fire, which was 31% contained, prompted new evacuation orders for Genesee Valley on Friday night as thunderstorms swept through, causing erratic outflow winds that increased fire activity, McKeague said.

“You can have really sudden changes in terms of the wind direction when we have those outflow drafts,” he said. “If you picture a faucet where water is coming down and then when it hits the sink it spreads out in all directions, that’s what that air is doing as those pressure systems interact.”

Fire officials were eying Saturday’s conditions nervously, as a smoke inversion that had put a cap on the fire earlier in the week had cleared out, he said.

“That puts more sun on the fire, and potentially more air movement,” he said. “That’s not a good thing in terms of fire behavior.”

Firefighters on the western flank of the fire saw a lot of activity along Highway 36 between Chester and Westwood, where crews put in 50 to 100 feet of contingency line, said Edwin Zuniga, public information officer with the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.

“A lot of structure protection resources are being assigned to that specific area to protect the peninsula on Lake Almanor, the cabins along that stretch of Highway 36 and the community of Westwood,” he said.

The weather was continuing to pose a challenge, with hotter and drier conditions forecast for the next couple days, he said.

Advertisement

Temperatures in the area of the fire were expected to reach anywhere from the upper 80s to just shy of 100, depending on the smoke cover, said Scott Rowe, meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Sacramento.

The Dixie fire ignited July 13 near the spot where a tree fell into a PG&E power line. The utility has said it took a worker about 10 hours to reach the remote site and observe flames.

Although the cause of the fire remains under review, prosecutors in at least two counties are investigating PG&E for potential criminal charges, saying it should have been aware of the high risk of fire in the canyon. It is the same canyon where PG&E equipment ignited the 2018 Camp fire, which saw the utility plead guilty to 84 counts of manslaughter after the town of Paradise was decimated. PG&E had planned to bury the power line that might have started the Dixie fire as part of a safety campaign announced in the wake of the Camp fire, but work on the project hadn’t yet begun.

The Dixie fire took off amid extreme conditions, as human-caused climate change has sent temperatures rising and upended the natural patterns of precipitation on which California relies to supply its ecosystems with water.

Advertisement

The state this year saw its hottest June and July on record, with the heat most intense in the interior areas where the fire is burning, Rowe said.

Authorities have also blamed a century of aggressive fire suppression for creating patches of forest that are overgrown with thick understories of dry brush and in some cases enabling invasive species to move into areas where more frequent, low-intensity fires would once have kept them out.

The conditions have aligned to produce an intense, active fire season that has stressed resources, resulting in shortages of personnel and equipment that are being felt nationwide.

Advertisement

More than 6,500 personnel were assigned to the Dixie fire — about a quarter of the nearly 25,000 people who were out fighting more than 100 large uncontained fires nationwide, according to the National Interagency Fire Center.

“And yet there are some critical positions that we’re unable to fill as frequently as we’d like,” McKeague said. “That includes our division supervisors, our dozer operators, our hotshot crews and even some critical line medic positions that are responsible for any medical emergencies for our firefighters.”

That comes after the National Multi-Agency Coordinating Group recently issued memos warning firefighters of a shortage of radio communications equipment and advising those arriving to incidents to bring enough food and water to be self-sufficient for three days due to a high demand for supplies.

Although there have been no specific actions firefighters were unable to complete due to the personnel shortages, they’ve at times found themselves with not as much coverage on certain areas of the fire as they’d like, McKeague said.

Advertisement

“With a fire this big and this active, we certainly would be putting any and all of those additional resources to use, if they were available,” he said.

There was also a 10% to 15% chance of more thunderstorms moving over the fire Saturday, causing officials to warn firefighters on the line to be aware of potentially changing conditions, including the possibility of ground lightning strikes, according to authorities.

“With fuels that are this dry, historically dry, you always run a good chance of those causing new ignitions,” McKeague said, noting the probability of ignition — essentially the chance that an ember that lands in vegetation will start a new fire — has consistently been between 90% and 100%.

Advertisement

In a normal year, vegetation in the Sierra Nevada goes through a spring “greenup,” sucking up moisture, then blossoming and putting on new growth before it goes dormant in the dry summer months, as it is evolved to do, said Ryan Bauer, fuels and prescribed fire program manager for the Plumas National Forest. At that point, the vegetation starts to burn like it’s dead even though it’s alive.

This year, Bauer said, precipitation was sparse and fell early in the season so the live vegetation never reached its full moisture content before it started going dormant.

“So it’s all critically dry right now,” he said. “The brush is burning just like dead fuel.”

That also resulted in conditions being ripe for active fires starting earlier in the year. Normally, he said, the Plumas National Forest wouldn’t really enter its fire season until mid-July. This year, it started in mid-May. It is expected to last through September if not October.

Advertisement

“We’ve been in fire season for a long time,” he said, “and we’ve still got a lot of fire season ahead of us.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@