President Biden has already violated his oath of office. The good news for him: He’s in fine company.

In 2002, President George W. Bush signed the McCain-Feingold campaign finance bill into law. At the ceremony, he expressed his “concerns” that the law he signed “restrains the speech of a wide variety of groups on issues of public import in the months closest to an election.” He added, deflecting from his own responsibilities, “I expect that the courts will resolve these legitimate legal questions as appropriate under the law.”

Between 2011 and 2014, President Obama said, over and over again, that he could not unilaterally overturn or subvert laws passed by Congress and change the immigration status of “Dreamers.” “I’m not a king. I am the head of the executive branch of government. I’m required to follow the law,” he said in January 2013. A month later, he reiterated that view: “I’m not the emperor of the United States. My job is to execute laws that are passed, and Congress right now has not changed what I consider to be a broken immigration system.”

Then, in November 2014, he signed an executive order doing it anyway.

Advertisement

We can skip President Trump’s track record on violations of the oath of office, since he was impeached twice.

And now there’s Biden. Last week, his administration issued a “new” moratorium on renter evictions, essentially reissuing the one imposed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in September as a public health measure during the pandemic. The Supreme Court said in June that the CDC had no authority to issue a nationwide moratorium. But Justice Brett Kavanaugh, writing for the majority, told the administration that it could let the old moratorium expire on July 31 rather than eliminate it immediately, since it had only weeks left on the clock. If the administration wanted a new moratorium after July, he said “clear and specific congressional authorization (via new legislation) would be necessary.”

On July 31, the moratorium expired without congressional action. On Aug. 2, White House advisor Gene Sperling was asked if the administration could unilaterally extend the moratorium. His answer was that it couldn’t find legal authority to do so.

“The bulk of the constitutional scholarship says that it’s not likely to pass constitutional muster,” Biden conceded a day later. Yet, he added, “at a minimum, by the time it gets litigated, it will probably give some additional time while we’re getting that $45 billion out to people who are, in fact, behind in the rent and don’t have the money.”

This is no way to run a constitutional republic.

The president takes an oath to “faithfully execute” the laws and to “preserve, protect, and defend” the Constitution. Biden, Bush and Obama, by their own admission, believed their actions ran afoul of the law and/or the Constitution. But politically, it was easier to pass the trash to the Supreme Court so the court could take the political heat.

You can be sure that when the court invalidates this new moratorium, Democrats — and probably some Republicans who’ve kept their heads down in all of this — will feign outrage at the court’s “callousness.”

But we should all be outraged by the cowardice of elected politicians who find their jobs too difficult to do within the bounds of their oaths.

Advertisement

And, frankly, we should be outraged at ourselves. It’s a rare day that fidelity to the Constitution is demanded by the people or the press except when it’s a useful talking point about a partisan disagreement. When Obama reversed himself on DACA, the Washington Post dubbed him a flip-flopper. That’s great, but flip-flopping is faint criticism for a president who — by his own standard — had behaved as an “emperor” or “king” outside his constitutional authority.

The elected branches of government routinely behave like a parent who can’t say no and cops out with “Go ask your mother” or “Go ask your father” to avoid being the heavy.

Progressives routinely complain that the Supreme Court thwarts popular will — which is why some want to pack the court. Conservatives routinely complain that the court is too powerful and legislates from the bench.

I’m with the conservatives on this. But the fact remains that politicians would rather the justices play the heavy than do the jobs they swore to do. Of course, Biden won’t be penalized, much less impeached, for the same reason Bush and Obama weren’t: No one really cares. While I can live with that, I’d rather live in a country where politicians were truly terrified of violating their oaths.

Advertisement

@JonahDispatch
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Some in the pork industry are warning that California residents may soon experience a significant shortage of the meat — and what will be available may be priced significantly higher than it is now. Beginning in 2022, pork producers will have to abide by Proposition 12, a California farm animal cruelty law passed in 2018 that introduces minimum space requirements for veal calves, egg-laying hens and breeding pigs. But do the pork industry’s dire predictions make sense?

To comply with the law, pork producers must ensure that the spaces confining breeding pigs and their offspring are no less than 24 square feet. Claims of the sky falling when it comes to pork production are an attempt by industrial farms to save money by keeping pigs in cages so small that the animals can’t move more than a few inches, let alone turn around during their entire four-year life. When it was on the ballot, animal advocacy organization PETA actually opposed the proposition for not being severe enough.

Proposition 12 also applies to the egg and veal industries. But although they were initially opposed to the proposition, they have complied with the law — only the pork sector is fearmongering about a commercial disaster. To be sold in California, products from pig farms must be up to the new standards, regardless of where they were produced. The industry claims that as a result of these requirements the state’s pork supply could fall dramatically, and bacon prices could spike by as much as 60%.

Economists have estimated that complying to the new standards could raise costs to pig farmers by 15% per animal. That relatively small cost increase for pork producers now threatens to hit consumers with a much more significant price spike. But rather than preparing to meet the new standards three years ago, like most veal and egg producers did, a vocal segment of pork producers decided that they’d rather drag their feet.

Advertisement

Not all pork producers are raising objections about this law. Companies such as Niman Ranch, Coleman Natural and Hormel have publicly stated they are ready to provide pork for the California marketplace under the new rules.

Requiring more space for breeding pigs is the least we can do, given the horrific practices of industrialized animal agriculture. Industrial pork operations squeeze pigs into extremely limited spaces that can prevent them from simply stretching their limbs. These conditions can cause immense suffering and physical breakdown of the animals’ bodies, increasing the risk of illness and disease.

Representatives of the pork industry are defending a practice that voters found indefensible — Californians overwhelmingly approved Proposition 12, which earned the support of nearly two out of every three voters. But instead of respecting the people’s decision, the industry has been fighting —and losing — in the courts. In July, the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a lower court ruling in favor of the law. The National Pork Producers Council and the American Farm Bureau Federation had filed a claim saying the legislation violated the Commerce Clause, which says states cannot unduly burden interstate commerce. The panel of judges found, among other things, that the impact of Proposition 12 was indirect and did not violate the Commerce Clause.

As the pork industry appeals to Gov. Gavin Newsom directly, hoping that he will delay the law from going into effect at the start of 2022, they’ve wasted three years when they could have prepared to comply with the legislation. Saying “we need more time” now is cynical and dishonest, not to mention that Newsom doesn’t have legal authority to delay the law’s implementation.

Nothing about Proposition 12 targets pork producers unfairly or disproportionately. Egg and veal farms met the January 2020 deadline this legislation required of their industries, and egg farms are prepared to meet an additional provision that goes into effect in 2022. Pork producers can and should meet their 2022 requirements without all the squealing.

The more this sector disingenuously fights an animal cruelty law voted for by people who eat their product, the more it shows that the strongest reason to leave pork off our plates may be the actions of the industry itself.

Brian Kateman is president and co-founder of the Reducetarian Foundation, which works to reduce societal consumption of animal products. His documentary “Meat Me Halfway” was released last month.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Before the library system in St. Paul, Minn., stopped collecting overdue fines in 2019, it was spending $250,000 a year to recoup $225,000. Library systems in large metropolitan areas across the nation have been finding that fines don’t provide much money — but they do keep low-income readers from using their local branches.

For that matter, the idea of having to face the local librarian with an overdue book is so chilling to many an adult or child that the dour “Dragnet”-style “Library Cop” became a beloved figure on “Seinfeld” in 1991.

It should be a no-brainer for L.A. County supervisors to eliminate library fines at their Tuesday meeting, as a resolution recommends. The city of Los Angeles did so nearly two years ago, though it’s hard to know exactly how that panned out because the pandemic made library access problematic for so long. Libraries in San Diego, San Francisco, Glendale and Burbank have done so as well. Orange County Public Libraries, with branches in most of that county’s cities, haven’t been collecting fines since July 2020, though that’s only “until further notice.”

Opponents of such forgiveness say that overdue books are the result of thoughtless (or absent-minded) users who are keeping publicly owned books out of the hands of other borrowers. If low-income library patrons find the fines untenable, by this reasoning, they should get themselves to the library more regularly.

Advertisement

This overlooks some modern-day realities: Low-income residents often juggle multiple jobs or face transportation obstacles that make it harder to get to the library. Once a book is overdue, these residents are in a worse position to pay the fine. Studies show that middle-class and working-class people keep their books past the due date at the same rates, but poor people tend to keep theirs for longer, a sign that obstacles to access and anxiety about meeting the cost of fines are serious issues for them.

That’s why two years ago the American Library Assn. officially asserted that “imposition of monetary library fines creates a barrier to the provision of library and information services” and urged all libraries to consider doing away with them.

Here’s evidence that fines, not a selfish impulse to keep library books, keep people from returning their books: A temporary 2017 amnesty from fines brought in nearly 700,000 overdue books to San Francisco libraries, and restored the right to use the library to 5,000 people who had been staying away rather than pay the fees. The lesson: Eliminating fines is smart policy for library budgets as well. Replacing never-returned books is more expensive than anything the libraries bring in from overdue fines, which generally account for about 1% of a library’s budget.

That’s why, if the supervisors do the right thing and approve a no-more-fines policy Tuesday, they should include provisions to prevent the outright loss of books and other materials, by ending the borrowing privileges of scofflaws who take out numerous books and don’t bring them back.

It’s time for all library systems to consider the same practice. The state of California partially funds almost all public libraries within its borders and has numerous regulations about their practices. Legislation could prod libraries to develop some form of fine-free policy and perhaps provide additional funding to help make up some of the lost revenue.

Overall, though, both libraries and the public would gain. Libraries would see more books return, at least eventually. They would gain more patrons and more activity, which would mean more public support.

The main beneficiaries, of course, would be the rest of us. Libraries have always been a place where people could become as knowledgeable on almost any subject as their own reading ability and ambition can take them. In this era of division and disinformation, libraries are where the public can find quality information as well as computer services, entertainment and community events.

A child who loves books stands a much better chance of succeeding in school. One study found that children who read for pleasure, rather than just what they’re assigned, show improved mastery of subjects that have nothing to do with what they were reading. Various studies have shown that children whose parents read to them at young ages performed better in later years at vocabulary, spelling and math.

Advertisement

Library fines are doing neither the public nor the public libraries much good. Our society shouldn’t allow 25 cents a day to stand between families and free access to books.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Skateboarding made its Olympic debut at the Tokyo Games this year, bringing a refreshing change of pace to the world’s biggest competition. Unlike most other Olympic events, the culture of skateboarding is based not in winning but in joy and individuality.

Since its inception, skateboarding has defied conformity. Born in California in the 1950s, skateboarding became synonymous with the counterculture of the ’60s and served as a safe haven for society’s outcasts. Considered more of a lifestyle than a sport, skateboarding offered an escape from the mainstream and a platform for people to be themselves.

Skateboarding’s global popularity launched it onto the Olympic stage, but its counterculture roots remain alive and well. Other Olympic events exist within a clearly established structure, but skateboarding has been anti-establishment from the start.

“Skateboarding presents so many more options than you typically have in sports,”said Neftalie Williams, a visiting fellow at Yale University and postdoctoral scholar at the University of Southern California, who studies the interplay of diversity, identity and skate culture . “You have an entire sporting culture that’s marginalized, that has placed less emphasis on competition and focused more on expression, and has learned that that’s the vocabulary.”

Advertisement

In this way, skateboarding is nearly impossible to define. But ask a skater at any level what skating means to them, and you’ll get a similar answer: What attracted them to the sport was freedom, community and creativity, not competition or being the best.

“There’s no other sport in the world, no other art in the world, no other culture in the world that transcends boundaries in the way that skateboarding does,” said sponsored Los Angeles skater Ethan Singleton, who’s worked on research with Williams at USC.

Skateboarding doesn’t quite fit into any traditional sports box, much less the ultra competitive and highly polished spirit of the Olympic Games. But its presence in Tokyo brought a playfulness and individuality to the sport world’s biggest stage.

“I was having an absolute blast,” American bronze medalist Jagger Eaton said about competing in the street event, where he nodded his head to music and laughed with his fellow competitors at the top of the course. All 20 skateboarders competing there were friendly with one another, he said.

“Growing up, skateboarding was my freedom and my creative outlet,” Eaton said. “Skateboarding is an art form, and every one of us does it differently. Name another sport like that in the Olympic Games.”

Every skateboarder has their own unique style, revealed in the way they approach obstacles, pop tricks or grab their board midair. There are no rules in skateboarding, no standards, no rigid structure — even at the Olympics. According to Mimi Knoop, professional skateboarder and head coach for the U.S. Olympic skateboard team, judges score the athletes based on trick progression, difficulty level and originality.

“We don’t have points for certain tricks because we wanted to stay away from that to keep it a little more creative,” Knoop said. “It comes down to little subtleties that aren’t really written down or necessarily defined in our sport. It makes things a little subjective, but that’s just how we do it.”

In the midst of tense competition and mental health struggles , skateboarding was like a beacon of light as I watched the Olympic Games.

Advertisement

“Skateboarding is where I feel I can express myself and let my own creativity play out,” American Olympian Alana Smith said. “At the Olympics, I definitely feel like it freshens up the environment and shows that it doesn’t have to be such a stressful time.”

While skateboarding allows an athlete’s individuality to shine through, the community is cohesive as well. “I feel like we’ve always been looked at as the outcasts,” Smith said, referring to the societal stigma pinned on skateboarders, “and we’ve all become a really big family.”

If you watched the Olympics, the way the skateboarders interacted with each other was often in stark contrast to other athletes. Competitors at some events, like gymnastics or swimming, typically didn’t stray far from their teammates. But skateboarders were enjoying each other’s company and lifting each other up regardless of country affiliation.

“From my point of view, we’re having a lot more fun than everyone else,” Knoop said. “There’s an unspoken understanding between skaters and a bond that’s there.”

Advertisement

Not everyone agrees that skateboarding belongs in the Olympics . Some say the Games represent a commercialization that strays too far from skateboarding’s counterculture roots. But skateboarding never really needed the platform of the Olympics in the first place.

Sports agent Yulin Olliver, who represents Olympians like Mariah Duran and Bryce Wettstein , said that skateboarding as a sport and lifestyle is inherently self-sufficient. There’s no need for coaches, teams or organized competitions. Those things exist in skateboarding, of course, but not out of necessity. As long as there are individuals who skateboard and find joy in doing so, the culture of skateboarding will remain strong.

“It’s almost like the Olympics needed skateboarding,” Olliver said, “not the other way around.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As if to confirm that this summer’s record-breaking heat waves, flooding and wildfires are no freak occurrences, the United Nations released a dire report Monday concluding that the world has moved too slowly to stop global warming and the increase in extreme and deadly weather events. “A code red for humanity,” the report says.

But there’s hope. We can still prevent the worst devastation with radical action to cut carbon emissions over the next decade.

That will take ambitious and committed leadership from the U.S. and other industrialized nations — and a reversal of political lethargy that has slowed progress since the Paris climate agreement in 2015. As of now, the nations responsible for the most emissions are still not cutting carbon fast enough. One test of that leadership will come in November, when world leaders will meet at a United Nations summit in Scotland to hammer out another round of climate pledges.

It could be the last chance for world leaders to band together to fight climate change. The path forward is clear, though not easy or cheap: Phase out gas- and diesel-fueled cars and trucks and accelerate the deployment of zero-emission vehicles. Stop building homes and businesses powered with natural gas. Stop construction of coal-fired power plants across the globe. Ensure every corner of the world has access to renewable energy. Cut methane emissions from oil wells, landfills and farms. Invest in research to develop technologies that can remove carbon from the atmosphere.

Advertisement

The report, which is the sixth assessment from U.N.’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change since 1990, asserts that the consequences of human-driven climate change are already being felt at unprecedented levels across the globe. And those changes are only going to accelerate. The report warns of increased frequency of climate extremes such as heat waves, droughts and heavy precipitation in nearly every inhabited region. Compared with the panel’s last report, issued in 2014, extreme weather events are occurring more frequently and are projected to worsen.

Human activity has already caused the planet to warm by 1.1 degrees Celsius, or nearly 2 degrees Fahrenheit, since 1850, according to the report. Climate experts agree that a global rise in temperature beyond 2 degrees Celsius would be catastrophic for life on Earth. If warming is not mitigated before then, sea level rise would displace significant portions of the global population. Extreme heat and drought are already on course to threaten agricultural production, particularly in western North America, northeastern South America, and across Africa.

World leaders have sought to limit the temperature rise to 1.5 degrees, to avert the worst effects. But progress hasn’t been good. In 2019, recorded atmospheric concentrations of carbon monoxide were at the highest levels in the last 2 million years. Unless emissions are significantly reduced in the immediate future, global warming of 2 degrees Celsius will occur within this century.

How many more dire warnings will it take? How many summers will the world watch in horror as forests burn and streets flood? We are fast approaching our last chance to save the planet from calamity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@COVID-19 is a nightmare that has left more than 600,000 people dead in the United States alone. But from the very start it was also a clear dress rehearsal for the looming global catastrophe of climate change, which is barreling toward us and likely to wreak more damage than the pandemic.

Early on , it seemed like COVID might sober us up, and teach us some useful lessons for that other great and imminent threat. Perhaps the coronavirus would force us to acknowledge that there really are invisible dangers in the world, and that there really are experts who know more than we do. Perhaps it would show us that if we don’t act to avert crises sooner rather than later, the problems only get worse.

Climate activist Bill McKibben suggested something along those lines. “This might be the moment when we decide to fully embrace the idea that science, you know, works,” he wrote back in March 2020. U.N. Secretary-General António Guterres called COVID-19 a “wake-up call” for climate change.

But here in the United States, we did not rise to the occasion. We did not wake up. Instead, we bungled much of our response to COVID, making the situation worse than it had to be. It’s not clear we learned much of anything as a nation,

Advertisement

I was reminded of that again Monday when the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued its most dire report yet (each has been more dire than the last). The IPCC concluded that humans can no longer reverse some of climate change’s effects or stop its intensification over the next three decades. Therefore, we should expect more raging storms, devastating heat waves, harrowing floods, out-of-control fires, severe droughts and other “extreme events unprecedented in the observational record.”

That wasn’t the part that bothered me. I expected no less.

What bothered me was the frustrating conclusion that we could still head off the most devastating climate change effects if we took immediate concerted action. Sharp cuts in carbon emissions beginning right now could make an enormous difference in what lies ahead.

It’s frustrating because why think that any such thing will happen? Isn’t concerted action what Americans just showed we cannot do — pull together, sacrifice together, expect that Washington will behave rationally or that our leaders will lead? I’m pleased there’s still hope, but what indication is there that we will avail ourselves of it?

In response to the pandemic here in the U.S., many millions of people behaved responsibly, wore masks, got shots and made sacrifices for more than a year.

But many, many millions of others responded by denying the facts and disbelieving the science. They chose stubbornness and know-nothingism. They chose shortsightedness. Some were misinformed; others were in the grip of fantastical conspiracy theories.

Worse yet, many elected officials, led by then-President Trump, were willing to politicize the pandemic, spreading bad information or encouraging misbehavior. Some merely kept quiet, like the New Mexico mayor quoted in The Times on Monday who says he no longer urges his constituents to get vaccinated: “You could lose votes for pushing the vaccine too much.”

Advertisement

That kind of gutlessness is why case numbers are going up and new virus variants are threatening to send us all back into hiding. Only about 58% of vaccine-eligible Americans are fully immunized.

COVID could have been stopped much sooner. A minor step like getting a shot in the arm — how difficult is that? It’s not an affront to liberty to ask people to get a life-saving vaccination.

If people won’t get vaccinated or wear masks, how can they be expected to transform their lives as climate change requires? Answer: They can’t.

And fighting climate change is even harder than fighting COVID in this sense: With COVID, there’s no trillion-dollar industry with a vested interest in making sure you don’t believe in it.

Advertisement

Unfortunately, neither the capitalist system (which too often encourages corporations to maximize profits at society’s expense) nor our democratic system (which allows citizens to toss out politicians who call for unpleasant efforts) seems particularly well suited to meet the climate battle.

Here’s what the IPCC report says: Melting ice and rising sea levels are accelerating. Extreme weather events are worsening. Even if we cut emissions drastically now, some climate changes are “locked-in” and will be “irreversible” for centuries. In about a decade, we’re expected to barrel past the limits on warming that the Paris pact sought to set.

The pandemic dress rehearsal didn’t go so well. And with each passing year, each passing presidential administration, each rise in temperature, each new season of wildfire or flood or drought — the problems ahead become deeper and harder to solve.

The lessons of COVID ought to be clear: We cannot dismiss science or blithely ignore what we know is coming at us. We need to work together, look out for others and accept that sacrifices will be necessary, as we have sometimes done in wartime.

Advertisement

We need leaders — Republicans and Democrats alike — who will acknowledge reality and instead of pandering for votes at any cost, press us to meet our obligations to the world and to each other. The threat to the planet is real, and we won’t be saved by self-delusion, conspiracy theories or stubborn, studied ignorance.

@Nick_Goldberg
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I’ve been writing about Congress since the late 1980s, watching as filibusters in the Senate evolved from rare and usually doomed efforts by fringe factions into what they are today: a routine practice by whichever party is in the minority. And I’ve been one of the few members of this newspaper’s editorial board who argued in defense of the filibuster, which was itself a lonely and doomed effort, given the board’s oft-stated position that the filibuster was unacceptably undemocratic.

I’ve come around on that. Republicans and Democrats have put the legislative filibuster to a stress test over the past decade, exposing faults I’d been dismissive of before. (The filibuster has been nuked for judicial and executive-branch nominees.) The institutionalist in me wants to hold onto the filibuster as a way to preserve more of what makes the Senate different from the House. But if the difference is dysfunction, it’s not worth preserving.

The main argument for the filibuster is that it compels compromise. That’s the heart of the defenses put forward by Democratic Sens. Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, the two people stopping their party from casting the filibuster into the dustbin of history. As Sinema put it in a Washington Post op-ed, “The best way to achieve durable, lasting results? Bipartisan cooperation.”

She’s right about that! But implicit in that remark is the notion that bipartisan cooperation is there to be had. It is — sometimes. Just not on big, divisive issues, which is where this country really needs it.

Advertisement

The Senate is now grinding its way through a bipartisan infrastructure proposal that Sinema helped negotiate. Last week it easily obtained the 60 votes needed to cut off a filibuster on the motion to start debate. (Reminder: Every piece of legislation has to overcome a filibuster just to get on the floor, and another one to shut off debate and hold a vote.) You might point to this bill as Exhibit A in the filibuster’s defense, but you’d be wrong about that.

Infrastructure bills are hugely popular with the public, even in red states. Numerous Senate Republicans wanted to be able to take credit for boosting spending on roads, bridges and the like, knowing that if they didn’t get on board, Democrats would do a big infrastructure boost through a budget reconciliation bill, which can’t be filibustered. That’s why bipartisan cooperation was available on this bill — it’s not that controversial a topic.

Contrast that with, say, healthcare policy. Lawmakers have known for years that the U.S. system is on an unsustainable path, costing too much, excluding too many people and delivering less value than in other major countries. But since the passage of the 2010 Affordable Care Act, lawmakers haven’t been able to do anything substantive on the topic.

Instead, the heavy lifting on healthcare has been done by the White House, for better or for worse. Witness, for example, the Trump administration’s efforts to lower the price of prescription drugs and to make less expensive but less protective insurance policies available to more Americans.

In addition to shifting the balance of power away from the legislative branch, the filibuster has led to some warped lawmaking. To avoid the filibuster, majorities have sought to use reconciliation bills to enact policies that the minority is determined to block. But under federal law, each provision of a reconciliation bill must have a significant effect on federal spending or revenues. That means the reconciliation process may change some elements of a program or policy but leave others weirdly intact.

That’s what happened in 2017, when Republicans repealed the tax penalty in the ACA for adults who fail to obtain insurance coverage while sparing the ACA’s mandate to obtain coverage, which they couldn’t address through reconciliation. The disparity triggered a lawsuit by Republican state officials seeking to throw out the entire ACA; happily, the Supreme Court threw the lawsuit out instead.

Conservatives argue that Democrats want to kill the filibuster because they’re eager to use Vice President Kamala Harris’ tie-breaking vote in the Senate to cram their agenda down America’s throat. And that sort of opportunism is definitely out there.

But it’s short-sighted. Eliminating the filibuster will help Republicans advance their agenda the moment they take back the majority, which may be soon enough. And so whatever policy gains the Democrats make without GOP support now could easily be reversed and then some when Republicans run the Senate.

Advertisement

I used to think that this was a problem — that the House was Congress’ pinwheel but the Senate was its cornerstone. Now I see it as a solution to the legislative branch’s inability to act on anything of consequence outside of reconciliation bills, whether it be immigration policy, climate change, criminal justice reform or a multitude of other long-neglected issues.

When you think about it, the filibuster isn’t protecting bipartisanship in the Senate. It’s protecting lawmakers from having to take a stand on divisive issues. If the Senate minority can no longer stop the majority from even bringing up bills, they’ll be in the position that the minority in the House is in, having to choose between trying to score political points and engaging with the majority on the legislation it’s moving.

And yes, some policies may end up swinging like a pendulum. But at least Congress will get off the sidelines.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@According to Congress’ tax experts, people who invest in cryptocurrency evade billions of dollars in capital gains taxes every year.

That’s one reason the U.S. Senate has set its sights on cryptocurrency exchanges such as Coinbase and Binance, where people buy and sell Bitcoin and other digital currencies. To help pay for a new infrastructure bill, its bipartisan sponsors want the exchanges to report their users’ sales to the Internal Revenue Service, just as Vanguard, Fidelity and other Wall Street investment companies have to do.

According to Senate staff, tax cheating is most common in the types of income where there’s no third party keeping track — when the only information coming to the IRS is what taxpayers report about themselves. Put another way, people who make all their money through wages don’t have the chance to evade taxes the way Bitcoin investors do.

Cryptocurrencies are unlike shares of GameStop or Apple in one important respect: People can buy and sell digital currencies anonymously. In fact, that’s part of the appeal. Nevertheless, if you’re going to turn digital currency into money that can be spent freely and easily, someone needs to know your name and bank account number. So at that point, when a capital gain or loss is realized, the veil of anonymity has been lifted.

Advertisement

So if Congress just focuses on the points where bits become dollars, tax enforcement should be easy, right? Except that it isn’t simple at all. Crypto advocates and civil liberties organizations erupted when the text of the infrastructure bill was released, arguing that the language was written far too broadly. In their view, many of the people involved in creating and maintaining the blockchains behind cryptocurrencies would be required to learn who their users were and to report that information to the IRS.

“The mandate to collect names, addresses, and transactions of customers means almost every company even tangentially related to cryptocurrency may suddenly be forced to surveil their users,” Rainey Reitman of the Electronic Frontier Foundation warned. The new obligations were so incompatible with the crypto ethos, advocates said, crypto companies would flee the United States for less prying environs.

Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio), the author of the cryptocurrency provision, sought to calm the waters, tweeting that the target of the provision was the exchanges, not the miners who maintain the digital transaction ledger, the wallet services that enable people to store their cybercurrency or others with roles in the blockchain. And on Wednesday, Sens. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), Cynthia Lummis (R-Wyo.) and Pat Toomey (R-Pa.) unveiled an amendment to clarify that the reporting requirement did not extend beyond “persons who conduct transactions on exchanges where consumers buy, sell and trade digital assets.”

That amendment, which Portman endorsed, seems to have quelled the controversy. But the episode raises a troubling question.

Crypto investors were targeted not just because of the alleged tax avoidance, which the congressional Joint Tax Committee estimated at $28 billion over 10 years. More important, cracking down on crypto tax dodgers didn’t require a broad and costly investment in the IRS’ enforcement personnel and capabilities, unlike the bill’s original framework, which Senate Republicans could not abide.

But should lawmakers care about just this one type of tax dodging? Given that the problem is orders of magnitude larger than $28 billion over a decade, it seems almost arbitrary to focus on cryptocurrency trades — it’s like going after piggy banks instead of Wells Fargo.

That’s not to say cryptocurrency investors shouldn’t be taxed the same way as investors in mutual funds and meme stocks. At least it’s possible now. But if cryptocurrencies ever become widely accepted as a form of payment, people won’t have to cash out their Bitcoins to buy goods. At that point, the IRS will truly be dependent on people disclosing their cryptocurrency capital gains to the taxman, who may have no other way of knowing about them. Good luck with that.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted millions of Americans’ rites of passage — quinceañeras, proms, graduations, weddings, etc. — and thanks to the Delta variant, the cancelations, postponements and downsizings will continue for the foreseeable future.

The casualties include the 60th birthday bash that President Obama had planned for this weekend, which would have brought 475 guests and 200 staff to the Obamas’ vacation home in Martha’s Vineyard. On Wednesday, the former president let it be known that the party was being “significantly” scaled back, with “only family and close friends” attending.

News of the party had circulated early this week, with critics gleefully accusing the former president of staging a potential superspreader event as the pandemic was raging anew across the country. Defenders noted that the guests were required to be vaccinated and tested before attending the outdoor event, and the expansive, 29-acre property would hardly be “packed” with guests.

But for many Americans, prominent Democrats are the face of the pandemic shutdowns, and that includes the Obamas. They weren’t in power, but they have supported the restrictions and remain allied with President Biden and other top Democrats.

Advertisement

It’s one thing for President Trump to hold rallies with thousands of people and no evident precautions against infection — that’s normal behavior for a guy who downplayed the virus and lambasted state and local efforts to slow the spread of COVID. For the Obamas to do something that we all were told not to do for months on end, however — that smacked of hypocrisy, regardless of the steps taken to guard against transmission.

A party on that scale had to have been in the works for months, and I don’t fault the Obamas for assuming early on that the country would have reached the point by now where such gatherings could resume. COVID restrictions were being lifted right and left in the spring, even in hypercautious states like California. Vaccination rates were climbing steadily, infections and hospitalizations were plummeting. The pandemic was in retreat.

But then we hit a vaccination plateau and, not coincidentally, the Delta variant broke out across the country, triggering a fourth COVID surge. Worse, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently warned that vaccinated people can transmit the disease, although the likelihood remains minute.

The Obamas may not have seen that coming, but once the surge was under way, it was clear that it was just too soon to behave as if the pandemic was firmly in the rearview mirror. Rather than waiting to be pummeled by critics, the Obamas should have canceled the party as soon as the CDC guidance stiffened.

But there’s also an empathy issue here, one that’s reminiscent of California Gov. Gavin Newsom’s French Laundry blunder. People gave up so much in the first year of the pandemic — so many major events, rituals and gatherings — that maybe they didn’t need to see Obama mark his 60th birthday with the kind of giant celebration they’ve been denied.

Is that fair, considering how much of America has returned to quasi-normalcy? It certainly feels like a reach to call the planned Obama party an outrageous superspreader event when tens of thousands of people are cramming into music festivals such as Lollapalooza. But then, the organizers of music festivals aren’t the folks who advocated stay-home orders, bans on gatherings and mask mandates.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s only halfway through the year, but state lawmakers across the nation have already proposed a record-breaking number of anti-trans laws. Many of these laws seek to restrict transgender youth from accessing gender-affirming medical care and participating in sports.

In response, the California Department of Justice has added five states with anti-LGBTQ laws to the list of places where state employees cannot travel at taxpayer expense. Since 2017, the list has grown to 17 states.

Public support for the transgender community has increased since the Supreme Court guaranteed marriage equality in Obergefell vs. Hodges in 2015, but transphobic arguments persist because they prey upon people’s worst fears. In a video that went viral in June, a woman at Wi Spa in Los Angeles recorded her reaction and berated the staff after she claimed to have seen “a man go into the women’s section [and] show his penis.” Protesters clashed in the streets, two people were stabbed and conservative pundits wrung their hands over the prospect of women and children being preyed upon by men who could pose as transgender women.

How many times have we heard this harmful and baseless trope about the transgender community? It echoes the same type of abuse that was hurled at gay men in the 1950s when people accused them of pedophilia.

Advertisement

Activists continue to say that transgender athletes will decimate women’s sports, a wild and outrageous claim. In reality, transgender people make up only 0.6% of the U.S. population, and there’s no indication that they’re going to be overtaking elite sports any time soon. Transgender athletes have been allowed to compete in the Olympics since 2004, but this is the first year that we’ve had “out” transgender and nonbinary Olympians.

Granted, the science is contested as to whether transgender women athletes have a performance advantage. Research indicates that taking hormone suppressants doesn’t remove all the biological advantages of muscle mass and bone density, but lower testosterone also reduces oxygen capacity, which impacts an athlete’s endurance.

Dr. Eric Vilain, the director for the Center of Genetic Medicine Research at Children’s National Hospital, has served as an advisor to the International Olympic Committee Medical Commission and played an integral role in helping the NCAA craft its policies on transgender athletes. He’s been public about his view that the new laws preventing transgender athletes from competing are not based on science.

It’s an oversimplification to say that transgender athletes are dominating cisgender ones, Vilain said, for a simple reason: “Sports is inherently unfair. Elite sports are all about advantages that come from so many parameters. For trans women athletes, exposure to testosterone has not been shown to provide an overwhelming advantage in most events.” Vilain said we look at Usain Bolt or LeBron James’ natural physiology and say they’re talented or gifted, and the advantages that transgender athletes may have are no different.

Laws and policies that restrict the participation of transgender women police all women’s bodies, said Kathryn J. Perkins, an assistant professor of political science at Cal State Long Beach who specializes in LGBTQ politics. Perkins says that anti-transgender policies are colored with racism and misogyny; transphobia begins to rear itself in anti-Blackness and sexist ideas about how women’s bodies should appear.

The NCAA and the International Olympic Committee have policies that set standards for testosterone levels in transgender athletes. In some cases, these regulations have also affected cisgender athletes. The most famous example is Caster Semenya, a South African female middle-distance runner born with XY chromosomes and high levels of natural testosterone, who was barred from competing in her best events at the Olympics. This year, two runners from Nambia were banned from competing in the 400-meter event at the Olympics. "[These regulations] are reinforcing essentialist gender binaries,” said Perkins. “It’s based on the idea that men’s and women’s bodies are opposite and non-overlapping and women’s bodies are weak and fragile and that they can’t compete in sports with tough men’s bodies.”

Meanwhile, the public debate mistakenly conflates elite sports with school-age children. New laws in Arkansas and Mississippi and one being proposed in Florida target transgender youth in primary and secondary education. These laws claim to be rooted in fairness, but they’re only fueling antagonism toward the transgender community, which has been targeted with increasing violence. This year, the Human Rights Campaign recorded at least 31 transgender and gender nonconforming people who were victims of homicide, putting 2021 on track to exceed last year’s record total of 44 transgender people killed. A disproportionate number of these individuals were Black transgender women.

The lack of social acceptance is also one of the biggest factors affecting rates of suicide. Shelby Chestnut, the director of policy and programming at the Transgender Law Center, says that’s why the accurate and positive representation of transgender people is so important. “If you’re hearing negative messages about your entire existence, your rates of depression increase. Unfortunately the rates of suicide increase,” Chestnut said of at-risk transgender youth.

Advertisement

For athletes like Schuyler Bailar, being open about his journey is about hope. “I didn’t see anybody like me,” Bailar said of being a transgender Asian American man. Bailar made literal and metaphorical waves as the first transgender athlete to compete in Division 1 sports as part of the Harvard men’s swimming team. His social media presence has grown with his public activism; he shares infographics with over 300,000 followers aiming to affirm other transgender youth. “Now if you Googled transgender swimmer I pop up,” said Bailar. "[It tells kids] ‘Hey you belong here.’”

At the end of the day, the semantic debates and the politicization around transgender rights often erase the individuals — the kids who aren’t trying to compete for the Olympics, who just want to have fun. Let transgender kids be kids, and let them play on the teams they choose.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A House committee to investigate the events of Jan. 6 held its first hearing this week, aiming to unravel the details of the Capitol riot that left five dead. The riot was an attack on our democracy, a startling insurrection that many have called an act of domestic terrorism, including FBI Director Christopher A. Wray .

Over 500 participants in the violent mob have been charged with crimes, but not one of them will be prosecuted for terrorism. Unlike our stringent laws against foreign terrorists and sympathizers, the U.S. doesn’t have a federal statute criminalizing domestic terrorism despite the fact that it’s now the larger threat .

The Biden administration’s new strategy to counter domestic terrorism is a direly needed step to combat extremism within our borders. But without a federal statute, it’s difficult to perceive and confront the severity of the threat.

Jan. 6 rioters will likely be convicted of other crimes , such as unlawful entry into a restricted building and obstruction of an official proceeding. These charges should be enough to send guilty parties to prison, some of them for a long time. But they still don’t accurately label the offenders for who they really are: violent domestic extremists who carried out an act of terrorism on U.S. soil.

Advertisement

The debate over a domestic terrorism statute is extremely complex. In most cases, law enforcement already has the tools to prosecute violent extremists for other crimes, and civil rights advocates worry that increased authority is bound to be abused.

But we need this statute because we need to set the record straight. There can be no double standard when it comes to acts of terrorism. Whether the perpetrator is Christian or Muslim, American or foreign, violence committed on behalf of an ideology needs to be called out by its proper name.

“We’ve had far more mischief caused by right-wing extremists than we have by Islamists,” said Gary LaFree, a professor of criminology at the University of Maryland. “I think part of the reason we are getting more domestic right-wing terrorism is because we have been so tepid in our response.”

A federal statute would provide impetus to take a more proactive and direct approach to domestic extremism. We have the resources we need, Chapman University professor Peter Simi argues; we’re just not using them.

“We didn’t ignore this problem because we didn’t have the right tools,” Simi said. “Most of the failure to address this problem has been that we just haven’t perceived it as a problem.”

What we really need is a fundamental shift in the way we view domestic actors.

Admittedly, implementing a domestic terrorism law is no straightforward task, and many experts don’t believe it’s a necessary or wise step to take. One reason is that a law like this could work both ways. Right-wing extremists and white supremacists currently pose the most significant threat of violence, experts say, but a domestic terrorism law could also be used against left-wing organizations like Black Lives Matter, which many conservatives blame for destructive riots during last year’s George Floyd protests.

“Terrorism has long been a label abused,” said Heather Williams, a senior policy researcher at the Rand Corp . “It’s a label used when it serves the interest of those applying it.”

Advertisement

“When you give law enforcement more authority, you’re really just turbocharging an already racist system,” said Kathleen Ruane, senior legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union. “Our concern is that a domestic terrorism statue will actually be used more often to target communities of color.”

The roots of domestic extremism go too deep to be mitigated by law enforcement alone, Ruane said.

Our government has a discouraging track record of targeting political groups that are out of the mainstream or considered too radical by those in power. Extremism is in the eye of the beholder, and therefore it’s essential that we preserve our 1st Amendment rights. But whether you’re far right or far left, violence warrants accountability, and we shouldn’t shy away from that.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence released a report in March assessing the dangers posed by domestic actors, which noted that, compared to other categories of extremists, racially or ethnically motivated extremists are most likely to commit acts of mass violence. We’ve seen this before, as when Patrick Crusius targeted Latinos in El Paso in 2019, or when Robert Bowers opened fire in a synagogue in Pittsburgh one year before that.

Advertisement

We need a federal law to criminalize domestic terrorism, which LaFree called the most serious challenge to our democracy since the Civil War. Yes, a statute like this would be subject to abuse, but that’s a worthwhile risk that we can be prepared for. Civil rights organizations such as the ACLU and the Brennan Center for Justice are well aware of law enforcement’s tendency to target minorities and will be able to respond quickly to overreaches of power.

Ultimately, the concern that a federal domestic terrorism statute could be misused by authorities doesn’t compare to the imminent threat of violence posed by right-wing extremists. The FBI released an unclassified document in June warning that domestic extremists who adhere to the QAnon conspiracy theory could become more violent in the immediate future.

Lives have already been lost, and the alarm bells continue to ring. We don’t know if or when the next domestic extremist attack will come, but if we establish a federal law against domestic terrorism now, we can face the threat head-on.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The news that Pope Francis will reimpose limits on the celebration of the traditional Latin Mass will disappoint and even enrage devotees of that ritual. But traditionalist Catholics who appreciated the revival of the old form encouraged by Francis’ predecessor, Pope Benedict XVI, are caught in a couple of contradictions.

The first is that conservative Catholics at least in theory take a strong view of papal prerogatives, but here a so-called “liberal” pope is using his authority to rescind a directive by his “conservative” predecessor. Reversing a 2007 decision by Benedict, Francis said that priests who wish to celebrate the so-called Extraordinary Form of the Mass would need to obtain the permission of their bishop.

In what traditionalists will see as insult added to injury, Francis explained that he had concluded that concessions to supporters of the old Mass had been “exploited to widen the gaps, reinforce the divergences, and encourage disagreements that injure the Church, block her path and expose her to the peril of division.”

If you think the pope has the final word, then you must accept the decision of the current one (unless you believe that Francis isn’t the real pontiff, a truly fringe position). Otherwise you’re purporting to be more Catholic than the pope.

Advertisement

There’s another contradiction snaring traditionalists, whether they are superannuated cradle Catholics who grew up with the old rite or younger believers who find it aesthetically or spiritually edifying. (As I wrote here, a lot of post-Vatican II worship is pretty banal.)

In allowing greater use of the old Mass, Benedict arguably was acting in the cause of pluralism. Benedict also granted a special status to Anglican converts to Catholicism who use a liturgy that contains some language derived from Anglican sources.

But to the extent that you see the “old Mass” — celebrated in Latin by a priest with his back to the congregation — as the “true” Mass, the less accepting you will be of the so-called Ordinary Form, celebrated in the vernacular and conceived of as a communal meal as well as a sacrifice.

In their heart of hearts, I suspect most devotees of the old Mass would prefer it to be the only permissible form, as it was for centuries before reforms adopted after Vatican II. Accepting it as one option among others always seemed like a tactical position for traditionalists.

It will be difficult for critics of Francis’ decision to argue credibly that what they want is a church that allows the Latin Mass in order to be comprehensive in the way worship is conducted and conceived — as Anglican Christianity long has been. (Episcopal bishops accept that some parishes will be “high church” with elaborate Catholic ceremonial and some “low church” with more sedate services.)

A better argument for the traditionalists would be that the Vatican accepts the traditional liturgies of Eastern churches that recognize the pope. But Francis obviously believes that more uniformity is necessary for Catholics of the Roman rite, his primary flock. It’s just not the uniformity that traditionalists desire.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On Sept. 14, California voters will decide two questions: whether to oust Gov. Gavin Newsom from office and, if so, who among the 46 candidates is best suited to take over.

Part 1 will be decided by a majority of votes, just like any other ballot measure. But when it comes to Part 2, the math changes. The winner doesn’t need more than 50% to win, just a plurality of the votes. That would mean that the next governor, be it a reality TV star or a former big-city mayor, could assume control over the world’s fifth-largest economy and the state’s massive bureaucracy with support from only a fraction of voters — maybe even a tiny fraction.

This arrangement is not just perilous for the state’s stability, it’s undemocratic. In other California elections, including special elections triggered by the death or resignation of an incumbent, a candidate cannot win without the support of a majority of voters. If a candidate doesn’t win outright, the top two vote-getters compete in a runoff. The fact that the recall election omits this reasonable step should concern all voters, regardless of whether they want Newsom to keep his job.

This is not the only feature of California’s 110-year-old recall law that needs updating to better serve citizens in the 21st century. Other provisions of the state’s rules for recall elections strike us as worth reexamining and, in some cases, tweaking before the next recall. And yes, the uptick in recall filings and political polarization over the last decade or so suggest strongly there will be a next time.

Advertisement

Why, for example, does California have among the lowest signature requirements among states that allow for the recall of a state official? Most others require that recall proponents gather signatures equal to 25% of the votes cast in the last election. California requires just 12%. That might have been a high bar in 1911, when the population was scattered across the 770-mile length of the state, but is it too low in 2021, when petitions for ballot measures are gathered en masse by paid staff in parking lots? And does it make fiscal sense to allow a recall to move forward if it would take place less than six months before a regular election? Holding an extra election in 58 counties is costly — approximately $215 million for the Sept. 14 election.

If a poll conducted in July by the Public Policy Institute of California is any indication, most Californians support revisions to the law. Though the pollsters found strong support overall for the state’s recall provision (86% of 1,569 respondents), a significant share, 66%, thought the recall process ought to be overhauled. Among the changes they supported is establishing a standard for removal on specific grounds of misconduct, such as malfeasance, neglect of duties or criminal convictions, as several other states have; currently, a California governor can be recalled for any reason. The poll also found support for increasing the number of signatures it takes to trigger a recall.

There are other provisions that deserve scrutiny: Should the recall election be a single question, followed by a separate election for a replacement or by the elevation of the lieutenant governor? Should a recall target be allowed to run on the replacement ballot — that is, could Newsom be a candidate to replace Newsom? These questions should be a starting point for a discussion about reforming the recall rules. And it must begin immediately, even before the Sept. 14 election.

To that end, we support the idea of creating a bipartisan commission to build a foundation for a proposed constitutional amendment to be placed by the Legislature on a future state ballot. We rarely support these type of commissions, as they are often convened as an excuse to delay real reforms. But altering this important tool of direct democracy should not be rushed or undertaken by one political party, as other recent recall tweaks have been. Proper study would allay concerns that any changes were partisan efforts to rig future recalls in the favor of a particular party.

Gov. Hiram Johnson, the architect of California’s direct democracy system, envisioned the recall as one of a trio of reforms, along with ballot initiatives and referendums, that “give to the electorate the power of action when desired, and they do place in the hands of the people the means by which they may protect themselves.”

What they needed protection from in 1911 was a political structure that had been hijacked by the powerful Southern Pacific Railroad.

In 2021, voters need protection from demagogues, wacky candidates and a marginalized political party that can’t win legitimately in regular elections and resorts to exploiting this outdated law to unfairly seize power.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: I am an 80-year-old man who survived the pre-vaccination era of childhood diseases the hard way — I suffered through them. (“Vaccinated versus unvaccinated: Lines harden as COVID surge continues,” Aug. 6)

When I was a young boy, my family’s house had a Los Angeles County “quarantine” sign affixed to the front door because a child inside (me) had chickenpox and measles simultaneously. Thus weakened, I developed pneumonia and strep throat, and at one point the doctors told my parents I would be OK if I lived through the night. They were “optimistic” because I had been injected with a new drug called penicillin.

There are adults today who never witnessed such suffering. They, in ignorance, are expressing their right to see others suffer or die by going unvaccinated.

Smallpox and polio have been largely eradicated because of vaccination. For my protection, I’ve been inoculated against multiple dangerous diseases, including COVID-19, and I’m still here thanks to scientists and doctors.

Advertisement

I have no sympathy for adults who refuse vaccination against COVID-19 and then become sick. Their decision not to be inoculated, endangering children and others, is absolutely unforgivable.

David Roelen, Torrance

..

To the editor: I do not understand why people like Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and Texas Gov. Greg Abbott are taking such a hard line against mask and vaccine requirements when they have been vaccinated themselves.

It is apparent that they truly do not care about the safety of the people within their states and only want to keep them riled up and scared that somehow their freedom of choice will be taken away.

Are all these anti-vaccine protesters who supposedly value freedom of choice over their bodies similarly pro-choice regarding abortion? Can they not see then that they are being misled by people like Abbott and DeSantis?

Sheryl Kinne, Lake Balboa

..

Advertisement

To the editor: Fifty-two years ago, I was drafted into the U.S. Army. While at basic training we were vaccinated, where they used an air gun held to the arm, which caused a small opening in the skin to receive the medication.

No needles, no choices, no arguments. We were going overseas and needed protection.

I don’t understand why some fire and law enforcement personnel are unwilling to be vaccinated. Politics has made this an issue, and many vaccinated politicians spout whatever they feel is needed to get votes and continue to hold the American people hostage.

It sounds a lot like a ransomware attack.

Advertisement

Dean Blau, Lake Balboa

..

To the editor: How much more time will officials in Los Angeles waste on “considering” whether to require proof of vaccination for people entering indoor spaces?

We’ve have had months to get vaccinated. Stop letting the anti-vaxxers endanger everyone’s health and put this requirement in effect tomorrow.

Advertisement

Cyndi Kitchen, Manhattan Beach
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Race is a touchy subject in this country at the most easygoing of times, and these are not the most easygoing of times. The issue is especially fraught as the nation struggles to come to some kind of racial reckoning after the murder of George Floyd, who died under the knee of a white police officer.

It’s not surprising, then, that a renewed call for ethnic studies in public schools has caused a nationwide wave of contentious school board meetings, with opponents of such courses hurling accusations of indoctrination and in some cases attempting to recall the education leaders they had elected.

The verbal cudgel that opponents wield most often against ethnic studies is that it’s a version of “critical race theory,” an area of academic study that emerged during the 1970s that has lately become the bête noire of the right. More than 10 Republican-controlled states have moved to ban teaching anything about critical race theory in schools, even though many people have very little idea what this complex vein of scholarship is.

What many of its detractors do realize — and what they can’t stand — is that critical race theory challenges the notion that this is a land of equal opportunity for all, regardless of race, ethnicity or background. As it should. This is a land of equal opportunity — but only for some people. In those groups, opportunity has been passed on from one generation to the next, while other groups are perpetually left out. One of the main tenets of critical race theory is to point out this reality and make students of all backgrounds aware of the impact it has on their lives almost every day.

Advertisement

It’s disturbing enough when parents rise up against their children learning uncomfortable realities. It’s deeply problematic for legislators to turn this into a political opportunity by putting a chokehold on the truth. But it’s particularly troubling when a board of education assembles a panel to educate itself and the public about ethnic studies and stacks it with people who detest critical race theory. That’s what happened in July at a forum hosted by the Orange County Board of Education, where panelists at times misrepresented critical race theory and made statements about the current state of racism in America that were out of touch and sometimes downright false.

The panelists repeatedly talked about the dangers of teaching children that systemic and institutional racism exists. Overall, their presentations went something like this: Once the Jim Crow days were over and the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed, racism in the country was pretty much relegated to isolated acts of hatred. We’re all one and we need to unify; besides, they said, look at Black students’ dismal scores on standardized math tests. Clearly what’s needed to help them is more math instruction, not ethnic studies.

They conceded that low-income children might have been stuck in underfunded schools before, but now that federal aid has raised per-pupil funding for them, there’s little reason to worry about inequality in education. And one panelist brought up the tired and largely discredited old saw of “mismatch theory,” the idea that if Black students are given a boost to get into selective colleges, the classwork will be too hard for them.

One other concern voiced by some attendees at the forum was that critical race theory teaches white children that they are oppressors and Black and Latino kids that they are perpetual victims. They have a point. Some badly fashioned curricula based on critical race theory separate and isolate groups, and imply that white students should feel guilty. But that’s neither inherent to the theory nor its aim, said Theresa Montaño, professor of Chicana and Chicano Studies at Cal State Northridge.

A proponent of critical race theory, Montaño was originally scheduled to be on the panel but withdrew, saying she’d been told this would be a conversation by ethnic studies experts, but that instead it was a stacked panel of people who were uninterested in discussing ideas. Montaño was pretty much correct, but her presence was missed. She could have informed some very uninformed people about what critical race theory is and what they were getting wrong about racism in modern America.

The one frequently repeated statement that made sense during the forum is that students need to learn facts rather than be indoctrinated into taking one side or another. True as that is in principle, the discussion showed that what is considered a “fact” really is a matter of individual or group viewpoint.

At the heart of critical race theory is the concept of systemic and institutional racism — the notion that racism isn’t an occasional aberration of individuals acting in biased or hateful ways, but entire systems that have built up over this nation’s history that put people of color at a perpetual disadvantage and that will take purposeful action to remedy.

Just look at the situation in our schools. Research shows that Black male students incur harsher discipline at school than white ones, for the same infractions. Low-income children live with daunting obstacles to academic achievement, including daily food insecurity for 1 in 6 children, according to the Children’s Defense Fund — have you tried feeding a family on the amount that food assistance programs provide? — and historically underfunded schools staffed by teachers who assume their students will not succeed.

Advertisement

It’s an attitude that rubs off, and it doesn’t magically get waved away by correcting funding formulas now — in other words, there’s a lot more to it than spending more money on math instruction. Those schools helped perpetuate systems that held some students back while launching others to success. Just “working harder” isn’t going to cut it.

The very fact that the panelists — as well as politicians, journalists and education experts — reflexively use the phrase “low-income Black and Latino students” is telling. The terms almost always go together in metropolitan areas because of a long history of frameworks that put those groups at a disadvantage. White people get professional jobs that lift their incomes, then help their friends get hired at the same places — friends who are usually white. That’s not intentional, hateful racism, but it is a system that acts in a racist way, day after day, across the country.

Yet it is important to acknowledge that critical race theory confuses parents and the public — and many educators — because its adherents take different views about how it should be interpreted and used. Those who rail against it point with some justification to the first draft of California’s model ethnic studies curriculum, which Montaño played a role in creating. It attempted to inculcate in students the idea that capitalism is, like racism, a form of oppression and power. The curriculum left no room for the idea that there might be another side and that students could research and debate this in meaningful ways. The same was true of its one-sided and loaded take on the Israeli-Palestinian conflicts, its list of social justice groups worth studying and various other topics.

It might not matter what’s in the model curriculum, which has been overhauled in response to several volleys of critiques. School districts don’t have to use it, even if the state mandates an ethnic studies course as a high school graduation requirement. And that might be the biggest problem of all. In very progressive areas of the state, something akin to the original and troublesome model curriculum is being adopted; in conservative areas, ethnic studies will likely be watered down to a modern version of last century’s National Brotherhood Week.

Advertisement

Public education has gotten better at bringing the history, literature and art of marginalized groups into the classroom. But it has not gone nearly far enough, generally making the nation’s past sound much brighter and shinier than the full story suggests. Ethnic studies is one place where the intention is for students to see topics through the history and eyes of Black, Latino, Asian and Native Americans, the nation’s four most marginalized groups. Students spend most of their schooling seeing these issues through the eyes of white people who had the power to create the institutions and tell most of the stories.

It is true that students should not be proselytized and told what to believe. But they need to be taught the truth. The nation’s treatment of its most marginalized groups must not be glossed over. Students should be researching the very rich though disturbing topic of this nation’s racial history and current realities, learning both sides of controversial topics and debating those with others as they learn to reach informed and independent opinions.

The Orange County forum missed the chance to demonstrate that very thing. If the adults can’t be bothered to do open-minded research and deliver balanced reports based on the full facts, how can we expect students to carry it off? If nothing else, the bias shown by panelists, the board and most of the audience illustrated why an ethnic studies course is needed in our high schools, and why the study of systemic and institutional racism needs to be part of it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Last year, wildfires burned a record 4.4 million acres in California. Thirty-three people were killed and 10,000 structures were destroyed, including 5,500 homes.

As bad as last year was, this year’s severe drought conditions and early wildfire activity mean 2021 could be even worse. Already we’ve seen the Dixie fire scorch nearly half a million acres in Northern California, a huge fire for so early in the season.

While California has made an effort to hire more firefighters and provide sufficient resources to fight fires on state land, the federal government has fallen behind. This is particularly dangerous considering 58% of California’s forests are on federal land.

The only long-term solution to reduce wildfires is to confront climate change head-on. Unless we take strong action, conditions that cause wildfires will continue to worsen.

Advertisement

However, there are near-term actions we can take that would make a real difference in confronting the wildfire risk. One of those actions is eliminating the extreme pay gap between federal and state wildland firefighters.

The starting salary for many federal U.S. Forest Service firefighters in California is $28,078, barely 40% of the $66,336 entry-level salary Cal Fire pays. It’s clear why federal agencies have trouble attracting and retaining skilled firefighters.

Last August, at the height of a historic fire year, the Forest Service’s Pacific Southwest region had 600 unfilled firefighting positions, far below its goal of approximately 5,000 total firefighters. This year there are about 730 unfilled positions.

By contrast, Cal Fire hired nearly 3,000 additional temporary firefighters last year to support more than 5,000 permanent firefighters and expects to hire even more this year.

President Biden recently took the first step to address what he called “ridiculously low” salaries by raising the minimum firefighter wage to $15 per hour and providing recruitment and retention bonuses to most of the workforce.

However, even that move left salaries woefully out of sync with the job market and the cost of living. Moreover, low federal firefighter salaries fail to account for the critical importance and dangerous nature of the work.

The infrastructure bill currently being debated in the Senate includes $600 million to help address the pay gap. It would increase federal firefighter salaries by 50%, up to a maximum increase of $20,000 per individual. An entry-level firefighter’s $28,078 salary would increase to $42,117, narrowing but not eliminating the pay gap.

The only way to permanently fix this problem and close the pay gap is by creating a new federal job classification and higher pay series, specifically for federal wildland firefighters.

Advertisement

Earlier this year I partnered with Sen. Steve Daines (R-Mont.) on a bill to begin this job reclassification process. Once that’s accomplished — and I believe it will be — the federal government should seek to hire more wildland firefighters as soon as possible. The Forest Service’s current goal of hiring approximately 5,000 firefighters in the Pacific Southwest region may be far fewer than needed — but at least filling existing vacancies would be a good start.

The federal government must live up to its responsibility to protect the land it manages. Major fires endanger lives, property, natural resources and wildlife, so we must do all we can to address the worsening scourge of wildfire.

It is vital for Congress and the Biden administration to invest more resources in dealing with the magnitude of these increasingly deadly and devastating wildfires, and that needs to start with fair salaries for the firefighters who protect us.

Dianne Feinstein, a Democrat, is the senior U.S. senator from California.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Los Angeles appears to be having a hard time sticking with the idea of defunding the police. The city reallocated $89 million last year originally slated for police services, but this year L.A. and other major cities are boosting police budgets, particularly in the face of an alarming surge in homicides.

For those who support criminal justice reform and investing in vulnerable communities, defunding prisons might be a more durable way to go.

Although it’s not as much as on policing, the United States spends billions on prisons, jails and juvenile detention facilities. Between 1980 and 2010, this spending quadrupled from roughly $20 billion to $80 billion — a reflection of the crime-punishment wave of the mid-1980s and 1990s that led to huge increases in incarceration that disproportionately affected Black Americans.

Such extraordinary expenditures on corrections are hard to justify today. Generation Xers account for about 30% of the prison population. Born roughly between 1965 and 1979, they are well past the prime ages of criminality. Younger generations are much less engaged in crime overall. The result: empty beds in correctional facilities and an opportunity to reclaim and redirect billions of dollars.

Advertisement

Research conclusively shows that criminal behavior peaks when people are in their early 20s. And not all generations are equally engaged in crime — or equally punished, according to a study published last year.

Using data from the North Carolina Department of Public Safety, Shawn Bushway and his fellow researchers compared generational variation in incarceration for three groups: those born in 1952 (baby boomers), 1972 (Gen Xers), and 1992 (millennials). Boomer incarceration peaked at age 23 at a rate of about 780 prisoners per 100,000 people. Gen X incarceration also peaked at 23, but at an unprecedented 1,360 prisoners per 100,000 people — nearly a 75% increase.

Gen Xers were the wrong age at the wrong time. The mid-1980s to 1990s was an era of rising crime — particularly violent crime — fueled by the crack cocaine epidemic. Homicide rates doubled between 1960 and 1980 and didn’t decline until the 1990s. Men then in their teens and 20s were convicted at high rates, and the U.S. prison system rapidly expanded.

Fortunately, Gen Xers appear to have been outliers. The incarceration rates of millennials resemble those of baby boomers and should remain that way since millennials are already past the peak ages of criminal behavior.

That leaves Generation Z. As of January 2020, teens and 20-somethings were being arrested at even lower rates than millennials. Although there is evidence of an increase in violent crime among young men during the pandemic, so far it is not nearly on the scale of what happened with Gen X in the 1980s.

By 2019, juvenile detention rates were at historical lows and dropped an additional 25% during the pandemic as facilities tried to halt coronavirus transmission. That’s leaving a lot of expensive facilities mostly empty. Nationwide, per capita operating costs rose 44% from 2014 to 2020. Four states — Alaska, New Hampshire, New York and Vermont — spend more than $500,000 per year to house a juvenile. California spends more than $300,000.

The same economics hold true for adult correctional facilities. Between 2008 and 2018, the incarceration rate fell 21%, and it has fallen even faster during the pandemic. In half of the states, prisons are at 85% of capacity or less. But spending on building and running jails and prisons has held steady.

Advertisement

Shifting funds from one state or local agency to another is bureaucratically and politically difficult — made more so by negotiations with unions that represent correctional officers. Yet it makes little sense to keep funding incarceration at the same level when it is needed less and less.

Beyond the wastefulness, it may create a perverse incentive to fill the empty cells. Although causation is hard to prove, fewer people are serving out sentences in local jails, and more are being held in jail pretrial.

The process of shrinking prisons — and their budgets — could be sped along by releasing prisoners who are no longer threats to society. Many such discussions focus on diverting young first-time offenders. But this ignores the new reality of prisons: There are now more people 55 and older in state prisons than aged 18 to 24 — a complete reversal from 20 years ago. America is increasingly spending its tax dollars locking up older people.

We might reasonably expect most Gen Xers, now in their 40s and 50s, to have been released years ago after completing prison sentences received in their 20s. Instead, they fell victim to another aspect of the crime-punishment wave: an emphasis during sentencing on prior criminal histories. The bluntest such tools were three-strikes laws in many states, including California, that mandated incarceration and led to lengthy sentences for even minor infractions.

Advertisement

Even more destructive are sentencing guidelines based on a defendant’s prior convictions — which sometimes carry more weight than the severity of the present crime. Releasing older offenders, or at least not incarcerating them solely on the basis of their prior criminal history, could unlock this trapped generation without harming public safety.

Regardless, new lows in incarceration rates present a chance to shift resources away from costly correctional facilities and toward education, job training, transportation and other community services.

In other words, savings on prisons, juvenile detention and jails could pay for the aims of the many “defund the police” campaigns — and in a way that has more political support and no trade-off on public safety.

Shawn Bushway is a senior policy researcher at the nonprofit, nonpartisan Rand Corp. whose work is focused on criminal justice issues. Nidhi Kalra is a senior information scientist at Rand.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Quick: Name a historically Black college or university. Most people would list Howard, Morehouse, Spelman or Hampton. They’re not wrong — but they are part of the problem faced by the other 103 HBCUs.

The top four receive the most media attention and donations, particularly after the spotlight of Black Lives Matter over the past year. But many others need attention and funding after years of financial struggle. As in all of higher education, their costs have steadily risen, but unlike many private colleges they can’t raise tuition steeply without excluding many students they aim to serve. And although some federal funding increases have flowed in recent years, the damage was already done from a long period of cuts. Federal dollars for HBCUs fell 42% between 2003 and 2015.

I realized the gravity of the situation when a friend of mine was told by school officials and her parents to clear out her dorm before the winter break of 2019 and start looking for a new college, because the HBCU she attended, Bennett College in North Carolina, was at risk of losing accreditation and closing. That shouldn’t be a part of anyone’s college experience.

Many small, private, historically Black colleges have struggled financially, which has sometimes put accreditation in doubt. They rely on ongoing donations, because their endowments are not wealthy enough to sustain operations. Last year, the combined endowment of all HBCUs was less than $4 billion, compared with Harvard University’s $42 billion. Even many public HBCUs are at risk because they have been chronically shortchanged in state funding.

Advertisement

The nation’s 107 historically Black colleges and universities, both public and private, have a rich legacy of educating African Americans at a time when no one else would, dating back to 1837. They have given generations of Black men and women a space to flourish and educate themselves to better serve their communities. The mission remains crucial today, and they need all the help they can get.

Many of these institutions have accumulated crushing debts. In April the U.S. Department of Education forgave $1.6 billion owed by 45 HBCUs. This is the sort of one-time boost that many institutions need in order to get back on their feet. The federal government should continue to seek such paths to support these schools, especially because they were deprived for so long.

We now know that some of the historically Black schools have also suffered under illegally skewed state funding. Four HBCUs in Maryland recently won a lawsuit against the state, which owes them $577 million that was inappropriately diverted for decades. In 2001, a similar case in Mississippi ended with a settlement of $500 million — after dragging out for 26 years. Researchers looking closely at a brief span, from 2010-12, found that historically Black land-grant universities in 17 states were denied $56 million in state funding that they were owed. Another tally of arrears totals $1.1 billion so far, owed to 50 colleges.

These funding deficits were not small or isolated. They cut deeply, and the schools will struggle to recover. States should pay what they owe from years past and ensure longer-term structural change in funding to help the schools survive.

Finally, private donations must be part of the solution. The colleges and universities with the most stable finances operate largely on revenue from vast endowments. Recent high-profile gifts, like $500 million from MacKenzie Scott and $120 million from Reed Hastings and Patty Quillin, show that there are donors ready to support these institutions. Future dollars will make the biggest difference if spread among smaller, overlooked schools.

HBCUs do important work, and they will continue to do it as long as they can. It’s up to lawmakers and donors to give them the chance.

Gabrielle Chenault has been an intern at the Los Angeles Times and will be entering the graduate journalism program at USC in the fall.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@That street taco you have been craving was supposed to be legal by now. Instead, thousands of sidewalk food vendors in Los Angeles remain unpermitted, denied the dream of entrepreneurialism by laws that undercut food safety principles they claim to protect.

As L.A. haltingly reopens amid the COVID-19 pandemic, officials have relaxed regulations to allow restaurants to serve food outside. But vendors — providing L.A.’s original outdoor dining experience — are denied the same treatment. In this pivotal moment, as many in government work to address inequality worsened by the pandemic, we must prioritize equitable public health standards that promote economic justice. This includes addressing the needs of low-income sidewalk vendors so that they can finally serve your tacos and other iconic street food fare with the full legal protection they, and you, deserve.

We were supposed to have already done this. In 2018, the California Legislature passed Senate Bill 946, requiring cities to stop issuing criminal citations and to regulate, not ban, sidewalk vending. Following along, L.A. repealed its decades-long criminal ban, establishing a permit system to regulate vending locations. These were landmark victories for sidewalk food vendors — but only on paper.

Three years later, workers behind L.A.’s celebrated food carts remain subject to daily fines and harassment for lacking permits. Since 2020, the city has issued only 165 permits to sidewalk food vendors, out of an estimated 10,000 eligible vendors.

Advertisement

A tangled web of city, county and state law is to blame. The city will not issue an operating permit to food vendors until they obtain a county health permit, which itself follows requirements set by the state Retail Food Code. To understand how all these rules fit together, we mapped out every step a vendor has to meet to legally vend in LA. We were shocked by what we found: A system designed to permit vending instead renders it functionally illegal. How?

A critical problem is that permit standards were developed for large food trucks — not small sidewalk vendors. For most food, the rules impose onerous equipment requirements, mandating four separate sink compartments, 20 gallons of water, exhaust ventilation, mechanical refrigeration and large food storage capacity. As a result, the few qualifying carts on the market cost thousands of dollars, and many are simply too heavy to push and too large for sidewalks. To make matters worse, the state prohibits slicing fruit or hot-holding previously prepared food at a sidewalk cart, creating a de facto ban on fruit carts and taco stands.

Ill-designed equipment requirements aren’t the only problem. The law also requires sidewalk vendors to pay for access to a small number of expensive commissaries made for trucks, while underutilized kitchens in community spaces like schools, restaurants and places of worship sit empty. Obtaining a permit requires navigating a head-spinning number of steps, none explained in languages relevant to the immigrant community. Any vendor who can successfully navigate this labyrinth then encounters a shocking price tag. Selling unpackaged food incurs a minimum of $10,000 in startup costs, plus $5,000 in annual fees. For workers earning an average of $15,000 a year, this amounts to a ban.

Instead of helping vendors break down barriers, local officials have created new barriers — in some cases, literally, by erecting chain-link fences to banish vendors from beloved community spaces like Echo Park and the Avenue 26 Night Mart. Instead of finding solutions, officials punish violations with tickets and cart confiscation,

depriving vendors of their livelihood. Raids are often conducted by sheriff’s deputies who have no business enforcing food safety rules.

The good news is that this broken system is fixable in the short term through targeted reform advancing the twin goals of promoting vendor opportunity and protecting public health.

First, the Legislature must change the Retail Food Code to support safe practices already undertaken by vendors: reducing sink requirements to reasonable levels; establishing sensible standards for safe reheating of food; opening licensed home kitchens for food preparation; and removing onerous criminal penalties.

Second, the county Department of Public Health must adapt its administrative practices to support struggling vendors. One easy step forward is to preapprove blueprints for affordable carts.

The county should also authorize underutilized community kitchen spaces for vendors to prepare food and store equipment, enable shared access to auxiliary sink facilities, lower permitting costs and stop bringing armed law enforcement to compliance checks. None of these critical steps requires state action; all can be done by the Department of Public Health now, as part of an ongoing county pilot program to evaluate and design new street vending regulations.

Advertisement

Removing these barriers is good not only for vendors, but also for all Angelenos. Helping vendors succeed will expand healthy food options for consumers, provide economic security for low-income and immigrant workers, and reduce enforcement costs.

We are in a moment when big change is more urgent and achievable than at any other point in our lifetimes. Let’s seize it to finish the work of legalizing sidewalk vending and fulfill the promise of an equitable economy for all L.A. residents.

Scott Cummings is the Robert Henigson professor of legal ethics at the UCLA School of Law. Doug Smith is a supervising senior staff attorney in the Community Development Project at Public Counsel.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Just 10 years ago, ransomware was the domain of mostly small-fry hackers encrypting files to squeeze a few hundred dollars out of random individuals. Today it’s an urgent issue of national security.

As President Biden said in late July: If the U.S. ends up in “a real shooting war” with “a major power,” a “cyber breach of great consequence” will be to blame.

Cybercriminals have been escalating their attacks for years — locking up the computer systems of police stations, city governments and hospitals. But the ransomware attack in May on the operator of the largest petroleum pipeline in the U.S. — which disrupted gasoline supplies in much of the country — is one of many cyberassaults that are tiptoeing closer to an act of war.

DarkSide, the hackers-for-hire believed to be based in Russia, dropped out of sight after the company Colonial Pipeline paid $4.4 million in bitcoin. But cybercrime groups frequently reorganize and rebrand. Haron and BlackMatter are among the new names that have emerged this summer. The FBI recently announced it was tracking more than 100 active ransomware groups.

Advertisement

To rein in ransomware attacks, the U.S. needs to upend the risk-reward ratio for hackers — and for the countries that harbor or support them. Such a national deterrence strategy would make networks harder to breach, hit back harder against hackers and claw back gains from those who succeed.

Many corporations and other private-sector organizations haven’t sufficiently hardened their own defenses, despite repeated warnings. In part, this is because they’ve paid too little a price for their negligence. In 2013, Target suffered what was then the largest-ever data breach, which compromised the financial data of 40 million customers. In 2017, the sensitive financial records of more than 140 million people were exposed in the data breach of Equifax, a credit-monitoring company.

Neither company — nor many others like them — were punished by their shareholders or their customers over the long term.

That could change if companies start to be held legally liable — beyond government fines — for damage caused by their lax security. For instance, a class-action lawsuit has been filed on behalf of 11,000 gas station owners who are seeking damages for sales lost because of the Colonial Pipeline shutdown.

Their claims of negligence may have merit. Colonial and other pipeline operators had been alerted to ransomware threats months before the attack by the Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. And yet DarkSide easily made its way into Colonial’s networks using an inactive Virtual Private Network log-in found among many stolen passwords from the dark web.

The incursion might have been prevented by basic internet hygiene practices — deactivating old accounts, mandating frequent password updates and two-factor user authentication, and practicing running company operations from backup data.

Still, cyberattacks are becoming so sophisticated that hardening network defenses won’t be enough. The hack of developer SolarWinds, discovered in 2020, corrupted a routine update of its widely used IT management tool, while the Microsoft Exchange breach in March took advantage of four vulnerabilities in the email software that were exploited before a patch could be issued.

Advertisement

Retaliation is the lodestone of any deterrence strategy. The question is whom to strike back against and how hard.

Charging individual hackers with crimes rarely works because so many operate outside the reach of U.S. law enforcement. Eastern European governments have been particularly unwilling to stop cybercriminals from operating within their borders. Economic sanctions are another tool — but they have yet to push Russia to deal with its local ransomware groups such as DarkSide and REvil. Other countries directly support such criminal activity; North Korea notoriously uses an army of cybercriminals to raise money for the totalitarian state.

To raise the stakes for its adversaries, the United States could launch online counterattacks on a hacking group or its host country. Retaliation measures taken could become more severe when ransomware jeopardizes public safety or access to necessities like healthcare, food and gasoline. This appeared to be what Biden was seeking to convey during his June meeting with Vladimir Putin, when he handed the Russian president a list of 16 critical infrastructure sectors that Biden declared off-limits.

Such resolve must be backed up by more than words. For deterrence to be credible, the U.S. needs to send clear signals that it is prepared to retaliate proportionately — especially if state-sponsored hackers take down a power grid or disrupt the operation of a dam. Under international law, such actions are considered “use of force” against another country, and that puts a military response on the table.

Advertisement

Some experts argue that private companies also should have the right to counterattack. Among the provocative ideas are reviving congressionally issued letters of marque, a permit given to merchant ships to search out pirates and take back stolen assets by force in the 18th century. A modern version would incentivize corporations to act as “cyber scouts” and share information with U.S. agencies in return for some immunity from fines and protection against lawsuits. A “hack back” bill introduced in Congress in 2019 would have gone further, allowing the private sector to use hacking tools against cybercriminals in the name of “active defense.”

These policies could, however, create more danger than they prevent. Ransomware attacks are frequently misattributed in the days after they become public. Private parties could unintentionally start an international conflict or escalate existing tensions. But the fact that these ideas are being taken seriously speaks to how recent approaches have fallen short.

Another way to deter ransomware attacks would be to deny hackers any gains from their successes. Regularly backing up data and exercising recovery can help, but it is not foolproof. The FBI advises against paying ransoms, but there is no consensus on whether banning ransom payments outright makes sense.

When ransoms are paid, the same digital ledger technology that powers bitcoin, ethereum and other cryptocurrencies can aid efforts to follow the money. For instance, the FBI watched DarkSide transfer its Colonial ransom haul across digital accounts, then moved in to seize about half the ransom, roughly $2.3 million. In addition, law enforcement agencies can try to make it harder to use cryptocurrencies to launder ransoms or purchase illicit goods.

Advertisement

Just two months after the Colonial Pipeline shutdown, another group of hackers stole sensitive data from Saudi Aramco — the largest oil company in the world — in an attempt to extort $50 million. That reflects the pernicious nature of problem: Left unabated, the scourge of hacking for ransom will extract ever-larger costs and cause wider disruptions that threaten our economic and national security.

The United States cannot rely on a passive, defensive strategy. Deterrence will require undermining everything that makes ransomware attractive by making it harder for hackers to profit — and quickly striking back against those who try.

Jonathan Welburn and Quentin Hodgson research cybersecurity, deterrence strategy and infrastructure protection at the nonprofit, nonpartisan Rand Corp.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Should noncitizens be allowed to vote?

That sounds a little crazy, doesn’t it? Weren’t we taught growing up that the right to vote belongs only to full-fledged, passport-eligible citizens of this country?

Nonetheless, the movement to expand immigrants’ voting rights is gaining ground.

We pay taxes, immigrants say. We run businesses. We send kids to public schools, drive the roads, ride the subways and fight in America’s wars. We are stakeholders in our communities and shouldn’t be excluded from the decision-making process that affects us.

Advertisement

There’s currently a bill before the New York City Council to let legal permanent residents vote in municipal elections — up to and including mayoral elections. Since 2018, San Francisco has allowed noncitizens to vote in school board elections, regardless of whether they’re in the country legally or not. Chicago allows it for school council elections.

Here in Los Angeles, the L.A. Unified school board authorized a study more than a year ago on how to extend voting rights in school board elections to noncitizen parents, grandparents and caregivers. The study — which would presumably lead to a ballot measure — was delayed by the pandemic but will be revived as school reopens.

There’s no question that noncitizen voting rights is a radical notion. It’s understandably worrisome to those who believe citizenship matters.

And you don’t have to be a xenophobe or a white nationalist or a Trump voter to feel that way.

A few years ago, then-Gov. Jerry Brown, whose liberal credentials are pretty impeccable, vetoed a bill passed by the California Legislature that would have allowed permanent legal residents to serve on juries, saying: “Jury service, like voting, is quintessentially a prerogative and responsibility of citizenship.”

Citizenship is a concept, a construct — but it’s a meaningful one. The idea is that there is a difference between merely living in the U.S. and being a full participant in its democratic self-government. Many people are stakeholders, but citizens are more like shareholders.

Becoming a citizen is a process (unless you’re born here, in which case it’s simple luck). At the end of it — after you’ve waited your time, lived in the U.S., taken a test, paid your fees, pledged your loyalty — you are rewarded for your formal commitment with both rights and responsibilities.

And there’s a value to waiting. The term “assimilation” is out of favor (perhaps because it implies that immigrants must check their differences at the door), but “incorporation” and “integration” are still important — learning the language, understanding the culture, making sure you buy into the rules and values laid out in the Constitution. Shared citizenship is a unifying force.

Advertisement

My mother, who came to America during World War II, went through this process, becoming a citizen seven years after she arrived.

Nevertheless, despite everything I’ve just said, I’ve come around to the idea that we should try noncitizen voting anyway, at least in a limited way on the most local level. The advantages outweigh the disadvantages.

After all, the United States was founded on the promise of “no taxation without representation” — yet there are some 25 million people living in the country, more than half of them legally, who are unable to participate in the elections that affect their lives and livelihoods. And yes, most of them pay taxes.

When a segment of the population is excluded from the political process, it can lead to discriminatory public policy and mistreatment.

Advertisement

Furthermore, noncitizen voting was widespread in the U.S. at the beginning of the nation’s history; it ended only in the 1920s. It is permitted in 45 countries around the world in local or regional elections, and in some cases, at the national level.

Noncitizen voting in federal elections was barred in 1996, but where it’s been allowed in the U.S. in recent years — in 11 towns in Maryland as well as San Francisco, two cities in Vermont and a few other jurisdictions — the sky hasn’t fallen. In many cases, it has led to greater political engagement and often to “improved outcomes,” says Ron Hayduk, a political science professor at San Francisco State.

Hayduk argues that noncitizen voting on the local level can be seen as part of the process of becoming a citizen, rather than a substitute for it. It undoubtedly fosters a sense of belonging and investment in the community.

It’s all well and good to tell immigrants to wait their turn to vote, but gaining citizenship is caught up in the U.S. immigration system, which is broken and irrational by all accounts, with no fix in sight.

Advertisement

In contrast, a limited experiment in noncitizen voting by the L.A. Unified School District makes sense. After all, the school board cited an estimate that 42% of Southern California’s children have at least one parent who is not a citizen, without a voice in the district’s leadership.

The expansion of the franchise should be narrow. It should be for school board elections only, and it could be restricted to legal permanent residents with children in the system. Let’s try it and see what happens.

Noncitizen voting raises fundamental questions about our country. Who is an American? Who gets to set the rules? What does it mean to run a country “with the consent of the governed”? What are the costs if millions of stakeholders are excluded from decision-making?

This experiment would challenge our assumptions but perhaps make us stronger in the long run.

Advertisement

@Nick_Goldberg
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kelp forests are a crucial California marine ecosystem. From kelp’s floating canopies to its “holdfast” roots, the giant seaweed — algae, actually — supports greater biodiversity and sequesters more carbon than a redwood grove, while also protecting our coastline from the full force of Pacific storms. Kelp forests shelter fin fish, shellfish, whales, seals, octopuses and sharks — more than 1,000 animal and plant species in all.

Unfortunately, since 2013 the state’s kelp beds have been in an unprecedented state of collapse. From San Diego to Monterey the losses are patchy, but north of the Golden Gate more than 95% of the kelp is now gone. Warming oceans combined with past hunting and fishing practices upset the balance between predators and prey in the kelp forest, with devastating effects.

One possible remedy has a satisfying twist — return the sea otter, the keystone kelp forest predator, to its historical range along the North Coast.

Perhaps 300,000 sea otters once thrived along the north Pacific Rim, from Japan to Baja, until humans hunted them almost to extinction in the 19th century. They’ve rebounded since they were fully protected in the U.S. 50 years ago, and in California they’ve recolonized about 13% of their range, especially in and around Monterey Bay.

Advertisement

Why not farther north? Possibly because they can’t make it past a burgeoning white shark population. If humans help them make the leap, they might be able to protect surviving North Coast kelp beds, and kick-start a more complete restoration.

California’s kelp catastrophe has two immediate causes. In 2013, a marine heat wave that scientists dubbed “the blob” caused ocean temperatures to spike along the West Coast, weakening the kelp, which thrives in cold, nutrient-rich currents. Then a virus — probably supercharged by the warmer waters, according to a 2019 study — allowed purple urchins, voracious kelp eaters, to proliferate.

The virus, known as the sea star wasting syndrome, is on a par with horror movie scourges. It melts the limbs and bodies of what we used to call starfish, including the many-armed sunflower sea star, a purple urchin predator. On the North Coast, with sea otters long gone, sunflower sea stars have been the major purple urchin predator. (Another top urchin predator, commercial fishermen, targets larger, meatier species.)

Since the sea star die-off, the quarter-sized purple urchins have run amok, especially off the Sonoma and Mendocino coast, devouring kelp and replacing the complex near-shore kelp forest habitat with “urchin barrens” — a seabed carpeted with pastel pin cushions.

To combat the devastation, divers — some volunteers and some paid by the state and private donors — have organized efforts to suction up, collect or take hammers to the urchins by the tens of thousands. But there’s no indication it’s helping much. Even as the kelp starts to recover, hungry purple urchins find it and the destruction begins all over again.

Sea otters are nearly as insatiable as purple urchins. They lack the blubber common to other marine mammals and depend for warmth on their luxuriant fur (the prize that led to their slaughter in the 1800s). They run hot; their metabolism requires that they eat up to a quarter of their body weight each day in abalone, crab, octopus — and urchins.

Letting otters expand their range on their own is ideal, but relocating them is possible. It could start with 10 or 12 — a sea otter SWAT team — from what’s estimated to be a California population of about 3,000. In fact, U.S. Fish and Wildlife has years of experience relocating the marine mammals with varying success, often at the behest of the fishing industry, which tends to view otters as competition.

North Coast fishermen, too, may not welcome back otters. On the other hand a lot of science — and in-the-water evidence at the Channel Islands and other MPAs (marine protected areas) — indicates that the more intact the near-shore ecosystem, with a healthy mix of predators and prey, the better the fishing will be in adjacent waters.

Advertisement

It was a remnant population of sea otters from Big Sur that recolonized Monterey Bay. Their presence played a key role in restoring the area’s kelp forests after the closure of Monterey’s polluting canneries. Today the bay and the city are a world center of marine biodiversity, with a thriving economy based on tourism (starring sea otters), marine science and fishing.

Otters could help in the battle to save North Coast kelp, but they aren’t a silver-bullet solution. That’s because the urchin barrens are in part populated by “zombies.” Once purple urchins destroy too much kelp, they turn auto-cannibalistic rather than starve to death; they feed on themselves. Otters aren’t much interested in the shell-like results. Studies in Monterey Bay show that even though otters don’t clear the barrens, they keep proliferating purple urchins in check wherever kelp survives.

Kelp forests are good at reproducing themselves; one hope is that the balance the otters maintain would allow kelp to reseed whenever and wherever a storm or some other natural event — or human effort — scrapes away enough zombies.

Conservationist Aldo Leopold once wrote, “To keep every cog and wheel is the first precaution of the intelligent tinkerer.”

Advertisement

On the North Coast, the way back to a healthy ocean will take planning, funding and cooperation and some intelligent tinkering. Reestablishing sea otters throughout their traditional range could be a start.

David Helvarg is the executive director of Blue Frontier, an ocean conservation and policy group. His latest book is “The Golden Shore — California’s Love Affair with the Sea.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@By one count, more than 2.5 quintillion bytes of digitized information are generated on Earth every day. That’s more data than all the words spoken by all the humans who ever existed, using generous estimates for both. Texts, emails, pet videos, influencer TikToks, financial transactions and data about data itself all inundate the world in a seemingly never-ending flood.

As much as this glistening informational ocean supports and amplifies our abilities as a species, it also burdens us. The energy and resource demands of data storage and computation are enormous, and despite ever-improving efficiencies and innovations, the sheer growth of data seems to continually outpace us: The largest individual data centers in the world, tucked into the semi-arid landscape outside the city of Hohhot in Inner Mongolia, each now extend across hundreds of acres to keep up with demand. Yet their microprocessors and storage devices that are state-of-the-art today will be ready for imperfect recycling tomorrow.

There are even technological “mutations,” such as blockchains and cryptocurrencies, that are deliberately, computationally and energetically demanding (or else we could all beat the system, mining wealth on a whim). So much so that Elon Musk announced that Tesla won’t use bitcoin further until the cryptocurrency gets its environmental act together, or at least uses clean energy for 50% of its operations. Even with such precautions, some projections suggest that within 20 years our global electronic data infrastructure may demand as much electrical power as the total amount we generate as a species today. We should venerate the engineers and coders who optimize and improve our data to save energy as much as we praise any green new deal.

Really, though, none of this is new for humans, it’s just on a bigger scale than before. Our externally held information, not encoded in our genetic material yet heritable and evolvable, has always asked a lot of us. For centuries much of this “dataome” has existed in billions upon billions of printed books, each requiring energy and raw materials to be fabricated and accessed. Throughout human history, the dataome has taken all manner of resources and attention to build and sustain; from pigments on cave walls to clay in tablets, to the bricks and mortar of libraries and school rooms.

Advertisement

The information of the dataome is also constantly reinvented and rewritten into new physical forms, leaping from words to film and video, from archived documents to digital databases. Less than 100 years ago it jumped onto computer punch cards, whose peak use may have sucked up as much as 10% of the United States’ annual coal-burning energy budget. But, despite the demands of the dataome, we’ve seldom stopped to ask why we comply. Why are we so compelled by data and its information?

In a Darwinian sense, we understand that our informational world confers amazing survival advantages onto us as a species. We can explicitly learn from the past. We can interact with people we’ll never physically meet, or, indeed, who lived 1,000 years ago. We can survey and model the world to evaluate risk and reward with astonishing fidelity. Yet these advantages come with mounting challenges, whether in energy and environmental change or in misleading, corrupted information and the sociopolitical instabilities it can cause.

There is another way to see all of this. It involves a realignment of how we think about ourselves as distinct from our data. But if we take that leap, pieces of the puzzle of our existence fall into place. The key is understanding the dataome as just another part of a process that has been unfurling here on Earth over most of the past 4 billion years. That process is life itself.

Biological genes are built out of organic molecules, but underneath they are all about information. Our dataome may be built differently than us, but it has all the hallmarks of a living system, including a deeply symbiotic relationship to its originators, Homo sapiens. Like all symbioses — think us and our microbiomes, or sea anemones and clownfish — that relationship is often, but not always, mutually beneficial. We rely on our dataome, and our dataome relies on us, but the precise needs of each may not always align.

The energy burden of the dataome and the impact on the planetary environment is an example. The dataome won’t stop growing, but that growth can negatively affect the ecosystems that humans rely on. At the same time, humans must have the dataome to function as a species. The outcome is rapid technological and behavioral evolution as we run faster and faster to try to stay stationary, trying to find sustainability with our information.

Critically, by seeing the dataome as a living thing, we might gain a better understanding of just how unstable a situation we’re in, and how to sway the symbiosis more toward humanity’s benefit. It’s hard to find a cure for dysfunction if you don’t even recognize the kind of organism you’re trying to nurse back to health.

We humans need to let go of any sense of supremacy. Put simply, we have never been alone. We have always been bound together with our dataome, a symbiotic entity of biology, language and tools that burst onto the scene some 200,000 years ago, and that has been reshaping Earth ever since.

Advertisement

Caleb Scharf is director of astrobiology at Columbia University. His new book is “The Ascent of Information: Books, Bits, Genes, Machines, and Life’s Unending Algorithm.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@MariNaomi is the author and illustrator of eight graphic books, including the comics memoir “Turning Japanese.” She is the founder and administrator of the Cartoonists of Color, Queer Cartoonists and Disabled Cartoonists databases. @marinaomi

Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The sudden COVID-19-driven shutdown of workplaces early last year cost more than 33 million people their jobs over a seven-week span. Governments rushed to try to help, partly by funneling cash to keep countless households afloat, but the damage was severe, especially to nonwhite workers and those already on the low end of the income spectrum. Even now, as jobs come back, the pain continues for people left with higher personal debt, deferred rent payments and other financial problems.

Advertisement

Read More >>>
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In Texas, a dangerous future looms on the horizon for anyone who values privacy or individual autonomy. Come September, ordinary citizens could be granted the power to monitor and sue their neighbors for violating a new abortion law.

This spring the Texas Legislature passed Senate Bill 8, which prohibits abortion after the detection of a fetal heartbeat, typically around six weeks into pregnancy. An abortion ban that early is completely unconstitutional; Roe vs. Wade and Casey vs. Planned Parenthood established that a woman has the right to an abortion any time prior to fetal viability , which is around 24 weeks of pregnancy.

Women are often not even aware they’re pregnant during the first six weeks. But the most chilling aspect of Texas’ new ban isn’t the flagrant attack on reproductive rights, it’s the legal innovation that might just let state lawmakers get away with it.

SB 8 authorizes only private citizens , not the government, to file suit to enforce the law. Any individual who objects to an abortion performed later than six weeks into a pregnancy — it could be the woman’s ex-boyfriend, barista, co-worker — can sue any party involved other than the woman herself, whom the law immunizes.

Advertisement

In case Texans aren’t motivated to go to court, there’s also a $10,000 reward for anyone who wins one of these lawsuits, effectively putting a litigation bounty on the head of abortion providers.

There’s plenty of precedent for giving individuals the right to sue to enforce a state or federal law — witness California labor law or most federal environmental statutes. What’s different here is that citizens aren’t joining government officials in enforcing SB 8, they’re being put in the government’s place.

The law was designed this way to make it harder to overturn. “They’re basically trying to get around federal court review,” said Marc Hearron, senior counsel for the Center for Reproductive Rights. “They know this is a blatantly unconstitutional law, and they know that if they had gone the same route as all of the other states, they would have had no chance of success.”

Abortion bans have been shut down in other states before they took effect, but this one could be harder to block. Stephen Vladeck, a professor at the University of Texas Austin School of Law, said private enforcement offers a loophole. “This makes it really hard for those who are affected by this law to challenge it,” he said, “because it’s not clear who you sue when you’re protesting a law that the government is not responsible for enforcing.”

Despite this hurdle, a group of abortion providers, counselors and others including the Center for Reproductive Rights filed a federal lawsuit targeting the Texas law this week. The defendants in the case include every state court judge and country clerk in Texas, the Texas Medical Board, the state attorney general and the director of Right to Life of East Texas.

The plaintiffs are asking the court to block the law before it takes effect Sept. 1. If they’re not successful, SB 8 is likely to have disastrous consequences for the availability of abortion in Texas.

“This is going to severely limit people’s ability to access abortions even before six weeks, because it will isolate patients,” said Julia Kaye, an ACLU lawyer seeking to block the law. The ban would cut abortion patients off from their support networks and encourage an anti-abortion public crusade, Kaye said.

By encouraging citizens to enforce the ban, Texas has equated abortion regulation to a public and moral duty. Anybody has the right to oppose abortion, but when those individuals form an army of courthouse vigilantes backed by the state, it becomes an unreasonable imposition of their personal beliefs onto others around them. Texas isn’t just deputizing its citizens, it’s weaponizing them in the fight to eliminate abortion access in the state for good.

Advertisement

This would be especially detrimental for Texas’ lower-income communities, Kaye said. In particular, individuals from rural communities and communities of color are less able to travel out of state for an abortion and less likely to get quality prenatal care, she said.

Even if the ban is tossed out before September, we can’t ignore the disturbing implications that Texas’ actions have for reproductive rights and the sanctity of constitutional law.

Anti-abortion activists have been manipulating the legal system for decades. They know they’re up against the precedent set in Roe and will do whatever they can to get around it. UC Berkeley School of Law professor Khiara Bridges refers to this mind-set as “abortion exceptionalism,” the conviction that, for whatever reason, abortion is a less valid constitutional right than all the others.

The larger danger is that if the anti-abortion movement manages to create a new legal strategy to undermine that right, that strategy can carry over into other areas of federal law. “The anti-choice forces out there are incredibly creative,” Bridges said. “But this is bigger than abortion. This is a terrifying precedent to set for any person who cares about constitutional rights.”

Advertisement

If Texas successfully insulates SB 8 from judicial challenge by employing the private enforcement approach, then other states can follow that roadmap to target any federal rights they oppose. Imagine restrictions on free speech or religion that can’t be blocked in court because they’re enforced not by the government, but by ordinary people.

“If it’s a red state abortion ban today, tomorrow it will be a blue state gun ban. This ought not to be partisan,” said the University of Texas’ Vladeck.

The Texas Legislature may or may not be aware of the dangerous vehicle they’ve created in their desperation to ban abortions. But SB 8 is utterly unconstitutional and fundamentally threatening to our legal system and federal rights. It should be struck down without question, and never attempted again.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In his speech about voting rights on Tuesday, President Biden told the audience at the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia that he wasn’t “preaching to you.” But that was false humility. Biden’s speech was very much a sermon, and an effective one, about the importance of defeating an assault on democracy.

What the speech wasn’t was a new battle plan for countering efforts by Republican state legislatures to make it harder for Americans — especially voters of color — to exercise the franchise.

Yes, Biden called for enactment of the gargantuan For the People Act, which passed the Democratic-controlled House and is stalled in the Senate, as well as the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. He also urged Congress to counter a Supreme Court decision earlier this month that narrowed the protections of what was left of the Voting Rights Act after the court gutted a key provision in 2013.

But as Biden surely knows, the original For the People Act is a dead letter. It isn’t just that Senate Republicans used the filibuster last month to prevent even a debate on the legislation. As the price for voting with the rest of his party on that procedural vote, Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.) apparently got assurances that if debate ever did commence, the focus would shift to his narrower proposal, one that accepts the idea of voter ID requirements.

Advertisement

If, as seems likely, Republicans continue their stonewalling regardless of Democrats’ willingness to compromise, Biden might then propose abolishing the filibuster — or at least suspending it for election-related legislation.

Biden didn’t take that position in Tuesday’s speech, disappointing civil rights activists. But that doesn’t mean the speech was a waste of time.

The president effectively communicated the urgency of the threat to elections posed by the big lie that former President Trump won the 2020 election and the subsequent (and related) state efforts to make it harder to vote and to give legislators more sway over election outcomes. The speech was marked by such a sense of exasperation at what Biden called “election subversion” that it could have been headlined “Come on, man!”

The most hopeful gloss on the president’s speech was that it was an overture to the sort of dealmaking that resulted in a bipartisan agreement on an infrastructure bill. In the speech Biden shamed Republicans who have enabled Trump’s big lie; now he must find a way either to work with them or render them irrelevant.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nobody wants to snack on plastic bags or soda rings, but according to a 2019 study from the University of Newcastle, we could be consuming roughly a credit card’s worth of plastic every week.

Microplastics, which are less than a quarter-inch in size and come in various shapes and textures, have contaminated the natural world and infiltrated our bodies. These particles are just about everywhere on Earth, including in drinking water and the air we breathe, but until recently we didn’t know how ubiquitous they really were.

Microplastics were first discovered in our oceans, and the vast majority of studies published since then focus on marine environments only. The threat to our oceans is indeed huge, but it’s not the full picture anymore.

The first clue to microplastic exposure in humans came around 2013, when scientists discovered plastic particles in seafood prepared for consumption. But by 2019, when the University of Newcastle study was published, the scientific community understood that the problem was considerably broader.

Advertisement

“We started to realize that we have exposure that’s much greater than just a fish at the grocery store,” said Dr. Chelsea Rochman, a University of Toronto professor who helped produce a report on microplastics in April for the California Ocean Science Trust. “The trend of the research at first was just to show that we were exposed, and then it became clear that we needed to understand how this impacts human health.”

Microplastics shed off of clothes and tires and have been found in beer, honey, table salt and other food items. We inhale plastic suspended in the air and drink plastic floating in our beverages. It’s no stretch to conclude that our exposure is significant. What we don’t know is what this means for us.

Researchers started to look seriously into the human health impacts of microplastic ingestion and inhalation just a few years ago. We’ve started to ask the right questions, but there’s a long way to go. If we’re going to get the answers in time, we need to prioritize this area and funnel resources into science that analyzes how microplastics interact with our bodies.

The amount of evidence collected on this subject is growing rapidly, according to Scott Coffin, a toxicologist also involved with the state report. Studies done on mice and rats have found that plastic contamination can reduce fertility , alter the gut microbiome and cause oxidative stress, which can severely damage cells.

These results aren’t directly translatable to people, however, and there are gaps in the research that make it difficult to draw conclusions. Most studies rely on polystyrene spheres, a specific kind of microplastic that can be purchased commercially but doesn’t reflect the vast range of plastics and chemicals in the natural environment.

Susanne Brander, an Oregon State University professor who also worked on the recent report, acknowledges these shortcomings. “More studies are needed on environmentally relevant plastic types before we can say with full confidence that the plastics you’re exposed to every day could harm you in these ways,” Brander said. “But I think it’s safe to say that it’s a concern, and if we’re seeing responses in mouse models, it’s likely that humans are also being affected.”

Toxicologists, ecologists and other scientists have been digging deep into these questions, but the scientific process is still in its infancy. Meanwhile, major environmental agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency and National Science Foundation have not provided funding for microplastic research regarding human health.

We already know enough to take action on the microplastics problem, but without all the details, it’s much more challenging to bring about change. If we could bring specifics to the table — for example, that these plastics cause cancer, damage organs, reduce fertility — there would be more pressure on public officials to pass sweeping regulations.

Advertisement

“We have to make a bit of a leap and say, whatever’s happening in rodents is happening at similar quantities in humans,” Coffin said, “and there is a little bit of a precautionary principle baked into that assumption.”

But will we be willing to make that leap? Because microplastics are too small to clean up, the only solution is to stop plastic waste at the source. And doing so would take a radical adjustment, given that plastics are deeply embedded in our economy and lifestyle. Weaning ourselves from them would fundamentally affect countless industries, including textiles, transportation and manufacturing.

“I think we’re going to need to have more studies coming out that are directly related to human health before we see a lot more concern from the general public,” Brander said. “It takes a lot to convince people that something that is really convenient for them to use is something they should sacrifice.”

The question of microplastics and human health needs more attention — from the scientific community, the general public, the government and funding groups. The issue isn’t being ignored, but it’s not being prioritized either.

Advertisement

In a perfect world, the knowledge we have now would be enough impetus for policy change. But in a society stuck in its ways and reluctant to alter the status quo, we need more than precaution to move the needle.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Last month, Sha’Carri Richardson’s name was splashed across the sports pages as she became the sixth-fastest woman to run 100 meters, finishing in 10.72 seconds. Her bold hair, tattoos and unabashed love for her girlfriend made her a symbol for other 21-year-old queer women of color like myself, seeing her break social conventions and become a contender for a gold medal at the Tokyo Olympic Games.

As swiftly as the praise came, so followed the backlash after Richardson tested positive for marijuana, putting her Tokyo Olympic dreams in doubt. Richardson apologized in an interview with NBC’s “Today” show and later tweeted, “I am human.”

I am human — Sha’Carri Richardson (@itskerrii) July 1, 2021

Richardson was ineligible to compete in the individual 100-meter race in Tokyo, but there was a chance after her 30-day suspension she could compete for the United States in the 4x100-meter relay. These hopes were dashed Tuesday, when the U.S. track and field team announced its relay team list, which did not include Richardson.

I understand that coaches and officials want to preserve fairness by keeping the original relay members, but what happened to Richardson was anything but just.

Advertisement

What’s heartbreaking is seeing Richardson explain to the public how marijuana was a way to cope with her emotional distress in the wake of her mother’s death. What’s enraging is the fact that marijuana is legal in Oregon, where the Olympic trials were held, and there’s been no indication that marijuana is a sports-enhancing drug. If anything, marijuana would decrease one’s athletic performance, because it impairs judgment and movement. The World Anti-Doping Agency has listed the substance as a danger to athletes for this reason, but penalizing athletes who need mental health support only exacerbates the problem.

A lot has changed since 2009, when photos leaked of Olympic gold medalist Michael Phelps taking a hit on a bong; the laws on marijuana use are simply outdated. Thirty-six states have legalized medical marijuana, and in certain social contexts, consuming or smoking marijuana is as commonplace as taking a sip of wine.

The issue to focus on is more than just antiquated approaches to cannabis but also the way Black women athletes face intense scrutiny in the media. These women are put on a pedestal because of their athleticism and what they represent as symbols enduring sexism and racism, but we forget that they too are like us, experiencing moments of intense grief, private pain and occasional lapses in judgment.

Recently, Brianna McNeal, who had qualified for the 100-meter hurdles in Tokyo, was forced to come out publicly about having an abortion in order to challenge a five-year suspension by the Court of Arbitration for Sport for a drug test violation. In March, Naomi Osaka, ranked as one of the top players by the Woman’s Tennis Assn., refused to take part in news conferences at the French Open for mental health reasons and was fined $15,000, leading her to withdraw from the tournament to rest.

Richardson has apologized and taken responsibility for her actions, vowing to never again fail a drug test, but she shouldn’t have to be sorry for anything.

In the world of high-level sports, where bodies are fine-tuned like machines cranked to their optimum levels, athletes are under immense stress. Officials apply the rules in a legalistic manner under the banner of equality, but it seems at times more like a witch hunt to prove fault and error. We hold athletes to impossible standards of perfection because they represent to us the best of the human spirit and work ethic. It can be easy to forget that life is messy and people aren’t always performing at their best.

Richardson’s gracious acceptance of the consequences and willingness to learn show the depth of her maturity and strengthen the example she sets for young people. She is human just like us, struggling through the loss of a loved one and trying to find ways to heal.

The good news is that, as the fastest woman in the U.S. today, Richardson should have more chances for gold at future Olympics.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Only one private institution is mentioned in the Constitution: the press. Our nation’s founders recognized that a press free to criticize those in power and spread information across society is essential in democracy. But what does that mean today when we see newspapers disappearing every month? Is our government failing to meet its duty to protect and strengthen the press?

The 1st Amendment assumes the existence and durability of a private news industry. This suggests the Constitution not only allows but requires the government to take steps to keep the press viable. And in fact, the government has done this since the beginning of the republic.

The current press landscape demands new action. Journalism jobs over the past two decades have declined by 60%. As newspapers close and local broadcasting and cable news reduce investment in reporting, digital platforms have diverted ad revenues and enabled the spread of conspiracy theories and misinformation. Especially notable is the loss of reporting in smaller towns, suburbs and rural areas, leaving thousands of American communities with no local coverage. This decline may even be tied to fewer candidates for office in local elections.

The idea of government intervention in the news media is not new. Throughout our nation’s history, the federal government has directly and indirectly contributed to the cultivation and growth of the news industry.

Advertisement

Deliberate government actions map neatly to the history of news in America. The Postal Act of 1792 generously subsidized the delivery of all newspapers. Other policies include investments in the telegraph, regulation of broadcasting and cable, even the financing of research behind the internet. And the government created the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, PBS and National Public Radio and developed public television and radio stations, providing critical vehicles for further innovation.

More recently, existing tax benefits for individuals and foundations are helping to strengthen the burgeoning field of nonprofit journalism. The Internal Revenue Service’s 2019 ruling that allowed the 150-year-old Salt Lake Tribune to turn itself into a nonprofit enterprise creates a new model for other newspapers interested in finding a way forward that includes philanthropy.

There are many other ways the government can strengthen the failing news industry while steering clear of censorship or control of media content.

For example, the Local Journalism Sustainability Act, a bill that has bipartisan support in Congress, creates tax incentives to encourage people to subscribe and donate to their local news organizations. It would relieve local news organizations of paying payroll taxes for journalists. And it would also provide tax incentives to businesses that advertise in local news organizations. This could help restore some of the revenue lost in the shift of billions of dollars in advertising to Facebook and Google and other online platforms — none of which has its own newsgathering operation.

Legislation has also been proposed that would address the harms caused by social media platforms in fueling the spread of misinformation and increasing political polarization through algorithms. More people today get their news from social media than from organizations that report and produce the news.

Through antitrust investigations and litigation, government could curb online platforms that abuse concentrated economic power and fail to pay for material generated by news organizations. Congress could end protections granted to those platforms against liability for consumer protection, fraud and defamation — which give them a huge advantage over conventional publishers and media organizations. Federal and state governments could further increase public subsidies for nonprofit and public media and even exempt local news organizations from sales and property taxes.

Such efforts are compatible with the 1st Amendment because they increase, rather than abridge, freedom of speech and press, and because they echo government actions long underway. The amendment’s meanings have also unfolded in response to new challenges. Over the course of the 20th century, its enforcement by the courts came to reflect social changes and demands. Freedom of speech now is a basic, enforceable right, and includes the rights of listeners.

Finally, the large degree of existing government involvement in media, in combination with media’s importance to democracy, lends constitutional support for new policies. Since the 1930s, the federal government has required disclosure by broadcasters of the actual sponsors of materials, because “listeners are entitled to know by whom they are being persuaded.” It has long enforced rules against broadcasters spreading hoaxes. And in 1994, the Supreme Court upheld a federal law requiring cable networks to carry local and public educational stations in service of competition, information dissemination and programming variety.

Advertisement

Voters and government officials — anyone devoted to the Constitution — should not be willing to watch the news industry collapse. Preserving democracy calls for measures to revitalize the creation, production and distribution of news. Any contrary view of what the Constitution permits in this field imperils the very system of government it establishes.

Martha Minow, a professor and former dean of Harvard Law School, is the author of “Saving the News: Why the Constitution Calls for Government Action to Preserve Freedom of Speech.” Newton Minow served as chair of the Federal Communications Commission under President Kennedy.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Something called the “London hard fork” is going down.

If you picture a two-pronged implement jabbing into a pub steak, you have some catching up to do. This has nothing to do with London broil.

Instead, the London hard fork is the insider-y (and admittedly cool-sounding) name of the first phase of a gut renovation to the Ethereum blockchain. It started Thursday in London.

The Ethereum blockchain is one of the most established of the digital ledgers that keep track of cryptocurrency all over the world. So the London hard fork is an upgrade to accounting software.

Advertisement

That sounds trivial. But the London hard fork has significant philosophical implications. It suggests that cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin and dogecoin might be growing up.

So it is time to pay attention — even if you still think crypto is mostly for teenagers with ballpoint tattoos.

The first consequence of the London hard fork is that it will make it easier to buy and sell cryptocurrency. The accounting will be more efficient. Imagine a credit card that processes your purchases faster, with lower fees.

The upgrade is also intended to reduce the supply of Ethereum’s crypto coin, which is called ether, and to drive up its price. Overall, it could be an advantage for investors, but a disadvantage for “miners” whose digital machinations put more such coin into circulation.

In any case, the market seems to approve of Ethereum’s move. Ether saw a bounce soon after the upgrade took effect yesterday.

But the hard fork is raising eyebrows among crypto obsessives, especially those who cherish the blockchain as a massive experiment in fully decentralized governance. Some of them see it as a harbinger of something sinister.

They don’t like the idea of a top-down power shifting the way the blockchain and the value of crypto works. Changes to the system, in this view, should be hashed out by the innumerable little guys who use the blockchain. Many of the smaller players would rather accept “regulation” from zillions of trolls on zillions of subreddits than by an organization like the Federal Reserve. Or the U.S. Treasury. Or the Ethereum Foundation.

On Hacker Noon, a popular blog about financial tech and crypto, an article in June called out Ethereum for abandoning crypto’s first principle: decentralization. “Ethereum, You Are A Centralized Cryptocurrency,” the headline read. “Stop Telling Us That You Aren’t.”

Advertisement

Bitcoin.com has long warned that centralization is creeping in everywhere in cryptocurrency: “Many crypto projects behave just like the financial institutions they were meant to replace.”

Actually, with the London hard fork, the Ethereum blockchain will be only minimally more overseen. Trading will continue to be a lot like pulling the lever in some kind of peer-to-peer casino, trying to get three bunches of cherries.

But the most intense crypto traders do care about the principles behind decentralized currencies like bitcoin and ether (the two biggest, by market value). What’s to keep the Ethereum Foundation from becoming just another central bank, making “upgrades” upon “upgrades” to their system, until they’re setting the digital equivalent of interest rates and controlling supply the way banks and nations do?

I have to confess I share some of this concern. I’m a believer in crypto. Sure, it’s a young person’s game. But it’s not every day you get a chance to be part of something that’s brand new, philosophically challenging and plain fun.

Advertisement

The crypto gamble I most enjoy is the risk taken by my brain in trying to understand it. I’ve certainly sunk more brain cells than dollars into the crypto proposition.

But there’s more to the allure of trading crypto. Politically, I favor a democracy, with a sound federal government that provides for the safety, health and well-being of a nation. But personally I like fewer guardrails. I generally prefer swaths of uncharted territory to Disneyland.

I’ve had some luck investing in dogecoin, a silly cryptocurrency that surged when Elon Musk promoted it on Twitter and “Saturday Night Live,” but which has lately been in freefall. (To my amazement, my household got out just in time.)

So count me among those wary of the overhaul going on at Ethereum. I get that it means ether may enjoy more stability. But we can’t pretend that it’s not a blow to the dream of a fully decentralized currency, one that is beholden to no government, bank or central authority.

Advertisement

The good news is that the London hard fork is indeed a fork. Two roads are diverging. Ethereum is not insisting on one right way; it’s offering an option. You can trade ether the old-fashioned less-regulated way, or you can go over to slightly-more-regulation.

We in the old guard have to be thankful for that, although lamentably if unsurprisingly most investors are expected to sign on with the upgrade. They may be financial risk takers but they’re willing to exchange the Wild West of currency markets for more regulation. We’ve seen it before: Sometimes free people choose repression — up to and including tyranny.

Crypto may be revolutionizing currency markets, but it’s not changing the infinite paradoxes in human nature, at least not yet.

@page88
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Privacy is Apple’s brand. The company brags that it has created “the most secure consumer platform in the world” — but its pretenses are misleading, and that does real harm.

Last month, researchers led by Amnesty International revealed that an Israeli company had developed spyware that had breached the vaunted iPhone, allowing it to track all your phone calls, messages and digital transactions.

That shouldn’t be so shocking. Privacy is ever vulnerable in the digital age. The supreme connectivity that digital technology offers necessarily means our lives are increasingly exposed, and the more we live our lives digitally, the more we are exposed.

Inevitability doesn’t excuse obfuscating risk.

Advertisement

Apple trumpets its privacy protections and oversells the virtues of its products, giving consumers a false sense of security that lulls us to let down our guard and only makes us easier targets for spies. If Apple is doing all that it can to protect us, great — it should say so. But any such claims should avoid giving users the impression that they have digital privacy.

We must give credit where it’s due: Apple did take a huge step this year when it spurned Facebook and other digital marketers with a new privacy feature on the iPhone. It allows users to opt out of being tracked across their digital transactions. Three-quarters of iPhone users took up this offer.

Also this year, Apple introduced a location tracking device called AirTags, a Bluetooth-enabled fob intended to help iPhone users find a missing object such as their keys or wallet. The company introduced it with restrictions intended to protect privacy and prevent stalking, for instance alerting you if the system thinks someone else’s AirTag is moving with you and reporting your location.

Among the tech behemoths, Apple takes a lonely, moral stand for privacy, which CEO Tim Cook has described as a human right.

Precisely because Apple touted its security, investigative journalists, political activists and human rights workers around the world have opted to use iPhones for their often sensitive and dangerous communications. Amnesty International revealed that the iPhones on which they rely could be compromised by spyware known as Pegasus, and that the vulnerability has existed for at least five years.

Perhaps most devastatingly, Pegasus is a “zero click” exploit, meaning you don’t have to click on a dubious message or link to enable it. Simply receiving it in a disguised message will implant the spyware. And then you are bugged by your own cellphone.

The Israeli company behind this spyware, NSO Group, sold its product to governments. Among 50,000 phone numbers of potential surveillance targets, researchers found heads of state, journalists and activists, as well as related contacts such as members of slain journalist Jamal Khashoggi’s family. It is unclear how many were successfully bugged.

Everyday users are wooed by Apple’s emphasis on empowering users to protect their privacy. It’s quite ingenious, simultaneously boosting Apple’s moral standing when it comes to privacy protection and giving us a sense of control. Apple’s privacy tool suggests we can pick and choose with whom we share our data, and how and when. It suggests we have an idea how our spies operate, how they follow us, what they want, and to what end.

Advertisement

However, all along, the notion that we may attain some degree of parity with our spies is delusional.

Apple must play a constant game of catch-up with surveillance innovators such as NSO Group. It’s asymmetric warfare: Apple’s defenses would have to be 100% flawless to succeed, but the hackers and spies need only an infinitesimal success rate.

Some privacy advocates even fear that Apple’s latest security measure, technology announced Thursday to detect sexual images of children or being sent to children, leaves iMessage more vulnerable to spying. It had been encrypted between sender and recipient, but now content is monitored and can be reported to third parties.

Increasingly, spies don’t even need our data to keep tabs on us; our metadata will do. Analysts can identify us by the way we hold our cellphones — at what angle — and how we swipe the screen. Apparently, they have determined this is distinctive to each of us. And digital marketers can circumvent Apple’s protections against tracking through a method called fingerprinting, which uses information such as screen resolution, operating system version and phone model to identify a user across multiple apps. No hacking required.

Advertisement

How are we to stay ahead of constantly innovating spies? We won’t. Act accordingly.

Be responsible in what you do and say, to whom, and how. Reflect, slow down, and think about what you share. Assume that someone is always listening.

Apple could remind us to protect ourselves by dropping the pretense of privacy.

Firmin DeBrabander, author of “Life After Privacy,” is a professor of philosophy at the Maryland Institute College of Art.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@President Biden should not let Cuban American elites — who are not representative of the Cuban people — dictate his policies toward the island.

Republican lawmakers such as Sen. Marco Rubio, Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart and others have criticized the Biden administration’s continuing review of Trump’s restrictions on remittances to Cuba.

Those leaders are well-fed, well-off and white, compared with the average Cuban. About 86% of Cuban Americans identify as white, but two-thirds of Cubans in Cuba are Afro or mixed — a consequence of the fact that the first Cuban émigrés to the U.S. were mostly affluent whites. Although this historically meant remittances benefited émigrés’ privileged relatives, more recent Afro Cuban immigrants in the U.S. have been helping relatives back home, too.

Biden says he favors letting Cuban Americans financially support relatives again but wants to make sure the Cuban military doesn’t take a cut. Remittances have long been a top source of income in Cuba, totaling $3.7 billion in 2019 and flowing largely through Western Union. Last fall, Western Union closed its 407 offices in Cuba because the Trump administration banned money from going to firms working with Cuban military-controlled companies. Western Union partners with Fincimex, a military-controlled agency, and a small fraction of remittance transaction fees ended up with the Cuban military.

Advertisement

The voices of comfortable Cuban Americans who oppose remittances because they loathe Cuba’s Communist leaders should not drown out the cries for food and medicine from Cubans. In last month’s historic protests, thousands chanted “patria y vida” — homeland and life — a hopeful reclamation of the Communist Party’s slogan, “patria o muerte,” meaning homeland or death.

Afro Cubans were front and center in the protests, and created the viral song, “Patria y Vida,” that inspired the chants. Biden should listen to them more than white Cuban elites in Florida and other parts of the U.S.

Biden was right to condemn the Cuban government’s repressive response, including hundreds of brutal arrests and an internet blackout. But his paralysis on reversing Trump’s cruel sanctions, a campaign promise, is concerning.

The U.S. embargo against Cuba, which dates back to 1962 and prohibits U.S. companies from doing business on the island, has failed to drive political change. We have 60 years of evidence that it has only worsened hunger and misery — and provided Cuba’s government with a perennial excuse for its failures. Trump’s decision to starve Cubans of remittances is more of the same.

“The U.S. has been tightening screws hoping that just one more turn of the screwdriver would somehow break the regime,” Manuel Pastor, a Cuban American professor of sociology at USC, told me. He says lifting sanctions would help the private sector and fuel a countervailing power to the Communist Party.

Many historians believe lifting sanctions, especially Trump’s remittance ban, would empower locals against the Cuban government. When Obama eased restrictions and boosted travel to Cuba, it exposed locals to a different way of life and politics. But, Pastor adds, this angers those Cuban Americans who have a “shared groupthink that you need to be tough on the Castro regime.”

Ada Ferrer, a Cuban American professor of history at New York University and author of the forthcoming “Cuba: An American History,” argues that Biden should expedite the remittance review. “The litmus test should not be that the Cuban government can get no money, because that’s just impossible,” she told me. “The Cuban government owns almost every store on the island.”

Advertisement

I spoke with Emily Mendrala, deputy assistant secretary for the State Department’s Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs, about the Biden administration’s remittance review. “There is a plan to work very quickly through the month of August and to have options ready to present in a matter of weeks,” she said.

I asked her if Biden’s hands would be tied by politics, since 58% of Cuban American registered voters lean Republican. (Republican-leaning Cubans are more likely to support harsh policies toward Cuba.) “I’m not going to prejudge the outcome of the working group, but President Biden’s overarching goals are clear,” Mendrala replied, citing Biden’s desire to let families support one another.

But many are losing patience with Biden’s pace given intense suffering in Cuba. Carlos Lazo, a Cuban American activist I spoke with, has been struggling to send money to his aunt. He accused Biden of “pandering to the most conservative sector of the Cuban American community.”

Rep. Barbara Lee (D-Oakland) and Rep. Jim McGovern (D-Mass.) are urging Biden to stop hesitating on remittances. “The most important priority at the moment is to respond to the suffering of the Cuban people,” Lee said in an emailed statement, adding that Biden “should quickly lift all restrictions and caps of family and donative remittances,” and a number of other sanctions.

Advertisement

McGovern said it’s hard to reconcile Biden today with the man who once promoted Obama’s loosened restrictions as a way to help the Cuban people. He added: “As of right now, I can’t tell the difference between Trump’s policies on Cuba and Biden’s policies on Cuba, and I hope that changes.”

Conservatives have seized on the Cuban government’s smashing of recent protests to argue for maintaining the six-decade-old status quo. Of course, that won’t bring democracy to the island or help protesters crying out for change. Biden needs to break from the decades-long U.S. cycle of backing right-wing interests on Latin America and Caribbean policy at the expense Afro and Indigenous people. Latino voters who helped elect him — including Cuban Americans outside of Florida — are waiting for him to do the right thing.

@jeanguerre
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: Industrial policy is a fool’s errand. Neither politicians, newspapers nor China can pick winners and losers in the marketplace. Tastes, incomes and production costs determine what gets bought and sold. (“Biden needs to put the pedal to the metal on zero-emission cars,” editorial, Aug. 6)

The environmental costs of burning fossil fuels in automobiles are real and significant, and unaccounted for in car prices, but the federal government should not subsidize the purchase and operation of electric vehicles. This would be impossibly complicated, and requires shifting public resources from other purposes.

Instead, tax internal combustion engines at a level that places the estimated cost of the environmental damage they do inside the price of such vehicles, and let the automotive market operate. The electric vehicle market will then thrive.

James E. Moore II, Los Angeles

Advertisement

The writer, an engineering professor at USC, is director of the university’s transportation engineering program.

..

To the editor: Yes, we must take a “hair on fire” approach to climate change, and pushing the transition to electric vehicles faster with government action is crucial.

There are other things, though, that can work faster to cut emissions; one is putting a hefty price on them. And that solution would cover not only vehicle emissions, but emissions throughout the economy. That should be the top priority, with additional policies, like requiring more EVs, adding heft.

We could eliminate subsidies to fossil fuel companies immediately if these businesses were not paying politicians to do everything but that. Perhaps if certain representatives put the general welfare above their own selfish interests and supported strong climate policies, they would find that would work better at keeping them in office than taking dirty money.

Cher Gilmore, Newhall


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: We read the op-ed by Martha Minnow and Newton Minnow on “why government has a constitutional duty to save the news industry” with nodding agreement. They offer many innovative ways for government to support good journalism, but they overlook low-hanging fruit.

Education and journalism should be natural partners to foster democratic engagement through a culture of newspaper reading. Colleges, universities and even high schools can make newspapers available and incorporate them into their courses.

In our own teaching, up-to-date newspaper accounts have been important resources for our students. Colleges and school districts should come to agreements to make newspapers available to students, increasing students’ knowledge and growing the market for the free press.

More than ever, students need access to factual information if we are to save this democracy. The education establishment has a critical role to play in this.

Advertisement

Patricia Gándara and Gary Orfield, Los Angeles

The writers are co-directors of the UCLA Civil Rights Project.

..

To the editor: Respectfully, the government has zero duty to save the newspaper industry. While I love the feel of holding a real paper newspaper in the morning, saving the industry is not the government’s responsibility.

The industry has become too political and has lost sight of its responsibilities to inform, not indoctrinate.

David L. McDaniel, Capistrano Beach

..

To the editor: It’s all well and good for Congress to take all the actions mentioned in the op-ed article, but the biggest problem is getting the public to actually read and understand intelligent news.

Advertisement

Americans have become so addicted to sports, entertainment, gossip, video games, social media and texting that they lack the time for and interest in reading important, intelligent, unbiased news.

Herb Adelman, Del Mar


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: “We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.” (“No more playing around for the unvaccinated,” editorial, Aug. 5)

This is the preamble to the U.S. Constitution, which elected officials swear to uphold and defend. Yes, one of the Constitution’s purposes is to “promote the general welfare.”

We are in a middle of a pandemic, and the virus is mutating into more transmissible forms. We should demand that all our elected officials commit to fighting to end the pandemic, and that includes mandating vaccination, masks, hand washing and social distancing.

Vaccines are safe, and we and our children are resilient. Let’s all work for general welfare.

Advertisement

Danute Handy, Santa Barbara

..

To the editor: One can agree or disagree with people on their decisions regarding vaccination, but when we start talking approvingly about government compulsion and even contemplate government restriction of things that people need to live, it’s time to slow down.

What about civil liberties? What about the “small issue” of individual freedom? Personal choice? What about control of our bodies? Remember, these vaccines have received only emergency use authorization and are not yet fully approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

And what about the fact that vaccination rates are lower in certain minority communities? Wouldn’t we then have to conclude that folks would be justified in saying that The Times Editorial Board is racist?

For what other individual choices should government start to issue mandates? Should government do similar things for obesity? Alcohol consumption? Meat eating? Driving too many miles? Living in too big a house?

Do we really want government mandates of our behavior of this sort?

Michael S. Klein, Los Angeles

Advertisement

..

To the editor: Can someone please explain to me how people who refuse to be vaccinated and have children under the age of 12, who cannot get their shots yet, can consider themselves to be good parents?

Susan Greenberg. Los Angeles
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: In her recent column urging a shift in Cuba policy, Jean Guerrero makes two tragic but typical mistakes.

First, she pits Cuban whites against Cuban persons of color, assuming that the prosperity of whites (it was the rich ones, after all, who fled the communist regime, wasn’t it?) numbs them to the plight of their fellow Cubans.

As a white Marielito Cuban who lived in abject poverty for the first 13 years of his life under the Cuban regime’s oppression, and having met many like me during my time in that country, I can assure Guerrero that in Cuba, people of all skin colors suffer the same plight.

Secondly, the assumption that economic relief will inspire Cubans to aspire to a more liberal system fails miserably when one considers China, another communist country. Anyone who thinks economic improvements or prosperity will necessarily bring about political change needs to understand the fact that regimes intent on retaining power have proved themselves unwilling to surrender any.

Advertisement

The U.S. economic embargo against Cuba may have failed miserably, but I was there when dollars from Miami and care packages with Lee jeans started rolling in. The communist regime and its oppression kept on ticking.

Eduardo Suastegui, Downey

..

To the editor: Cuba does have a communist government and is not a democracy, and that is also true for Vietnam and China, but companies still do business in the latter countries. Intel’s largest chip plant is in Vietnam.

The U.S. was instrumental in the overthrow of democracies in Honduras, El Salvador, Brazil, Iran, Egypt and Peru, and it supported the dictators in those countries as well as in Cuba prior to the hasty departure in 1959 of Fulgencio Batista, with many millions of dollars of the Cuban government’s money.

Cuba has a higher literacy rate and lower infant mortality rate than the United States. Heaven forbid that a country without white elites running it be allowed to prosper.

Bruce Stenman, Prunedale, Calif.

..

Advertisement

To the editor: Brava and thank you to Guerrero. After weeks of shoddy and partisan reporting in U.S. media on the Cuba protests, here is a simple, clear analysis of the current situation between the two countries.

Crucially, Guerrero well explains the race and class dynamics that are rarely discussed in U.S. reporting on Cuba.

On the subject of embargoes, isn’t it odd that no country has ever blockaded the United States for its actions in Vietnam, Central America, the Middle East and many other places?

John Newby, Studio City
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Before you worry about bacon and how much it may cost when new animal welfare laws go into effect next year, let’s talk about the pigs that gave their lives for it.

California has been on the forefront of protecting animals who live short, dismal lives on factory farms either to produce food for us (egg-laying hens) or to be slaughtered and sold as food — such as the ducks and geese whose livers are turned into foie gras, the calves that will be served as veal or the pigs that continuously produce piglets before being carved up into pork. Even animals that end up as food deserve to be treated without cruelty before they are killed.

The latest advance came in November 2018, when 62.7% of the state’s voters supported Proposition 12, the Prevention of Cruelty to Farm Animals Act. The law began going into effect last year, requiring hens and veal calves to be given more space to live in. Starting Jan. 1, the law will require that all eggs sold in California come from cage-free hens and that pork sold in the state come from breeding pigs that are not held in cramped cages. These are humane steps designed to lift these animals out of structures that barely allow them to move.

Pork producers have had the longest time to comply. Some big companies like Hormel Foods have pledged to do so fully, but others have spent the last few years fighting the law rather than figuring out how to implement it. They say that the law will significantly raise the price of pork and that it violates the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, which gives Congress sole power over interstate business activity. So far, that fight has been a waste of time that pork producers could have better spent figuring out how to reconfigure their farms.

Advertisement

They also complain that the regulations on the law are not set. But the California Department of Food and Agriculture, which has yet to finalize the regulations, says that the delay should not have stalled producers from retrofitting their housing for breeding pigs. The agency has publicly posted draft regulations, which mostly concern record-keeping, certification and definitions of terms. As the agency said in a statement to the Associated Press, the rules about space were set out in the 2018 ballot measure, and no regulations can change them.

There are pig farms here in the state, but most of the pork eaten in California is brought in from elsewhere. (Iowa is the country’s largest producer of pork.) Under the new law, all California producers as well as out-of-state producers who sell pork to California can no longer keep sows in cramped gestation crates that literally don’t allow them to stand up and turn around. Instead, pork must come from breeding pigs allowed enough room — 24 square feet of space — to stand up, turn around and spread their limbs without touching the sides of an enclosure or another animal.

Trade associations representing pork producers have sued the state, but so far they have been rebuffed by the federal courts. The 9th Circuit recently rejected an appeal from the National Pork Producers Council and the American Farm Bureau Federation, which argued the California law would force out-of-state suppliers to make substantial changes to their operations and raise production costs by 9%, which would then raise the sale price of pork.

The appeals court noted that state laws run into trouble with the Commerce Clause only if they treat in-state producers differently from out-of-state producers and if they interfere with interstate commerce nationally — neither of which is the case here, regardless of the costs imposed on pork producers. As Judge Sandra S. Ikuta wrote for the three-judge panel, "[S]tate laws that regulate only conduct in the state, including the sale of products in the state, do not have impermissible extraterritorial effects.” Nevertheless, farmers in Iowa have filed separately for an injunction against the law, and a hearing is scheduled for this month.

For fans of bacon and other pork, any rise in cost is the price of not having a pig suffer before it’s killed for food. It’s a price the animals shouldn’t have to pay.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Politically funded websites that advance a partisan agenda under the guise of publishing local news are sprouting up across California. The majority of them are operated by a shadowy entity called Metric Media, which operates 74 distinct websites across the state that masquerade as legitimate local newspapers.

These disturbing findings are contained in the “California News Integrity Report,” a document released recently by NewsGuard, an entity that rates news sites with the goal of separating reliable sources of journalism from purveyors of false or misleading information.

NewsGuard rated 202 local news sites across California along nine criteria. To assess credibility, NewsGuard reviewers assessed whether the sites refrained from repeatedly publishing false content, gathered and presented information responsibly, regularly corrected errors, differentiated responsibly between opinion pieces and news stories, and avoided deceptive headlines. To measure transparency, the reviewers assessed whether the sites disclosed their ownership and financing; clearly labeled advertising; revealed who’s in charge, including any possible conflicts of interest; and provided names of content creators, including contact or biographical information.

Of the 202 sites, 62% were rated credible and trustworthy and 38% failed the test — the vast majority of them right-wing sites that purport to be credible news sources.

Advertisement

Take, for example, the “Fresno Leader.” At first glance it appears to be a bare-bones local news site, with sections devoted to schools, business, local politics and real estate. But look more closely. Nearly every article is devoted to attacking Democratic politicians or reporting campaign contributors to Republicans. One article reports on the Fresno County Republican Party’s condemnation of the local congressman, Rep. David Valadao of Hanford, who was one of 10 House Republicans to vote to impeach President Trump. Nowhere in the article was there a response from Valadao, or even a mention of any attempt to reach him. That’s a violation of a basic tenet of journalism: The subject of a critical news article deserves a chance to respond.

An even more nefarious example can be found in Stockton, where a publication called the “209 Times” promised to “be the voice of the community” and “tell the stories of the community that often go overlooked.” However, the site’s owner, Motecuzoma Sanchez, had an agenda that was not disclosed to readers: He was running for mayor.

NewsGuard’s review found that the 209 Times failed on seven of the nine journalistic standards assessed, earning it a trust score of 17.5%. In the run-up to the 2020 mayoral election, the site published numerous misleading claims about one of Sanchez’s opponents, Mayor Michael Tubbs, who is best known for championing an experiment with guaranteed income in the city. For example, the site reported that Tubbs planned to turn the San Joaquin County Fairgrounds into a giant homeless encampment.

Sanchez ran in the March 2020 primary but did not advance to the final round, in which Tubbs lost to a different candidate. Tubbs blamed his defeat in part on a smear campaign fueled by 209 Times. He said the barrage of distortions and lies overwhelmed the community. “People saw 209 Times and thought, ‘Well, it’s a news site. Why would anyone purposely and deliberately go out and deceive people?’” Tubbs told the Columbia Journalism Review . “It was literally everything — just lie after lie after lie. At some point, I think it just beat down the defense mechanisms for some people. And they’re like, ‘All this can’t be false.’ Like, ‘There’s something about this that has to be true.’”

Closer to home, another site, the “Santa Monica Observer,” owned by onetime City Council candidate David Ganezer, is notorious for publishing false news. In 2016, for example, it claimed that Hillary Clinton had died and that a body double had been sent to debate Donald Trump. Months later it reported, incorrectly, that Trump had appointed Kanye West to a high-level position in the Interior Department. Last year, it reported falsely that sunlight could be a remedy for COVID-19 sufferers and that Bill Gates, a major funder of vaccine research, had been responsible for a polio epidemic.

Such claims are so outlandish that they might seem obviously fraudulent, akin to supermarket tabloids reporting on the discovery of extraterrestrials in the desert. But the damage is cumulative: By pretending to be legitimate news, these websites cast doubt on the veracity and trustworthiness of all sources of information, leading to greater mistrust and apathy.

What can be done? American journalism is ultimately self-regulating; it’s not for the government to say what is or isn’t a legitimate source of news. But discerning readers should always ask basic questions of any news publication: Are contrary points of view included so readers can make judgments for themselves? Are corrections published, acknowledging errors? Does the site allow readers the chance to offer unfiltered feedback?

Publications that reject these standards do not deserve readers’ trust.

Advertisement

The internet has inundated users with a tsunami of information, some of it false and pernicious. Schools should teach basic news literacy, helping students assess the credibility of news sources, using criteria like the ones outlined by NewsGuard.

Fake news is cropping up in part because real news is expensive to gather and produce. Most traditional newspapers have been weakened by sweeping changes in technology; many are owned by hedge funds and private equity companies that have little stake in the communities the newspapers serve.

Ultimately, it’s up to consumers to decide whether they value real news over fake news. The best response to bogus outlets is to support the real ones.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@President Biden is right. Electric vehicles are the future. But for the sake of the planet, the future has to arrive much sooner than the president and automakers are planning.

On Thursday, Biden proposed new fuel efficiency and tailpipe emissions standards for passenger cars and trucks that would in effect reverse President Trump’s clean-car rollback, getting U.S.-made vehicles just about back to the standards put in place by the Obama administration. It’s a return to what should have been the status quo.

The president also signed an executive order setting an ambitious but voluntary target that by 2030, half of the new vehicles sold in the U.S. will be zero-emission models, including battery electric, plug-in hybrid or fuel cell electric. The three big U.S. automakers aimed a tad lower, announcing their “shared aspiration” to have zero-emission vehicles make up 40% to 50% of their U.S. sales.

Here’s the harsh reality: The status quo is unsustainable, and targets and aspirations are no longer sufficient. It should be obvious by now that climate change is creating havoc and destruction across the globe. It will take dramatic action to cut greenhouse gas emissions enough to prevent a climate catastrophe. In the U.S., where gas-powered cars and trucks are the single largest source of greenhouse gas emissions, that means accelerating the transition to clean vehicles.

Advertisement

The signs coming out of dealerships haven’t been good. Consumers have been buying more gas-guzzling SUVs and trucks over the years. Electric vehicles make up just 2% of the U.S. new car sales market, which is less than in China and many European countries. In May, the International Energy Agency warned that governments will need to end the sale of new internal combustion engine vehicles by 2035 in order to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions enough to avoid the worst impacts of climate change. So the U.S. has a lot of catching up to do.

The country lost precious time and momentum toward clean cars during the Trump administration. Prodded by automakers, Trump relaxed Obama-era standards that required cars and light trucks to become steadily more fuel efficient; by 2025, they were supposed to achieve an average of more than 50 miles per gallon. Automakers were expected to meet the target by developing and selling more hybrid and electric models, gradually cutting smoggy tailpipe pollution and greenhouse gas emissions in the process.

Trump’s standard called for automakers to reach an average of 40 mpg by 2026, which would have allowed companies to continue to produce more gas-guzzling SUVs and trucks. Biden’s proposal, which still has to go through the rulemaking process, would reset the average fuel economy target at more than 50 mpg by 2026. Biden also directed his administration to begin developing stricter fuel economy and emissions standards for 2027 and beyond.

At least in the short term, the U.S. is back where it was four years ago while other countries have pressed forward, setting high goals for zero-emission vehicle deployment. China in particular has embraced EVs, spurring the development of battery technology and a supply chain for EV manufacturing while increasing private investment in the field. Now, there is a real concern that American automakers’ lethargy during the Trump years could end up hurting the U.S. industry’s global competitiveness.

Essential environmental and economic policies should not flip-flop so easily between administrations. While Biden’s voluntary target of 50% zero-emission vehicle sales by 2030 is a good start, his administration and Congress need to cement this goal into law. They also need to follow through with funding to help build out a national network of EV charging stations and offer financial incentives for customers to buy zero-emission vehicles — two pieces of the president’s initial, far-reaching infrastructure proposal that have been either slashed or eliminated in the bipartisan bill the Senate is considering. Biden should make it absolutely clear to automakers and the public that the future really will be electric.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It may soon be tougher to be unvaccinated against COVID-19 in Los Angeles — and that’s a good thing.

Last week, state agencies and the city of Los Angeles imposed rules requiring their employees to be vaccinated or submit to regular testing, and this week L.A. County officials moved to mandate vaccines for their workforce. Other employers have mandated immunization as well. Since then, the rate of vaccinations in California has increased.

But not quite enough to end the pandemic. And now Los Angeles authorities are weighing even tougher restrictions, similar to those announced recently in New York City, that would require patrons to show proof of vaccination to enter indoor businesses.

As fraught as such restrictions would be, not to mention controversial, they stop comfortably short of a universal vaccine mandate. People have the right to refuse medication.

Advertisement

But it’s reasonable, and in fact imperative, for authorities to limit the ability of those who are not immunized against COVID-19 — currently, nearly 30% of Angelenos over 16 — to spread infection during a public health crisis when cases, hospitalizations and deaths are back on the upswing. If conditions get much worse over the next few weeks, Los Angeles could even face new shutdowns similar to those last winter. No one wants that, least of all businesses that suffered greatly from forced closures.

Nevertheless, Los Angeles must tread carefully in taking this next step. Any restrictions must be crafted strategically and compassionately — and with a clear ending point so that Angelenos know this is a temporary measure. They must accommodate people who are under 12 or who have medical conditions that don’t allow them to be inoculated.

The proposal put forth by the Los Angeles City Council on Wednesday does not quite meet those marks. For one thing, it goes too far by including essential businesses. Everyone needs access to groceries, clothing and prescriptions. Many of the people who remain unvaccinated are already struggling, and prohibiting them from shopping for essentials would be an undue hardship.

But what the unvaccinated can live without is seeing a movie in a theater, getting a spa treatment or observing happy hour inside the local bar. Imposing vaccine certification requirements on nonessential businesses would send a strong signal that having no shot equals having no fun.

Furthermore, we are concerned that the vaccine requirement proposed by the council only mandates a single shot. That might be an effective inducement for those to get a first jab, or for those who receive the one-shot Johnson & Johnson vaccine. But full protection from the Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna vaccines is reached only after two shots, and there are too many people already skipping their second shots as it is.

And, finally, any local vaccine requirement would work best if it was imposed countywide, as the mask mandate has been. It would be confusing to have different rules for businesses on one end of Wilshire Boulevard compared with the other. An order issued by the county public health department would also have the benefit of going into effect quickly.

And with infections rising exponentially across the county, every day counts. For the unvaccinated, play time must end.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Andrew Cuomo, the departing governor of New York, announced his resignation Tuesday after months of defiance in the wake of sexual harassment allegations. A defiance, mind you, that was still present in his goodbye as he blamed “generational and cultural shifts” for his political demise, as if groping women were akin to cassette tapes and flip phones.

Nonetheless, in a couple of weeks the highest seat in New York State will be held by a woman for the first time, which would be a fitting end to an otherwise disheartening story.

Except this is not the end.

Not for Cuomo, not for the 11 women who bravely spoke out and not for the people trapped in the Cuomo vortex.

Advertisement

People like Roberta Kaplan, chairwoman of the anti-harassment group Time’s Up, who resigned after a report from the state attorney general’s office found she had reviewed a letter designed to discredit one of Cuomo’s accusers.

And my friend Alphonso David, formerly counsel to Cuomo and now president of the Human Rights Campaign, who is under review by the organization’s board because the attorney general’s report accused him of advising the governor — after David left state service — on responses to these scandals.

“I was never aware of any allegations of sexual misconduct,” he said in a recent statement to news outlets, “and no one ever reported them to me, as the report verifies.”

Nonetheless David, Kaplan and others now find their credibility questioned because of their connection to Cuomo — whether or not they intended to serve as enablers, whether or not they knew about the accusations.

Let’s not forget one important piece of collateral damage in the governor’s political implosion: the reputation of his brother, Chris Cuomo, the CNN host — and the integrity of the industry in which he works.

Conflicts of interest and full disclosure matter, so first of all: Chris Cuomo, like David, is a friend of mine. Also, I worked for CNN on and off from 2009 to 2020, when I stopped appearing and writing after a contract agreement could not be reached.

When the report revealed that Chris participated in strategy meetings with his brother in response to parts of this scandal, I was shocked, although I also understood why Chris would have done that. It’s his brother. But the concerns of conflicts of interest predate the report’s revelation.

Last year’s lovefest between the two, in which Chris repeatedly interviewed Andrew on CNN, was never hidden or subtle. It may have made great television, but it was not great journalism.

Advertisement

We were in the early stages of a pandemic, and the governor was a high-profile face of the government response. CNN certainly should have interviewed him. His brother should not have. This was a completely avoidable, self-inflicted wound that has come back to haunt all involved.

Since November, much has been reported about the attempts of the former president — and his allies — to overturn the election. From questioning the validity of the results at rallies to his role in the Jan. 6 terrorist attack at the Capitol, there is no question that the actions of the former president threatened democracy itself.

But here’s the rub: So do the actions of some news organizations. As much as democracy depends on accountability and good government, those are unlikely to thrive without trusted news outlets.

I do not fault Chris for wanting to help his brother, and I told him as much. The larger problem, however, arose because CNN lifted the ban on the two appearing together on air. That decision pulled more than just Chris into the governor’s vortex; it pulled in Chris’ colleagues as well.

Advertisement

Journalism is not an exact science, and objectivity doesn’t automatically come with the job. Practitioners get close through checks and balances. When reporters make mistakes, editors correct them. When a commentator steps out of bounds, the standards department reminds us of the boundaries. These safeguards are in place to maintain public trust. But when the industry willfully conflates news with entertainment for ratings and clicks, we risk losing the public’s trust.

It is the media that are called, and entrusted, to hold the powerful accountable. This role was deemed so important that it is enshrined in the 1st Amendment of the Constitution. But modern American journalism can serve this function only if the electorate generally trusts mainstream news. That’s impossible if we cross clear lines with stunts like presenting the Brothers Cuomo as a news segment.

There’s no question it’s better to have the injustices out in the open and the offending man out of office, for the sake of past victims and so there won’t be any others. Society will pay a price for letting the situation get so out of hand, as people who have done good work are dragged down, and institutions that know better face consequences.

Any tally of the collateral damage must include not only Cuomo’s enablers, but also journalistic integrity itself.

Advertisement

@LZGranderson
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In this world of snooping and snitching, truly private conversations are increasingly endangered. Apple devices once provided a refuge from all kinds of corporate and governmental prying, and the iconic Silicon Valley company had been studying how to block even itself from its users’ private communications by expanding end-to-end encryption — from the device to the cloud and back again — that ensures only the users can have access to their own information.

But Apple is now taking a deeply disappointing step in the opposite direction with its plan to scan photos collected on U.S. iPhones and iPads in a puzzling search for child pornography.

The company that has long vowed not to create back doors to encrypted user data is now building just such a door and is making a key. And when that key is in hand, who else will demand to use it, or figure out how to snatch it away?

Apple announced its plan on Thursday to scan devices for photos that are uploaded to its iCloud photos service. (Many companies scan photos uploaded to the cloud; Apple will scan devices for photos that have been uploaded to the cloud.)

Advertisement

Software will compare the scanned data to a collection of known sexually exploitative images of children. Matches will be reviewed by human beings, and if confirmed they will be flagged for the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, a private nonprofit child protection organization. From there the information could conceivably be referred for criminal prosecution.

Apple distinguishes its program from others by noting that competing companies scan all user photos in the cloud — the global network of servers that collectively store uploaded data. Apple claims its program of scanning individual devices is more secure.

More secure, perhaps, but also more intrusive and creepy. And the larger point is that Apple has abandoned its laudable quest for user-only access. Why?

It could be because of pressure from the Justice Department and Congress, who believe we are safer and more secure when government can compel private companies to disclose user data. That was the gist of the showdown between Apple and the FBI following the 2015 terror attack in San Bernardino, in which authorities wanted Apple to help it break into the iPhone left behind by Syed Rizwan Farook.

Apple refused, angering many Americans who believed it was possibly standing in the way of their safety by protecting the privacy of a deceased killer. But the company was also standing in the way of government forcing itself into all of our devices and communications, and in the process it was standing up for privacy. The company is well aware that there is no hardware, software or policy that safeguards only the privacy of the good guys and permits surveillance only of criminals and terrorists.

Preventing access to anyone means locking out not just criminal prosecutors, but also foreign governments on the lookout for dissidents and others it wants to control, criminals who want to get their hands on personal information, commercial interests who want to find out what the competition is doing, spies and miscreants of all sources.

Child sex trafficking and exploitation of the innocent is a serious problem. Still, if Apple is going to open a door into otherwise private customer photos, why has it zeroed in on this issue as opposed to, say, terrorist threats, murder-for-hire plots or other serious crimes?

Perhaps because the crime is so photo-oriented, and because it has long been a target of Congress. But now that there is a door, won’t it be even easier for the government to open it even wider and to demand access to images that hint at other activities, criminal or otherwise?

Advertisement

“Apple will refuse any such demands,” the company said in a statement. And the showdown over the San Bernardino iPhone suggests that it may well mean it.

But this move, which may be meant to fend off government pressure, could just as easily encourage government to exert further pressure — for direct access to illegal photos in devices, and then to other communications that it argues provide evidence of crime.

Private communication that cannot be accessed by the prying eyes and ears of governments, companies or crooks is an essential element of freedom and Apple has in the past been right to promote it. The change in direction is a very serious setback.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Policies requiring vaccination against COVID-19 need not include, and should not include, exceptions for those who have religious objections to vaccinations.

Many universities, including the University of California, are requiring vaccination for all students, staff and faculty returning to campus. Many employers, public and private, are doing so as well. These policies are essential to protect public health. The virulent Delta variant of the coronavirus has made it imperative to ensure vaccination of as many people as possible.

Unfortunately, though, many of these policies have an exception for those who have a religious objection to vaccination. These are neither required by the law nor are they desirable as a matter of policy because they make it possible for anyone to circumvent the vaccine mandate.

The UC’s mandatory vaccination policy, for example, has an exception for those who object on religious grounds. It states that this is because the law requires such an exemption, declaring: “The University is required by law to offer reasonable accommodations to ... employees who object to vaccination based on their sincerely-held religious belief, practice, or observance.”

Advertisement

This is simply wrong as a matter of law. No law requires such a religious exemption. In terms of free exercise of religion under the 1st Amendment, the Supreme Court ruled more than 30 years ago in Employment Division vs. Smith that the Constitution does not require exceptions to general laws for religious beliefs. In an opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia, the court said that as long as a law is neutral, not motivated by a desire to interfere with religion and of general applicability to all individuals, it cannot be challenged based on free exercise of religion. In June, in Fulton vs. City of Philadelphia, the court reaffirmed this legal test.

Laws that require vaccination are the epitome of a neutral law of general applicability: a requirement that applies to everyone and that was not motivated by a desire to interfere with religion. Even if this were not so, the government can infringe on religious freedom if its action is necessary to achieve a compelling interest.

Stopping the spread of a deadly communicable disease is obviously a compelling interest and vaccinations are the best way to reach that goal. No one, in practicing his or her religion, has a constitutional right to endanger others.

Indeed, a number of states, before COVID-19, created mandates for children to be vaccinated against other communicable diseases without making exemptions for religious beliefs. Without exception, the lower courts have upheld these mandates as constitutional.

Nor do federal employment discrimination laws require a religious exception for employees. In the 1977 case Trans World Airlines vs. Hardison, the Supreme Court said that employers do not have to bear more than a “de minimus” cost in accommodating employees’ religious beliefs. Vaccine exemptions could impose a significant cost on employers in terms of illness and therefore clearly are not required.

Religious exemptions, like in the University of California policy, are for those with “sincerely held religious beliefs.” But how can this possibly be determined?

The Supreme Court has said that religious beliefs are personal and it does not matter whether they are in accord with the teachings and dictates of a particular faith. Under this broad principle, any person could get a vaccination exemption merely by stating that he or she has a religious objection against it.

Such an easy opt-out could make the mandate illusory. That is why the only way to have a meaningful vaccination requirement is to apply it to everyone — except those for whom vaccination is not medically advisable.

Advertisement

As people return to the workplace and to campuses the spread of COVID-19 remains a great danger, especially with the highly transmissible Delta variant circulating. The unvaccinated not only endanger themselves and other unvaccinated people, but also those who cannot get the vaccine for medical reasons. And now, there are growing reports of breakthrough infections of fully vaccinated individuals.

Universities and employers have the legal right to make sure that everyone is vaccinated. And they have the moral duty to protect health and lives.

Erwin Chemerinsky is dean of the UC Berkeley School of Law and a contributing writer to Opinion. He is the author of a forthcoming book, “Presumed Guilty: How the Supreme Court Empowered the Police and Subverted Civil Rights.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: The forests don’t need to be raked. But it might be best to rake up dishonest politicians and carefully recycle them. (“Biden climate envoy demands global action after devastating U.N. climate change report,” Aug. 9)

Many of those who impede taking action to address global climate change have a singular focus — scooping up personal power, wealth and fame. Although we are experiencing fires, hurricanes, tornadoes, coastal flooding, mass migrations and pandemics, imagine what the generations right behind us will face.

It’s best not to imagine, but we cannot keep our heads in the sand.

Ronald Paulinski, Santa Barbara

Advertisement

..

To the editor: During the 1960s, there were televised games where contestants were sealed in a glass box and told to grab as much money as possible as cash swirled around them. From the viewers’ standpoint it looked simple — just start grabbing the bills. The contestants, however, discovered that as they reached for additional bills, they often let go of money already in their hands.

The recent United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report on accelerating global warming reminded me of these games. The difference is that the current contestants (governments, corporations and individuals) are standing with their hands figuratively in their pockets. I do not see any party lunging at any and all opportunities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

I look forward to the time when we are all responding to climate change with the energy and determination of the game show contestants. Stay tuned.

Todd Collart, Ventura

..

To the editor: I recently read about one call to change the American flag colors to red, white and brown, the argument being that our flag should be representative of our country.

I made a connection to this issue with Doyle McManus’ column on Canada’s forests burning along with those in the U.S.

Advertisement

As I write this letter near Lake Tahoe under skies darkened by wildfire smoke and read of fires in Canada causing brown skies elsewhere, I realize one way in which brown is representative of our country.

It’s impressive that Canada did something about the issues they face. They passed a carbon fee and dividend plan, which is the solution that takes the biggest step forward to solving climate change with principles that appeal to moderate Republicans as well as Democrats.

I bring up the polarizing issue of changing the flag so Americans can summon the political will and patriotism to act on climate change. I suggest that everyone call their senators and representatives and tell them to enact a carbon fee.

Bruce Tierney, Irvine

Advertisement

..

To the editor: Articles on the IPCC report emphasize the need to reduce emissions to slow climate change. I haven’t read of many concrete examples that describe what individuals can do to help.

I have a battery-electric car that my husband drives to work, but if we were to take it on longer trips we would have to spend an hour or more charging, possibly in a dark and unfamiliar area. So what do we do? We use our gas car.

Is it better to grow my own food and use all that water, or go to the farmers market? Are paper plates better in a drought? Which is worse, using trees for paper plates or using water to wash plates?

Advertisement

We need concrete steps we can take in our everyday life to do our part on climate change.

Christine Beirne, Ojai

..

To the editor: It cannot be denied that all those people who fought to stop nuclear power are complicit in the accumulation of greenhouse gasses in our atmosphere.

Advertisement

The U.S. should have built 50 nuclear power stations 40 years ago and encouraged other nations to do the same. Regrettably, emotion won over science.

Richard Jackson, Arroyo Grande

..

To the editor: As proof that “a picture is worth a thousand words,” I submit your photograph by Robert Gauthier captioned, “Siblings view the Bobcat fire from their backyard in September.”

Advertisement

Paired with your editorial on the most recent and dire IPCC assessment, the silhouette of a young brother and sister staring helplessly at a sea of fire captures both the moment at hand and the very essence of climate change’s dreaded wrath.

I can’t help wondering if these questions flashed through their minds: How did this happen? Why? Couldn’t anyone do something about it? What will happen to us?

William P. Bekkala, West Hollywood
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Early this year, teachers unions throughout California were saying that their members couldn’t go back to work in physical classrooms without being vaccinated against COVID-19. They were given priority on vaccination and most school districts delayed reopening campuses until their members could go through the two-dose vaccination and waiting period afterward.

Now unions are saying that teachers shouldn’t have to be vaccinated to return to school, just as the more contagious Delta variant is raising infection rates and a new school year is beginning.

We can’t run schools safely on a basis of doing whatever individual teachers want. If, as unions claimed early on, vaccination is necessary to keep teachers and students safe, that doesn’t somehow change when a minority of teachers avoid baring their arms for a needle jab.

This apparent contradiction probably could have been overlooked if California had stayed at super-low rates of infection. After all, even before the vaccine was available, federal, state and local health officials were saying that it was safe for teachers and students to return to campus with proper masking and distancing. The state was later than almost all of the nation on that, which was a shame that cost too many students too much learning.

Advertisement

But now, increasing numbers of California children are being sickened by the highly contagious variant. Even if they show no symptoms, they still can harbor the virus and pass that infection along to their families and community members, including severely immunocompromised individuals who get less protection from the vaccine.

In fact, COVID-19 cases among children are skyrocketing nationwide — not because the variant somehow picks on children but because it is transmitted far more easily. The virus has become a pandemic of the unvaccinated — and children younger than 12, for whom the vaccines are not yet approved, make up a large segment of that group. Schools will be a petri dish of these younger children.

That’s why Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, shifted her longtime stance late last week and said she’s considering supporting mandatory vaccination for teachers. The teachers unions in Philadelphia and Washington, D.C., followed quickly with support for vaccine mandates in their schools.

And now, it’s California’s turn. On Wednesday, Gov. Gavin Newsom announced, in time for the start of most schools, that teachers and other school staff must be fully vaccinated or undergo weekly COVID-19 testing. The delay was, in part, because of opposition by the California Teachers Assn., perhaps the most powerful lobby in Sacramento. It urged teachers to be vaccinated — and says that more than 90% have been — but wasn’t willing to support a vaccine mandate. Neither was the leadership of United Teachers Los Angeles, which has softened its stance in more recent days.

We applaud this decision and the unions’ more reasonable stance. Newsom’s original plan had been to leave vaccine mandates up to individual school districts. We had a chance to see how that kind of policy worked last spring when the governor refused to set parameters for schools to reopen, leaving that up to local control — widely disparate reopenings, with many of the poorest students, those suffering the greatest learning losses, returning later than others.

Newsom already has mandated masks indoors for all students and staff at schools, vaccinated or not, another smart move.

Los Angeles Unified is going two steps better, with weekly COVID-19 testing for all students and staff, vaccinated or not, as well as masks indoors and outside. Given the ease with which the variant makes the rounds, this is a wise move that should maximize safety. And parents who object to the tests and masking need to just get over it. Most kids have readily accepted masks as a current need, behaving far more maturely than many an adult.

The return to school this fall will be only as successful as the number of students who return. The variant is making already-traumatized parents nervous. Vaccine, testing and mask mandates should help families feel confident in sending their children back to campus. By getting vaccinated, school employees help protect the students — and one another.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s hard to find an element of daily life that doesn’t lend itself to politicization. There are the obvious ones: media, guns, lattes. But there’s more. Convertibles are evidently a Republican ride. Vegetables, in general, are Democratic.

But infrastructure knows no party. What ideology favors a broken bridge over one in good repair?

This is why Donald Trump ran on infrastructure in 2016, promising to invest $1 trillion and revive manufacturing jobs in the Rust Belt. It was also why his staff tried mightily to steer him toward the crowd-pleaser of “infrastructure week” whenever his antics turned too unstructured and too crowd-displeasing.

All to no avail for the former president. Nothing panned out.

Advertisement

During Trump’s term, federal investment in roads and bridges stagnated. Roads, ports and airports never got fixed. Any hope that Trump’s autocratic proclivities could be channeled into mega-projects to astonish his base fizzled. He couldn’t even add more than 80 miles to his promised big, beautiful wall.

At the same time, national consensus about the urgency of an infrastructure upgrade has never wavered.

Finally, in November, 28% of white working-class men — the very demographic that put infrastructure high on their priority list — voted Democratic, up from 23% in 2020. These voters helped deliver Biden’s key victories in Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania.

So far, President Biden hasn’t forgotten them. And no one in any state has forgotten the stomach-sinking truths about America’s infrastructure.

Forty-three percent of public roadways are in poor or mediocre condition. A water main breaks every two minutes. More than one-third of public schools use portable buildings, including trailers, because the regular buildings are too crowded.

An AP/NORC poll in July showed that 59% of Americans, of both parties, supported the infrastructure bill’s key aspects.

All of this may be why Biden has been able to get more harmony on this part of his “Build Back Better” agenda than Washington has seen in a long, long time. On Tuesday, the Senate passed the 2,700-page Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, 69 to 30, with 19 Senate Republicans voting in favor of it, including Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.).

Advertisement

“The president deserves a lot of credit,” said McConnell of the bipartisan miracle. “If you’re going to find an area of potential agreement, I can’t think of a better one than infrastructure, which is desperately needed.”

The bill still must pass the House, which will no doubt ask for changes, before it’s signed into law. But this is big. And it’s sure to be galling to ex-President Trump, whose party decisively defied his command to vote against the bill and bust Biden’s agenda.

In addition to McConnell, other Republicans in the party leadership — South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham and Iowa Sen. Charles E. Grassley — voted for the bill. Evidently, the Monarch of Mar-a-Lago holds less sway over the party than he once did.

And the bill, which its proponents say requires no tax hike and is mostly paid for with unspent coronavirus relief money, is a thing of beauty.

Advertisement

According to Mark Zandi, the chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, it could create some 660,000 jobs by 2025, partly because it includes funding for job training and provisions for more women to get into construction and trucking.

In the bill’s current form, the big money goes to marquee items, especially roads and bridges. Appalachian and Alaskan highways will get a special boost, evidence (perhaps) of the contributions to the bill by Sens. Joe Manchin III (D-W.Va.) and Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska).

But the package also funds Puerto Rico’s highways, projects to relieve congestion in cities, and academic research on transportation.

Railroads will also get substantial federal investment, especially Biden’s beloved Northeast Corridor, the well-worn route from Boston to D.C. Among other things, the bill provides for more refreshments on Amtrak routes.

Advertisement

(If that refreshment clause makes it all the way into law, I’m lobbying for this earmark: more delicious Wee Brie, which used to class up Amtrak’s plastic-wrapped cheese plates.)

There’s funding to fortify the power grid against hacks and attacks, help protect communities against drought, flooding, wildfire and poisonous lead water pipes. Electric vehicle charging stations and electric school buses will — if this thing passes intact — proliferate.

Yes, some of this is “green” and some of this is “blue-collar,” and those color concepts can always trip partisan wires. But the explosion didn’t happen this time; it got muffled by days, weeks and months of what various media called “grueling,” “painstaking,” “fierce” debate and compromise.

And of course one person styled it as test of loyalty — to himself.

Advertisement

“This [bill] will be a victory for the Biden Administration and Democrats, and will be heavily used in the 2022 election,” Trump shouted two weeks ago. “It is a loser for the USA, a terrible deal, and makes the Republicans look weak, foolish, and dumb.”

He threatened any in his party who might support the bill, saying “lots of primaries will be coming your way!” But this time, 19 shrugged.

As for the Democrats, the progressive wing has its own objections to the bill and its compromises, but no one defected on Tuesday in the Senate.

It seems that one of the ways to repair political bridges is to repair literal bridges.

Advertisement

@page88
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Don’t come knocking on my door with your Fauci ouchi!” Rep. Lauren Boebert (R-Colo.) yelled at last month’s Conservative Political Action Conference. “You leave us the hell alone!” Boebert has described her election to Congress as “a sign and a wonder, just like God promised.”

She’s a moderate in some circles. One Florida pastor hears parishioners call the vaccination the “sign of the beast,” a biblical reference to the apocalypse. A Tennessee pastor who threatens to expel anyone who wears a mask to his church also discourages people from getting the vaccination, which he falsely claims contains aborted fetal tissue.

No wonder that white evangelicals are among the least vaccinated Americans. And no wonder that many in the vaccinated majority, increasingly angry with their unprotected fellow citizens, conclude that anti-vaccination evangelicals are just tools in the right-wing war on common sense and basic decency.

Yet the roots of vaccination hesitancy are much older and more interesting than that. Indeed, American skepticism of expert knowledge reaches back nearly three centuries, to a rebellion against religious authority.

Advertisement

During the first century of English settlement in North America, most colonists listened to college-educated pastors. Whether Congregationalist in Massachusetts or Anglican in Virginia, those pastors based their authority on their knowledge of Latin and Greek as well as of theology. Many dabbled in medicine. They were the experts.

But in the mid-1730s, charismatic preachers without college degrees suddenly drew huge crowds with harrowing tales of a furious God and wayward flocks. Embracing these revivals, the Rev. Jonathan Edwards of Massachusetts delivered one of the most famous sermons in American history, “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God.” (The title pretty much sums it up.)

The revivalists also denounced educated ministers as “unconverted” impostors whose book learning led people away from real piety. One likened the regular clergy’s sermons to “rat poison.” Distressed by such attacks, Edwards pulled back from the fires he had stoked, calling for “humility and modesty” in the face of conflicting views.

But the wounds of this religious revolution never healed. Unlike in crowded European countries, where congregants had to coexist, Americans kept spreading apart, moving west after 1800 and forming new churches that reproduced rather than resolved the bitter divisions that had begun back East.

As moderate Protestants began to stress the human capacity for progress with or without God’s help, wave after wave of revivals cast fresh doubt on anyone who claimed expert knowledge without divine inspiration.

New forms of fundamentalism emerged in the 1920s in response to Darwinian science and again in the 1970s in reaction to the women’s liberation and civil rights movements. While many Americans and Europeans drifted away from religion, except as a guide to moral conduct or a source of community, religious conservatives sustained the belief in God as an immanent presence in daily life — a power vastly superior to any kind of research or learning.

As Boebert says, “The wisdom of the world is foolishness in God’s sight.”

Some faith communities have embraced vaccinations and other medical breakthroughs, citing God’s benevolence and the golden rule. Yet modern evangelicals often see God as more stern than kind, encouraging a sense of epic conflict between the pious and the profane. And over the past few decades, evangelicals’ deep-seated distrust of society’s experts has merged with the increasingly nihilistic themes of the far right, creating a toxic disdain for science in general and public health in particular.

Advertisement

Which brings us back to our troubled present. COVID-19 surges again due to vaccination hesitancy and growing hostility to basic safety precautions, while the experts — and the Americans who listen to them — throw up their hands. How can understanding the long history of anti-expertise help us overcome this deadly impasse?

To start, those of us who are vaccinated must accept that the non-vaccinated aren’t just political pawns for the Lauren Boeberts and Tucker Carlsons of the world. Rather, they are bearers of a long and complicated history, one that has often enlivened American culture.

After all, the mid-18th century revivals that tore apart so many communities also helped prepare the colonists to defy the Church of England, and thus the British Empire during the American Revolution. The revivalism of the 19th century often inspired anti-slavery activism.

Advertisement

In non-pandemic times, a healthy skepticism of expertise has made the U.S. a nation of free-thinkers and rule-breakers.

On that note, public health officials should more directly address faith communities, making clear that each church has a right to worship God according to its traditions and to question science when people’s lives are not in immediate danger. By taking that vital step across the great cultural divide, the experts can more effectively dispel the wild conspiracy theories swirling around the vaccines. They might even make the case that getting vaccinated is the moral choice, the kind, caring and Christian thing to do.

Many won’t listen. But some will, and fewer people will die.

In the end, we can all learn something from the Rev. Edwards, who had the wisdom to step back from his deepest longings for spiritual revival and speak instead to the simpler, humbler virtues of coming together in dark times.

Advertisement

J.M. Opal, who is an American, teaches in the department of history and classical studies at McGill University in Montreal.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As a 17-year-old born and raised in the Central Valley, I grew up with the Sierra Nevada as my second home — backpacking through sequoia groves, drinking alpine water and gazing at cobwebs of stars.

But over the past year, wildfires, a viral pandemic and college applications have limited my outdoor excursions. When I returned to my old home for a backpacking trip, I was shocked at the stark difference between the current reality and my idyllic memories. Even in just a decade, I’ve watched the Sierra wilt under the brute force of climate change, the sanctuary of my youth burning to ashes. How will it endure two more decades? Or four?

In July, my family drove to Kings Canyon National Park to backpack the Rae Lakes Loop, a 41.4-mile trail chock full of silky lakes and crumbling mountain passes. It was the first time we’d been in the mountains since the devastating Creek fire a year and a half ago, and years since our first glimpse of Kings Canyon.

An odd sense of emptiness hovered about our car as we slithered up Highway 180. The forest that once repressed sharp rays of sun had given away to stretches of black ash. The remaining pines, once capable of surviving subzero winters on 80-degree granite slopes, were reduced to blackened toothpicks. Even the immense granite faces and magnificent jagged cliffs of Kings Canyon were yellowed and left barren by the intense heat and wildfires of the past months.

Advertisement

I had known the Sierra to be unforgiving in its beauty and unpredictability. Having always been in awe of nature’s terrifying power, I was pained to see the Sierra vulnerable, brought to its knees by human-induced climate change.

Though drought, heat waves and wildfires are all natural phenomena, climate change increases the frequency and severity of all three. They are also mutually reinforcing. As places like Kings Canyon heat up, drought becomes increasingly common. Snowpack levels drop, and clouds dissipate before releasing rain. Plants, animals, backpackers and farmers alike thirst for water from shallow, trickling streams. Trees and other plant life die of water loss and insect epidemics, fueling the severity and duration of wildfires.

The signs of climate change are all around us, yet we’ve staved off the consequences of our actions by sheltering in our air-conditioned homes and watching pretty documentaries, believing that Earth’s resources remain pure and unmarked by human touch. But what happens when we can’t protect even the most hallowed lands from our actions? Even during my pandemic hiatus from the wilderness, the power was shifting between humans and the environment. Nature isn’t invincible; it never was.

That week, I found devastation in the scarred trees and dried creeks of the Rae Lakes Loop. But I also found hope.

Along the trail, I let my hands run across the freshly sprung grass near the riverbed and prayed for the many young saplings pushing through the fertile, black ash. Deer, large and small, roamed the forests and gulped water from the rocky beds of the Kings River. They served as a reminder of nature’s resiliency, that even the deepest, most sacred folds of the mountains are capable of fighting humanity’s reaching impact.

Thankfully, Generation Z — my generation — is anything but silent on the issue of climate change. After all, our future lives depend on new policies and cultural attitudes that will both preserve our natural world and ensure a safe and sustainable life for us and the generations after. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s most recent report warns that we’re in “code red”; our summers are only getting hotter, smokier and longer. It’s only a matter of time before we’re forced to confront the cataclysmic fallout of a warming planet.

I’m a senior in high school, and I’ve already backpacked hundreds of miles in the Sierra and summited its tallest, 14,000-foot peaks. Still, there’s so much more that I want to share with my friends and family. I want them to feel the same terrifying awe of nature, to fall deeply in love with it, as I had so long ago.

Of course, the state of the planet frightens me. But when I see the blades of grass and saplings of the Sierra, I still feel hopeful. I believe, if we show enough passion and respect for each juniper pine and robin, that nature can still be saved from humankind. We just need people to care.

Advertisement

Juliet Fang is a high school senior in Fresno. She is a research assistant at the UC Davis Western Center of Health and Agricultural Safety and at the Central Valley Health Policy Institute.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Reports on the too-cozy ties between local district attorneys and local police began piling up over the last decade, and they all generally found that elected prosecutors rarely prosecute police for killing unarmed civilians. They relied too much on police department cooperation during criminal investigations and police union money at election time to risk that relationship.

One answer was to turn the prosecution of cops accused of unlawful deadly force over to someone else, like the state attorney general. A modified version of that idea took shape last year as Assembly Bill 1506, which passed and was signed into law. It took effect July 1, only a few months after Rob Bonta was appointed California attorney general.

Bonta on Monday used his powers to file manslaughter charges against Salvador Sanchez, who was an off-duty Los Angeles police officer when he shot and killed a mentally disabled man inside a crowded Costco in the Riverside County city of Corona in 2019. Sanchez fired 10 shots, killing Kenneth French and injuring his parents.

Bonta’s action is a step in the right direction, even as it raises a number of questions about the criminal justice process and its ability to hold police accountable free from political influence.

Advertisement

For example, if we can’t rely on district attorneys because they are too enmeshed in politics and too reliant on police union money, why are we better off with the attorney general — who is also an elected official and also relies on campaign donations from police?

The answer is imperfect because attorneys general are indeed somewhat beholden to police. Bonta was appointed to the office by Gov. Gavin Newsom, filling the vacancy left by the departure of Xavier Becerra for a Cabinet post in President Biden’s administration. But Bonta was likely to run for the job anyway, and in any event he is now deep in election mode as he campaigns for election next year in hopes of landing a full term.

But as a statewide official, the attorney general is not so directly tied into the local political or police establishment, in Riverside County or anywhere else. It’s tempting to look for decision-makers completely aloof from politics, like, say, U.S. attorneys, who have no election campaigns to run. But they are appointed by presidents and, as such, may seek to curry favor in hopes of future appointments.

What about the Riverside County grand jury, which declined to indict Sanchez in 2019? Surely it was the right, apolitical body to make a decision, and Bonta’s decision overrides it?

It is true that grand juries don’t collect campaign donations and don’t run for office, yet they are widely seen as tools of the district attorney. They make their decisions based solely on the evidence and argument the D.A. puts before it. There is an old saying attributed to various luminaries that “a district attorney could get a grand jury to indict a ham sandwich if he wanted to.”

The reverse may also be true: By leaving the charging decision to the grand jury, the D.A. escapes criticism from both those who want him to prosecute and those who do not.

But surely it’s the timing, and not the attorney general, that made the difference here, right? There was plenty of skepticism of police in 2019, but nowhere near as much as there is today, in the wake of last year’s police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis, an angry summer of sometimes-violent protests, and the murder conviction and sentencing this year of ex-Officer Derek Chauvin. Would Sanchez be in the clear today if the attorney general review had taken place in 2019?

Perhaps. The tenor of the times plays a role. Besides, Becerra was attorney general then, and he found no reason to charge Sacramento police officers in the killing of Stephon Clark.

Advertisement

Still, the differences between the French and the Clark shootings are significant. Police suspected Clark of committing a crime, they were on duty, it was nighttime and outdoors, and they were following him and fired when they thought they saw a gun (they were wrong; it was a phone). Sanchez claimed that he, too, thought he saw a gun. But he was off-duty and surrounded with bystanders, and the circumstances can leave the impression that he acted out of anger rather than fear. That may now be for a trial jury to decide.

Neither decision can be free of second-guessing, but the same can be said of any decision to charge or not charge a crime. Sanchez’s actions were found “out of policy” by the Los Angeles Police Commission, and he lost his job, but he very nearly escaped further accountability for what appears to have been a shockingly irresponsible shooting. There may now be a trial, but in the meantime Bonta’s decision to charge should restore a measure of confidence in the criminal justice system.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: Well, bully for Newsom, he has finally decided to get serious about reopening K-12 schools, after 14 months of closure and hybrid education in much of California. But those school bells ring hollow — they just sound like a politician trying to avoid recall. (“Newsom finally rings the school bell,” editorial, May 21)

If he’s really serious, he should apply the same pressure to all the community college and California State University campuses that are still planning to conduct classes mostly online for the summer and fall 2021 terms.

Try taking advanced calculus, physics or chemistry with labs in preparation to transfer in a STEM field without in-person classes. Imagine enrolling as a freshman for virtual learning at Cal State after spending your entire high school senior year at home.

It’s a diabolical joke.

Advertisement

Sandra Valeri, Rancho Palos Verdes

..

To the editor: While I’m glad to see the push to reopen K-12 schools, I’m sorely disappointed in The Times’ lack of coverage of what’s happening in Los Angeles County and Ventura County community colleges — unconscionable foot-dragging, with no plan for all classes to be in-person until spring 2022.

We need more coverage of this shameful letdown for college students.

L.J. Williamson, Granada Hills
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: I’m not a lawyer, so it isn’t clear to me if any of the following would apply to the governors of Florida, Texas and South Dakota: criminal negligence, dereliction of duty, gross incompetence, violation of their oaths of office, and abuse and neglect of elders and children. (“Why are vaccination rates so low? We found the worst county in each state and asked the politicians,” Aug. 9)

However, I am a career public health physician with more than 30 years of experience in communicable disease epidemiology and control, so I can say without any doubt or hesitation that these elected politicians are ethically challenged and morally bankrupt.

How pathetic to use the COVID-19 pandemic to advance their political agenda and aspirations.

David E. Dassey, M.D., Los Angeles

Advertisement

..

To the editor: To borrow Tolstoy’s observation on happy and unhappy families, all vaccinated people are alike, and each unvaccinated person is unvaccinated in their own way.

Clearly, large numbers of the unvaccinated have been “inoculated” against taking the vaccine by right-wing politics who define government as the enemy. Those who are waiting until the vaccine is proven safe belie their position by opposing the wearing of masks.

I will suggest one other reason for those who refuse vaccination. Just as some belligerent, antisocial, self-loathing individuals are known to commit “suicide by cop,” the comments and behaviors of some unvaccinated people suggest “suicide by COVID” as a motive. Even if the disease does not result in death, it offers them a certain amount of notoriety and bragging rights for having survived it.

Marcia Goldstein, Laguna Woods

..

To the editor: There are many reasons that people have given not to be vaccinated, but almost all of them (except medical contraindications) boil down to the idea that getting vaccinated is a “personal choice.”

For diseases like tetanus, HPV and rabies, vaccination is a personal health intervention. For diseases like measles, smallpox and COVID-19, widespread vaccination programs are public health interventions.

Advertisement

Choosing not to get vaccinated against tetanus is a personal choice. The only person you put at risk is yourself.

Choosing not to participate in a widespread vaccination program against a deadly contagion like COVID-19 is a public choice, similar to choosing not to follow traffic lights. Everyone nearby is put at risk.

Please get vaccinated. The life you save could be somebody else’s.

Philip Rohrbacher, Los Angeles

Advertisement

The writer is a registered nurse.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As the Taliban captures one provincial capital after another in Afghanistan (18 in all so far), the wearisome but familiar Beltway parlor game of who “lost” the country — as if it were ever an American possession to begin with — has started. President Biden is most likely to be saddled with the blame for ordering a “precipitous” exit. Even former President Trump, who set the stage for a full exit and vowed to end the forever wars, now says that “it should have been done much better.”

Precipitous? Is this really an accurate characterization of a military campaign that has lasted close to 20 years and that cost close to $90 billion just to train the Afghan National Defense and Security Forces — and almost $2.3 trillion if all other costs are added in, including $815.7 billion in war-related and reconstruction expenses?

The Afghan army outnumbers the Taliban by at least 4 to 1. It has more firepower on the ground and, despite its limitations, an air force, where the Taliban has none. Nor has the Taliban benefited from the training and funding of any country with resources comparable to those of the United States. While in some ultimately captured places such as Lashkar Gah, capital of Helmand province, Afghan forces have fought back bravely under excellent leadership, elsewhere the army, police and local administrators have either fled or surrendered without a fight. The likelihood of the government retaking lost territory is therefore small at best.

The rapidity with which the Taliban captured places that have traditionally been the most hostile to them — such as Herat and Kunduz, because of their substantial non-Pashtun populations — has been particularly surprising. What remains to be seen is how quickly the north’s main city, Mazar-i-Sharif, will be overrun.

Advertisement

So the game seems to be up in Afghanistan. With the Taliban’s capture of Ghazni, about 90 miles from Kabul, the U.S.-backed Kabul Afghan government has been cut off from the south. And now that Aybak, capital of Samangan province, has also fallen, the connection between northern Afghanistan and the capital has also been severed.

We don’t know what the battle for Kabul will look like, whether the government’s defense of the city will be strong enough to prevent, or substantially delay, a complete triumph by the Taliban, which might open a path toward a political agreement. As things stand, the odds of the Taliban settling for anything less than full victory are slim.

Though some observers did say it was unavoidable, no one wanted the outcome we are now witnessing — on this the most ardent advocates of pressing on and the most fervent foes of persisting can agree.

But if an army that the United States has trained for so long and at such colossal expense collapses so quickly, critics of withdrawal are obliged to answer two questions that they habitually avoid or finesse with bromides: At what point would you be prepared to declare that the U.S. could withdraw without the risk of all of the dire consequences you are now watching unfold? Short of again significantly ramping up the number of U.S. troops, what do you propose to do in, say, the next five years that has not been accomplished despite two decades of effort?

No civilian expert (even some very smart ones) or the ex-general who has decried Biden’s decision to end the American war in Afghanistan has a convincing answer to either question. They pivot hastily to canned formulations about the importance of “staying the course,” preserving American “credibility” and so on. In short, their counsel amounts to this: We must keep doing what we’ve been doing, no matter that it hasn’t worked. It will work out eventually. This has been their refrain for years.

Advocates of withdrawal, for their part, need to be realistic and honest. A great deal of fighting and dying lies ahead in Afghanistan, and innocent people will suffer immensely. The Taliban’s rule will be cruel — it hasn’t reformed, its spin about protecting human rights notwithstanding. Many freedoms now enjoyed by Afghans, particularly well-educated urban professionals and above all the women among them, will be lost. Ethnic and religious minorities, notably the Hazaras of central Afghanistan, who are mainly Shiite Muslims, will be persecuted. The Taliban’s reign will be brutish and nasty, but not necessarily short.

No one who has followed the Taliban denies that its rule will be draconian, pitiless and intolerant. Those opposed to the Biden administration’s decision to withdraw are right to lament the future that awaits millions of Afghans, but they must also explain how long the United States would have needed to remain in Afghanistan to ensure a different, much better life for the country.

The American war in Afghanistan is about to end. But the war of words over “who lost Afghanistan” has barely begun.

Advertisement

Rajan Menon is a professor of international relations at the Powell School, City College of New York and a non-resident fellow at the Quincy Institute.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Question 1

Ballots for the Sept. 14 special recall election have been mailed to 22 million California voters. The ballot poses two questions. The first is whether Gov. Gavin Newsom should be removed from office.

The correct response is a strong, unequivocal no.

Removing Newsom and replacing him with an untested and unprepared alternative who wouldn’t represent the values of most Californians would be a disaster. It would doom the state to months of political and bureaucratic dysfunction and economic uncertainty. And for what purpose?

Advertisement

Newsom, who is 53 years old and 2½ years into his first term as governor, hasn’t been perfect — but show us a governor who has. His public communications have been muddled and confusing at times. He has not worked as well with the Legislature as he could. He has occasionally promised more than he could deliver. His prodigious fundraising has raised legitimate concerns about the role of money in politics.

These are things that voters would appropriately consider during a regular reelection campaign, but they do not justify using the extraordinary power of recall to remove a legitimately elected governor in favor of someone who may only have a sliver of support from voters. Indeed, by our reckoning, Newsom’s missteps are minor when compared to the good he has done for California as one of the nation’s strongest leaders on the COVID-19 pandemic. In our hyperpolarized time, sadly, decisive leadership has also enraged and galvanized the governor’s critics.

And while pandemic response has been his top responsibility over the last year and a half, Newsom has also started work on solving some of the state’s most intractable problems, using the state’s historic budget surplus to fund programs to help individuals and business recover from the pandemic, build more affordable housing, house the state’s unsheltered and prevent and fight wildfires.

The 46 candidates vying to replace Newsom — most of them men, most of them Republican, and most of them utterly unqualified — offer an endless litany of grievances that are little more than objections to his liberal policies — policies, we may add, that were clear to everyone when 62% of voters chose Newsom in the 2018 election. The whole thing would be comical if the stakes weren’t so high.

The critics paint a picture of a state teetering on collapse that is wildly irresponsible and in many cases just flat wrong: The streets are overrun with criminals thanks to Newsom! (Nope.) People and businesses are fleeing California in record numbers because of his terrible policies! (Wrong.) Newsom caused the state’s massive wildfires because he mismanaged the forest! (Ridiculous.) He kept changing the rules during the pandemic — but he also didn’t change them enough! (What?)

The reality is that Newsom took office in January 2019 amid literal and figurative wildfires: Homelessness was rising and reaching a tipping point. The state’s largest electric utility, PG&E, was in bankruptcy because of negligence that started infernos like the one that wiped out the town of Paradise. The state’s information technology systems were (and still are) hopelessly out of date, leading to one of the first challenges of Newsom’s administration, at the Department of Motor Vehicles. Climate change was and still is accelerating, squeezing the state’s power grid during its transition to renewable energy sources and straining its water supply.

These crises were years in the making and — let’s face it — Newsom inherited them from his Democratic predecessor, Jerry Brown. But Newsom had the misfortune to take office just as they reached the boiling point. And then, the pandemic hit and forced Newsom to pivot into emergency mode and set aside the usual business of governance to focus on addressing the emerging and not fully understood threat of COVID-19.

Advertisement

Newsom’s biggest error was a momentary lapse of judgment. As governor, he issued tough public health restrictions intended to limit the spread of COVID-19, including a limit on more than three households gathering. But he didn’t always follow his own guidance; in November he and his wife dined unmasked and shoulder to shoulder with 10 other people in a private semi-enclosed outdoor room at the French Laundry, a high-end restaurant in Napa Valley. It was a mistake, for which Newsom apologized — but it was in no way a fireable offense.

Unfortunately for the governor, and for California, the blunder happened at a critical juncture for the latest gubernatorial recall effort (the four filed over the previous year failed to qualify). Not two weeks after the dinner, a judge granted the recall’s proponents an extra four months to gather signatures, reviving it from all-but-certain failure. With the help of Republicans such as former U.S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who saw an opportunity for political disruption in the blue state they love to hate, the recall effort was able to hitch a ride on the inchoate frustration, anger and grief Californians were feeling after months of pandemic restrictions, political divisions and civil unrest.

What’s at stake in this election is ultimately not Newsom’s political career but California’s values and our democracy. A new Republican governor would struggle to get laws passed given a hostile Democratic supermajority in the Legislature, which could override a gubernatorial veto. But he or she could reshape California for decades to come through the use of executive orders to roll back environmental protections, criminal justice reform and the social safety net.

Advertisement

Governors also wield power by appointing judges and regulators, such as those overseeing the state’s power utilities and coastal commission, and, in the case of a vacancy, members of Congress. Newsom named successors to Kamala Harris, who left the Senate to become vice president, and Xavier Becerra, who resigned as state attorney general to become President Biden’s Health and Human Services secretary. Should Sen. Dianne Feinstein, who is 88, retire next year, whoever is governor would have a chance to select her replacement.

And who might that appointment be? House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Bakersfield), who asserted that Donald Trump was the real winner of the 2020 presidential election? Rep. Darrell Issa (R-Bonsall), who used his House seat to hound and harass Presidents Obama and Biden?

If times have seemed tough over the past year — with our lives, our environment and our democracy under grave threat, with political violence simmering just under the surface of every heated debate, and families and neighbors so polarized that they can’t hold a civil conversation — remember that they can always get worse.

Gavin Newsom has made his share of mistakes. We’re not thrilled with the complacency that characterizes parts of the Democratic power structure in California, or with the outsize power of public-sector unions. There is no doubt that California liberalism hasn’t exactly solved soaring homelessness, persistent economic and social inequality, a mediocre education system and, most pressing of all, a housing crisis that threatens the future of the Golden State as a place of opportunity and growth.

Advertisement

But we are thrilled by California’s values. This state has chosen to be a national leader on the environment, criminal justice reform and the social safety net because state leaders and voters have chosen to look forward, not backward. We want a healthier planet, more just communities and opportunity for people to live and love in peace and freedom.

To be sure, Newsom’s self-inflicted wounds have dismayed us. We wish, even now, that he would make a more forceful, proactive case for his record, and not simply denounce his recall opponents as Trumpian extremists (though some of them are).

In tough times, citizens may be tempted to throw out the incumbent and try their luck with someone offering shiny new ideas. That rarely works out for the better. Don’t gamble with California’s future. Vote no on the recall and let Newsom finish his term. If you’re not happy, you’ll have a chance in next year’s election to choose someone else.

Advertisement

Question 2

The second question on the ballot asks voters to choose one of 46 people to take over should Newsom be recalled. For Californians who oppose removing Newsom, this answer is not so simple. As an editorial board, we have struggled over our recommendation, because we can say with certainty that none of the people hoping to replace Newsom would be an improvement.

The editorial board members have met with six of seven leading candidates (Caitlyn Jenner’s campaign did not respond to our invitation). There may be gems among the other 39 candidates, but neither the board nor the voters are likely to find out before ballots are due on Sept. 14, as they don’t have much if any political support and virtually no chance of winning.

Faced with such terrible choices, it’s tempting to skip this difficult question altogether and to recommend leaving this part of the ballot blank, as the Democratic Party has urged. Why dignify this reckless power grab by participating in it in any way?

Advertisement

We have concluded, after searching debate and reflection, that that is a cowardly way out and would hand the decision-making power to others who do vote — and those voters may be uninformed, irrationally angry and looking for someone to take a far-right turn on issues like climate change, environmental protection, civil rights, policing and vaccination. That’s too great a gamble.

We’re left to conclude that voters who oppose the recall should also vote for a replacement — even if they have to hold their noses to do so.

But who?

Californians were extremely lucky in 2003, when they voted to recall then-Gov. Gray Davis in favor of Republican movie star Arnold Schwarzenegger, who managed to grow into the job to become a decent, if not great, governor. But looking at the field of top recall candidates leads us to believe California is unlikely to be so fortunate in 2021.

Advertisement

It’s hard to find much to recommend the front-runners. All oppose to some degree the pandemic actions taken by Newsom, including mask mandates and vaccine requirements.

California Newsom wants voters to ignore the recall ballot’s second question. They don’t have to Gov. Gavin Newsom and Democrats are singularly focused on Californians casting a “no” vote on the first part of the recall ballot. That may leave some voters unaware they can also choose a replacement in the event Newsom loses.

But some are worse than others. Case in point is the man who is polling highest among those who favor recall: the conservative radio host Larry Elder. Not only does he have no experience in elective office, Elder is a Trumpian ideologue who has called climate change a “crock” and said there should be no minimum wage.

Supporting Jenner, the transgender reality TV star, former Olympian and member of the Kardashian clan, might seem as great an advance in LGBTQ representation as Newsom’s 2004 decision, when he was San Francisco’s mayor, to grant marriage licenses to same-sex couples. But she is a clueless lightweight, who demonstrates little knowledge of how the state works or the scope of, and limitations on, the governor’s powers. It wouldn’t do the LGBTQ community any favors to have her fail spectacularly as leader of the state.

Advertisement

Then there’s Republican John Cox, the San Diego businessman and self-funded perpetual candidate who lost to Newsom in the 2018 general election. He was not qualified for the job then, and the only apparent difference in his 2021 campaign is the Kodiak bear and gigantic ball of plastic trash he’s been hauling around the state to make a point about … well, we’re not exactly sure.

Angelenos may not know much about Doug Ose, a land developer and former three-term Republican congressman from the Sacramento area. His only distinction from the pack is that he’s straightforward about the damage he would do to California, namely abandoning criminal justice reforms, building new prisons and putting the interests of the state’s agricultural lobby ahead of its environment and its residents.

Assemblyman Kevin Kiley (R-Rocklin) is an impressively knowledgeable young policy wonk with degrees from Harvard and Yale, but also a worrisome ideologue. When we asked Kiley who won the 2020 presidential election, he refused to say whether Biden was legitimately chosen. That’s shameful. He reminds us of Republican opportunists like Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, Sens. Josh Hawley of Missouri and Tom Cotton of Arkansas, and Rep. Elise Stefanik of New York, who benefited from Ivy League educations but have veered far right to pander to Trump supporters when they certainly know better.

Democrats and left-leaning independent voters may be inclined to support Kevin Paffrath, a 29-year-old social media influencer who, with his 1.69 million YouTube subscribers, is the closest thing to a prominent Democrat on the ballot. He exudes enthusiasm and idealism, and may share some basic Democratic values with most Californians, but he’s not a serious candidate any more than Los Angeles billboard star Angelyne. Besides, some of his proposals — rounding up homeless people and forcing them into shelters, and enacting massive tax cuts — make us question whether he truly stands for anything besides his own fame.

Advertisement

That leaves us with the least terrible of all these bad options: former San Diego Mayor Kevin Faulconer, a moderate Republican. He is perhaps the most conventional gubernatorial candidate and has the executive experience and mature temperament that other recall candidates lack.

Faulconer is pro-vaccination. He acknowledges Biden’s victory. He supports abortion rights and strong efforts to mitigate climate change. He points to his work with a majority-Democratic City Council and his ability to get elected, twice, in a city where only a quarter of voters are registered Republicans as evidence of his bipartisan bona fides.

Faulconer, 54, stands for the kind of traditional Republican values that the GOP espoused during decades of electoral dominance in California. Alas, the party that produced Earl Warren, Richard M. Nixon, Ronald Reagan and other leaders who reshaped postwar American politics has lost serious credibility over the past decade as demagogues and extremists have taken over more of the GOP.

In a normal general election, Faulconer would merit scrutiny. But it’s hard to see how he could remain politically viable in this extremist era without tapping into the Trump-dominated national Republican infrastructure. We are also concerned about Faulconer’s involvement while San Diego mayor in a sketchy real estate deal in which the city paid more than the assessed value for an office building. He should publicly answer questions about his role in this deal.

Advertisement

We fervently oppose the recall of Gavin Newsom, and we do not support Kevin Faulconer for governor. But for those who care about the stability of California, Faulconer is the least bad option in a recall field that ranges from the merely bad to the utterly catastrophic.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Last year, Microsoft announced that it would be carbon-negative by 2030. “If we don’t curb emissions, and temperatures continue to climb, science tells us that the results will be catastrophic,” the company said. Microsoft deserves credit for publicly discussing the climate crisis, being transparent about its own greenhouse gas emissions and at least having some sort of plan to reduce them.

But the fact is, Microsoft is one of the top 10 corporate buyers of commercial flights in the United States. In 2019, its business travel alone accounted for 392,557 metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions.

That’s far more than my entire country emits in a year. Tuvalu, a low-lying island nation in the South Pacific, is well known for its vulnerability to the effects of climate change and sea level rise. We contribute almost nothing to global emissions, but their consequences affect us even daily.

Microsoft’s high level of corporate air travel is not a good look for a company that talks big on climate, sustainability and racial justice, especially one that has its own videoconferencing platform. Surely an advanced tech firm that claims to be “reimagining virtual collaboration for the future of work” should practice what it preaches, crank up Microsoft Teams and fly less.

Advertisement

But Microsoft is hardly an outlier among tech firms. Five of the 10 largest buyers of corporate air travel in the U.S. are technology companies: Amazon, IBM, Google, Apple and Microsoft. These digital giants, along with the big consulting firms, are also among the top buyers of flights globally.

Although one might expect these big, growing companies’ large number of employees to fly to many meetings, there are plenty of even bigger employers that fly less. Companies that tout technological innovation as the key to tackling climate change should know enough to use video calls, rather than shuttle employees around the planet on airlines that before the pandemic burned 7 million to 8 million barrels of oil per day.

In May 2020, research in the journal Nature Climate Change found that the pause to aviation accounted for 10% of the decrease in global emissions during COVID-19 lockdowns. Half of all aviation emissions come from just 1% of the global population, and according to the International Air Transport Assn., most of the frequent flyers are businesspeople.

The wealthiest pollute the most, while those who emit the least — predominantly people of color, the socially vulnerable, and inhabitants of the Global South, including the Pacific — bear the costs. Comparatively wealthy flyers need to recognize their responsibility to climate-vulnerable people, who want to maintain their homes and identities as citizens of their country, rather than being forced to migrate elsewhere.

If concern for equality and climate justice won’t cure Big Tech’s corporate flying addiction, maybe money will. The profits of Amazon and other large technology firms soared during last year’s lockdowns, even when commercial flights were reduced to zero for many months.

Chief financial officers and accountants are, therefore, now wondering whether the expense of business flights makes any sense. Employees can hold more meetings in a day via videoconference, and business flyers say the pause in air travel either had no impact on their productivity, or actually improved it.

Bill Gates has predicted that business travel will decline by half after the pandemic. If that’s the baseline, then what would a company truly committed to urgent climate action do?

With that question in mind, a coalition of nongovernmental organizations, activists and Microsoft customers recently launched JustUseTeams.com, calling on Microsoft to take the lead and announce that it will permanently lock in all of its 2020 reduction in business flights. Once Microsoft shows some leadership on this issue, the campaign will expand to other tech firms. On the road to net-zero emissions, any step that advances that goal while saving a company millions of dollars a year should be considered low-hanging fruit.

Advertisement

Tech firms will very likely claim that they have been trying to reduce emissions, but their actions are inadequate to the climate crisis. Microsoft, for example, is part of an initiative to promote sustainable fuels. But the airline industry has consistently failed to meet its own targets for scaling up such fuels, which still account for less than 0.1% of the sector’s use.

Meanwhile, many Big Tech firms buy “carbon credits” and maintain that doing so erases or “offsets” their own flight emissions. But this claim is losing whatever scientific credibility it once may have had. A recent investigation revealed that the most popular carbon-offset scheme used by airlines is based on a flawed system, in which so-called “phantom credits” are sold based on the protection of forest areas that were never at risk of being cut down. Under this kind of scheme, neither airlines nor their biggest corporate customers can really claim that their flights are “carbon neutral.”

Microsoft and other big technology companies must commit to remain permanently at their 2020 flight levels. This is possible and necessary — and it is also good business.

Richard Gokrun, a former meteorologist, is executive director of Tuvalu Climate Action Network.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This is the way such things are supposed to work.

In late February, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo asked the state’s attorney general to name an independent panel to investigate multiple allegations of sexual harassment that had been made against him. The lawyers went to work — for more than five months.

They issued 70 subpoenas, reviewed 74,000 documents and interviewed 179 people, including Cuomo, all of his accusers and other individuals they believed could have relevant information. They created a tip line that received 280 tips, and reviewed each one.

On Aug. 3, Atty. Gen. Letitia James, a Democrat, made public a 165-page report, which found that Cuomo had harassed 11 women, including a state trooper whose allegation had been unknown.

Advertisement

A week later, on Tuesday, Cuomo announced his resignation.

Contrast the Cuomo case with the last such “investigation” in Washington: the FBI’s examination of sexual assault allegations against Supreme Court nominee Brett M. Kavanaugh nearly three years ago.

President Trump asked the FBI to investigate because he had little choice. Republicans who controlled the Senate stood to lose several votes, and with them Kavanaugh’s confirmation, if the party wasn’t seen to be taking the allegations seriously.

But Republicans gave the FBI one week and it finished in days. The White House first gave the agents a list of just four individuals to interview, then six more, but did not include Kavanaugh, Christine Blasey Ford, his chief accuser, or dozens of other individuals seeking to provide information. All the while, Trump lied to the media, saying that FBI agents “have free rein.”

The bureau created a tip line that got more than 4,500 tips. It deemed an unknown number “relevant” and forwarded them to the White House. They were never heard of again.

The final FBI report to the Senate was nothing more than a compilation of agents’ notes that drew no conclusions. It never was made public, which allowed some Republicans to falsely claim that the FBI had exonerated Kavanaugh.

Days later, he was confirmed to a lifetime seat on the Supreme Court. Among the Senate Republicans, only Alaska’s Lisa Murkowski opposed Kavanaugh. The vote, 50 to 48, was the closest for a justice since 1881.

Unlike the Cuomo probe, the point of the Kavanaugh investigation had never been to seek the facts. It was to appear to do so, to give Republicans political cover.

Advertisement

A few weeks ago, an official at the Biden Justice Department finally responded to a letter that Senate Democrats first sent two years ago to the Trump administration with 18 questions about the FBI’s performance. The response offered little in terms of information, except to confirm that the FBI tip line essentially was nothing more than “a tip dump,” as Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island has called it.

In the reply letter, a Justice Department official, Jill C. Tyson, echoed the FBI’s long-standing explanation that the Kavanaugh investigation was not a criminal investigation. But even accepting a lower standard for a background investigation, it was a farce, laughably limited both in time and scope.

The FBI wouldn’t tell Ford’s lawyers who was leading its investigation or even the simple fact that she would not be interviewed, that she wasn’t on the White House-approved list of interviewees. Debbie Ramirez, the Yale classmate who also alleged that Kavanaugh assaulted her, was on the list — but only so Senate Republicans could avoid giving her a public hearing, which might sway public opinion. Even Trump had been moved to call Ford’s testimony at her Senate hearing “compelling” and “very credible.” He’s called her a liar ever since.

The FBI ignored the two dozen potential witnesses Ramirez and her lawyers had named. Among them were two Yale classmates who hadn’t known Ramirez but tried to interest the FBI in a story identical to hers just after Kavanaugh’s nomination in July 2018 — more than two months before Ramirez went public. Nor did the FBI or the Senate ever contact another Yale classmate, Max Stier, a respected nonpartisan figure in Washington, who sought to privately tell them that he’d seen Kavanaugh drunkenly assault another classmate.

Advertisement

Why does it matter?

Exactly 30 years after the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas hearing, the Senate and the executive branch still have not settled on a fair, nonpartisan way to handle such allegations against presidential nominees or anyone else in public office.

Since the #MeToo movement emerged, seemingly invulnerable figures in entertainment, business, media and culture have been felled by accusations of sexual misconduct. Yet in politics, it seems only Democrats — their party indebted to female voters — need to fear a reckoning.

Republicans have become a cult of Trump, a man credibly accused of sexual assault by nearly two dozen women, all of whom he calls liars. Not surprising that he is quick to defend other Republicans similarly accused, from Kavanaugh to Florida Rep. Matt Gaetz.

Advertisement

No movement will end sexual predation in the workplace, on campuses and elsewhere — as Cuomo, the hypocritical #MeToo cheerleader, showed. Hill, in a memoir, predicted there would be other accusers moved to call out sexual misconduct and implored the Senate to devise a system to fairly handle accusations against political players. It did not, of course, and 27 years after her ordeal, Ford and Ramirez paid a similar price in lost privacy, threats and a sense of justice denied.

And that was a year after the #MeToo movement took off. It’s past time for Washington to act.

@jackiekcalmes
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: You have published important articles for voters to consider when they vote on whether to recall Gov. Gavin Newsom.

One was columnist Michael Hiltzik’s excellent comparison of California’s pandemic response to those of Texas and Florida. The situation could not be more stark: Texas’ infection rate is more than twice that of California, and Florida’s is twice as bad as Texas’.

Another was your report on the Republican debate, with all but one of the possible frontrunners to replace Newsom participating. To a man, they support an approach to the pandemic similar to Gov. Ron DeSantis’ in Florida and Gov. Greg Abbott’s in Texas. That is the last thing we need.

Voters should realize that voting to recall Newsom will get us one of these candidates. The governor’s campaign slogan should be simple: “Don’t DeSantize California.”

Advertisement

James Bailey, Banning

..

To the editor: Looking at the latest figures regarding vaccinations, attitudes on mask mandates and the rising number of patients in hospitals due to COVID-19 and the Delta variant, I can’t help but wonder why there is an election to be held Sept. 14 to recall Newsom, yet no one seems to want to recall the governor of Florida or Texas.

Could the recall be politically motivated?

Arlene Markman, Indian Wells
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: The Sept. 14 recall election is approaching. Here are several reasons to remove Newsom:

Given the Democrats’ decisive numerical advantage in voter registration to Republicans, Democrats have been hurt more by Newsom’s errors than Republicans.



Newsom’s unpredictable and destructive flip-flopping on COVID-19 mandates has created a huge problem for the business community.



Newsom has placed the desires of the teachers unions above the needs of our schoolchildren, possibly causing a permanent learning deficit.



He ignored the clear will of the people of California when he suspended use of the death penalty.



He has failed to provide any productive measures to reduce homelessness in our state.



He has expanded healthcare programs to cover undocumented immigrants, thereby promoting illegal immigration into our state.



Rolling blackouts are our new normal.



Remember his hypocrisy in attending a dinner at the ritzy French Laundry restaurant with lobbyists unmasked after commanding all of us to wear masks indoors.



We need a governor with clear, unmovable principles who takes effective actions that serve the people of California.

Jay Bayman, Camarillo

..

Advertisement

To the editor: The recall (a democratic process laid out in our state Constitution) is undermining Newsom? Nope, he did that to himself with his feckless COVID-19 restrictions.

Larry Elder will restrict abortion rights and end minimum wage, as some recall opponents are claiming? These are the sounds of a wounded animal in its death throes. No governor has the authority to do either unilaterally.

I don’t care who a candidate supported in the past. I only care that he or she can fix the problems in California that have long festered but have grown during Newsom’s tenure. I want a governor who will not impose restrictions just because he can.

Newsom has shown by example he cannot fix our problems, and he will not even follow his own mandates.

Arnie Sklar, Beverly Hills
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To the editor: Expecting voters to ignore the recall ballot’s second question is Gov. Gavin Newsom’s third mistake.

The first was failing to get his Democratic Party identification on the ballot when he was entitled to do so. The second was allowing ego and personal ambition to override his professional obligation to California and its residents. It was arrogant and strategically stupid not to welcome a viable Democratic candidate on the ballot.

The ballot’s second question is actually the more important of the two. There are many voters, not just Republicans, who might prefer to see if someone could do a better job than Newsom. They might vote yes on the recall’s first question without realizing that, if Newsom is recalled, California will most likely end up with a Republican governor.

Unless Newsom’s campaign does something to match and overwhelm the Republicans’ energy and creativity, it’s the “real residents of California” who will end up paying for these mistakes.

Advertisement

If nothing else, we shouldn’t allow a crafty ploy intended to circumvent the results of a legitimate election to win. This has nothing to do with Newsom’s personality. It’s about the survival of the democratic process and the rule of law.

Betty Rome, Culver City

..

To the editor: Sensible voters who get mailed recall ballots will wisely vote no on the first question of whether to remove Newsom and ignore the hollow option to pick a replacement from among the motley crew of 46 unqualified wannabes.

Sensible voters will vote to keep California government intact until our next regular general election in 2022. Newsom then will run on his record and face a vetted, endorsed GOP opponent rather than the nonentities being offered on this confusing ballot.

Sensible voters will recognize this recall as an expensive, exploitive end run around transparent electoral process in an unsettled pandemic time.

Sensible voters will vote no, put their ballot in the postage-paid envelope, sign the envelope and mail it back to their county registrar. A simple majority made up of sensible voters is needed to end this charade.

Frances O’Neill Zimmerman, La Jolla

Advertisement

..

To the editor: As one of those voters who actually reads the sample ballot, I was surprised that there was no obvious indication that one could vote against the recall and still vote for a replacement. This is not self-evident; it is in fact counterintuitive.

In his recent column, George Skelton explained that not only could I vote “no,” but also that I should vote for a least disastrous replacement. At the very least, shouldn’t we siphon votes from Larry Elder, the most disastrous replacement?

The Democratic Party made a mistake by not having a “just-in-case” alternative.

Advertisement

Mark Olmsted, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: I agree with Skelton that that those who vote no on the recall should not leave blank the question of who should replace him if the recall should succeed.

But there is not one person on the list of replacements that I would be willing to vote for. So, I’m planning to follow the reasoning of a recent letter writer and write in Lt. Gov. Eleni Kounalakis.

Advertisement

Catherine Crook, Camarillo

..

To the editor: I think your articles confuse a lot of voters with the implication that we should vote for someone even if we vote against the recall. Also, I do not think it’s rocket science to explain how to vote on this two-part ballot.

In my mind, the vote is no on the recall, and no second part. There are no people running for whom I would ever vote to be governor.

Advertisement

If the recall succeeds, we’ll just run Newsom again, and none of these clowns could beat him in a general election.

Jay Coffman, San Diego
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This week, former President Trump ratcheted up his efforts to turn Ashli Babbitt, the insurrectionist who was slain in the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, into a martyr. He went so far as to say she “truly loved America.” This — despite video of Babbitt climbing through a broken door in the Speaker’s Lobby, which led to the chambers where lawmakers were hiding during the terrorist attack that ultimately left more Americans dead than the one in Benghazi.

“The destruction of property, violent assaults on law enforcement officers, and imminent physical threats to elected officials betray the values of our democracy,” FBI Director Christopher A. Wray said in a statement before the House Oversight and Reform Committee in June.

Trump’s attempt to rebrand Babbit was in line with his continuing efforts to stoke support for his lie that the election was stolen. But what made this week’s statements particularly disturbing — even for him — was his characterizing the law enforcement officer who pulled the trigger as a murderer:

“We know who he is,” he said in the statement.

Advertisement

Feels like a threat to me.

But even if you don’t agree with my assessment, can we at least agree he’s not backing the blue?

Remember, this is a man who looked at the white nationalist rally in 2017 in Charlottesville, Va. — which occurred four years ago this week — and found “some very fine people on both sides.” No such grace for the police defending the Capitol, it seems.

“What makes the struggle harder and more painful is to know so many of my fellow citizens, including so many of the people I risked my life to defend, are downplaying or outright denying what happened,” Metropolitan Police Officer Michael Fanone said in testimony recently before the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack.

Wonder how Fanone feels about Trump calling the fallen terrorist a hero and his fellow officer a murderer?

Also this week, residents in Chicago gathered to mourn Police Officer Ella French, who was shot and killed during a traffic stop last Saturday night. Bars and restaurants are holding fundraisers, kids are selling lemonade, blue ribbons are tied to utility poles, all in support of French as well as her partner, who is still in the hospital recovering. The night of the incident about 30 police officers turned their backs on Mayor Lori Lightfoot after she arrived at the hospital, clearly frustrated by Lightfoot’s law enforcement policies.

“They have had enough and are no longer going to remain silent anymore,” union President John Catanzara told the Chicago Sun-Times.

Interesting comments coming from Catanzara, who last summer threatened to kick officers out of the union for kneeling in solidarity with Black Lives Matter protesters.

Advertisement

His comments are even more troubling when you consider that Catanzara, a vocal Trump supporter, initially downplayed the Jan. 6 attack as “a bunch of pissed-off people that feel an election was stolen, somehow, some way.” He added it was “beyond stupid” to view the actions of people violently trying to stop the peaceful transfer of power as treasonous.

I guess that’s better than Rep. Paul Gosar (R-Ariz.) saying the Capitol Police officer who shot Babbitt was “lying in wait,” painting the officer’s actions as premeditated murder as opposed to, I don’t know, heroic, given the circumstances.

Look, without question, progressives like Lightfoot are struggling to find the right balance between supporting law enforcement while pushing for meaningful, necessary reform. Senate Democrats didn’t earn any gold stars from the far left when they voted to pass Republican Sen. Tommy Tuberville’s amendment to the budget bill to withhold federal funds from municipalities that “defund the police.”

But Democrats are willing to acknowledge the attack on constitutional government on Jan. 6 as well as the selflessness of law enforcement officers who risked their lives to protect our democracy. That’s more than can be said for the far right, which spent the week reminding everyone that backing the blue will always take a back seat to backing Trump.

Advertisement

But don’t take my word for it — take theirs.

@LZGranderson
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Why was it so hard to give the city of Los Angeles a brand new athletic field for children to play on?

My family had raised money to replace a decrepit field at Westwood Recreation Center and dedicate the new site to my 12-year-old son, Tommy, who went to sleep on Monday, April 16, 2018, and never woke up.

We poured our grieving hearts into it, along with thousands of children and adults across our city, by raising $1.2 million. The new field was designed to conserve water, reduce maintenance costs and avoid harmful chemicals, but most importantly it was conceived to promote free play and host multiple sports, including the most popular and diverse youth team sport in our city: soccer.

My son wanted to become a professional soccer player. For countless evenings, we watched him train with children who focused on how they played instead of their differing backgrounds and circumstances. I never could have anticipated how watching him play would inspire me in building his legacy.

Advertisement

After we hit our fundraising goals and had drafted a gift agreement, city officials privately asked me, “Do you have the community’s support?”

“Of course!” I responded.

Children in the neighborhood had sold lemonade and asked for donations in lieu of birthday presents. Colleagues hosted public fundraising events that sold thousands of tickets. Friends and family, joined by compassionate Angelenos who were complete strangers, made donations. Local businesses and schools supported it, along with nonprofit groups desperate for more places for kids to play.

“This has been a true community effort,” I assured them.

At the first city hearings, however, some neighbors living on one side of the park claimed that this recreation center was their backyard. They did not want more children, more whistles or more “outsiders.” Some local activists serving on neighborhood councils were quick to support them.

Detractors used various online platforms, including a well-known neighborhood site marketed to “bring communities together,” to criticize my family and spread falsehoods about the field, suggesting that the field would be caged, despite it having no lock or fence. That it would be privatized, despite knowing it would be fully managed by the city.

Critics did not trust our intentions. They were suspicious of local government. They were resistant to change. My husband and I are second-generation Angelenos living in the neighborhood, but some did not consider us, or “those people” who play soccer, part of their community.

It all felt so personal until I learned in public meetings that some of the opponents also resist bike lanes, transit stations — virtually anything that brings change.

Advertisement

My husband and I supported multiple design revisions to try to reach a consensus. Our efforts were only rejected by the opponents. We endured no less than 11 contentious community meetings spanning eight disheartening months. So much anger. So much divisiveness. All over an athletic field in a park dedicated to a 12-year-old who loved sports.

When the opponents’ reasons against the field kept changing, I reflected on all the times I had watched Tommy play soccer and began to apply what I had learned. Tired of being on defense, I changed my offense.

They raised their voices; I cut through the noise and asserted mine. They attacked with obscure city codes; I played simple and direct. They threatened with lawsuits and relied on bureaucracy to wear me out; I thought of Tommy and kept pressing forward. We didn’t reach our goal because we wielded the cleverest argument or legal maneuver, but because we were motivated by love and refused to give up. After nearly two years, our gift was finally approved by the Board of Recreation and Park Commissioners.

When Tommy’s Field opens in September, I will celebrate as my son did after scoring goals and winning matches. I will hug my teammates and cheer with our fans. I will also turn to our opponents and shake hands. For, after all, they are our neighbors. I hope to see their children and grandchildren enjoy Tommy’s Field, because it is theirs too.

Advertisement

Nikki Mark is founder and president of the TM23 Foundation, which supports youth initiatives.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In 2013, I unintentionally touched off a journalistic controversy when, in a short piece on counterfactual letters to the editor, I mentioned that denying the existence of evidence for climate change was an example of the kind of factual inaccuracies I try to keep off the page. A follow-up explaining my thinking as an editor on this drew more controversy. In many quarters at the time, climate change denial was considered a mainstream opinion occasionally worthy of print space.

Today, with the latest report by the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warning that the window for humanity to decarbonize is rapidly closing, there is scarcely any disagreement among our letter writers about the reality of global warming. Even politicians notorious for their previous rhetoric and actions on climate change are now expressing agreement with the science, if not the need for society to do much about the problem.

Since the IPCC report was released Monday, our readers have expressed everything from despair to resolve to curb climate change. Letters denying the science still trickle in, but this isn’t anything like 2013.

——————————————

Advertisement

To the editor: The Times’ Aug. 9 editorial on the U.N. climate report focuses on world leaders and their policies. But as one reader wrote in response to an earlier editorial on President Biden’s electric vehicle push, “Industrial policy is a fool’s errand.... Tastes, incomes and production costs determine what gets bought and sold.”

If that’s the case, then let’s change our tastes, incomes and production costs.

As consumers we can stop buying stuff we don’t need. As manufacturers we can choose not to be overcompensated. We can use the savings in executive salaries to ease production costs and boost the incomes of frontline workers, who could then afford to buy stuff they do need. We can embrace a simpler lifestyle that places less of a burden on the planet.

None of this requires government regulation or policy. What it requires is looking around and asking, whether it’s stuff or money, do I need all this?

Mary Bomba, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: Even as The Times’ pages fill with scientific warnings about how quickly we must act to avoid the worst of global warming, a Bloomberg article on your Business pages tells us that U.S. carbon emissions will surge this year. The economy is springing back and fossil fuel use is increasing.

The market prices of coal, oil and natural gas in no way reflect the catastrophic effects they are having on our planet. This is why “business as usual” cannot be allowed to continue. Putting a rapidly escalating tax on carbon is essential to rendering fossil fuels less and less attractive economically. That in turn will accelerate the adoption of alternatives.

Advertisement

New fossil fuel exploration should cease now. Clean-energy infrastructure must be placed on a war footing. Conservation, forestation and many other solutions clamor for implementation. And poor nations must be helped by rich ones.

It is high time for the world, led by the U.S., to accept we are all in the same boat that will founder unless we get serious.

Grace Bertalot, Anaheim

..

Advertisement

To the editor: I do not accept the idea that our response to climate change will fail as it has with the pandemic.

Reducing greenhouse gasses does not rely on micro-level decisions made by individuals. Rather, it depends on the macro policies put in place by government. Placing a substantial price on carbon at its source is the best way to significantly impact global temperatures.

For inspiration, we can look back on the 1980s. It was then that the world became aware of the enlarging hole in the atmosphere’s ozone layer, created by the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in aerosol products, refrigeration and air conditioning.

Though initially skeptical about the need for government intervention, President Reagan listened to the science and, ultimately, signed onto the Montreal Protocol of 1987, a global treaty to phase out CFCs. Reagan realized that government needed to quickly address this emergency and, consequently, incentivize the production of CFC-free products.

Advertisement

Likewise, private citizens alone cannot solve climate change. Our environmental story will not echo our COVID-19 tragedy if government does what it is meant to do: Act in big ways to solve big problems.

Sarah Freifeld, Valencia

..

To the editor: Our beautiful and wondrous planet will undoubtedly regenerate itself and go on with or without humans. What is truly threatened or may need saving right now is humanity.

Advertisement

Perhaps natural selection is already playing out. When the human animal does nothing to protect its young by refusing vaccination, consumes products it does not need, flies in planes and goes on cruises and burns fossil fuels while the very life systems that support it are contaminated and altered by its activities, what else are we to conclude?

It would have been nice if humans could have heeded the wake-up call that was COVID-19. It is beyond sad that we are taking many non-human animals and plants down with us in the mass extinction crisis that is happening right now.

But there is hope. Nature bats last.

Gina Ortiz, Claremont

Advertisement

..

To the editor: In 1968, I went to a movie theater and watched a blockbuster science fiction movie. The shocking twist ending, that we had destroyed our planet, brought the character played by Charlton Heston to his knees in horror.

Today, my horror is that “Planet of the Apes” was not necessarily science fiction.

Shelby Popham, Los Angeles
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Touch fentanyl, and you’ll die. That’s what law enforcement officials want you to believe.

Recently, a dramatic, but inaccurate “public safety” video was released by the San Diego County’s Sheriff Department. And it went viral. The video purported to show a deputy overdosing on fentanyl from brief contact with a white powder at the scene of an arrest.

The reality is you can’t overdose from fentanyl in this way. After criticism of the video, San Diego County Sheriff Bill Gore admitted he, not a doctor, diagnosed the incident as an overdose; and no toxicology reports were performed.

Yet, the damage was done.

Advertisement

The video was quickly picked up by media outlets around the country, without interviewing medical experts who have said that fentanyl cannot be absorbed simply by touching it nor can it be easily aerosolized. The deputy’s reaction on the video could well have another cause, such as a panic or anxiety attack. But when a law enforcement agency puts out this kind of misinformation, it becomes accepted truth. And it could cause first responders to avoid getting close to a person overdosing for fear of contacting fentanyl.

All of this distracts from the tragic reality that fentanyl was involved in more than 60% of overdose deaths last year. In fact, law enforcement crackdowns on opioids have created perverse incentives for underground chemists to increase the potency of their drugs (so they weigh less and are easier to smuggle) and resulted in a more toxic drug supply. People are overdosing after injecting fentanyl, snorting lines of it, or swallowing it, but not simply from handling it.

More broadly, erroneous police statements can create an atmosphere that forces politicians to propose counterproductive policies in the midst of a panic.

We already know how this story goes, because we experienced it in the ’80s and ’90s, with narratives about crack cocaine being used to create policies that shattered lives, families and communities. Law enforcement-driven, media-perpetuated fear-mongering inevitably leads to extreme racially biased enforcement and mandatory minimum sentencing. President Biden created many of these policies as a senator and he is repeating these harms by extending the Trump-era decision to place fentanyl’s related analogues (compounds with a slightly different chemical structure) on schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act, which includes drugs like heroin. This gives the Department of Justice broad authority to prosecute individuals regardless of whether they knew the drugs contained fentanyl or even a trace amount of a fentanyl-related substance.

It’s been 50 years since Nixon declared the “war on drugs” and tried to convince Americans that criminalization would end drug use and save lives. Yet, overdose deaths are skyrocketing. They increased by 52% in Los Angeles County during the first 10 months of the pandemic compared with 2019 and claimed the lives of more than 94,000 people across the U.S. last year, up from 47,000 in 2014.

And it’s not just the overdosing that is destroying lives and communities — there are more people in our jails and prisons with drug or mental health problems than in treatment, and they are disproportionately low-income and from communities of color. Drug charges remain the No. 1 cause of arrest in this country, with stark racial disparities that systematically harm generations of families in every aspect of life. Incarceration itself is linked with increased mortality from overdose, with individuals almost 13 times more likely to die from overdose than the general population within the first two weeks of release. If we truly want to save lives, we need to move toward comprehensive drug decriminalization and remove drugs from the domain of law enforcement.

Overdose is preventable with a public health response, not a criminal one. We need to focus on and fund real solutions that work, like access to life-saving naloxone, harm reduction services, evidence-based treatments including medications like methadone and buprenorphine, overdose prevention centers, and access to drug checking equipment.

The San Diego County sheriff needs to do the right thing and retract the video. And it’s time for the federal government to divest from our reliance on policing and punishment-first strategies that have failed to save lives or reduce the supply of fentanyl-related substances. Our communities would be made safer with health- and evidence-based approaches — like the S.T.O.P. Fentanyl Act , now before the Senate — that address the root cause of fentanyl-related overdoses.

Advertisement

It’s misinformation, not touching fentanyl, that kills.

Sheila Vakharia is deputy director of research and academic engagement at the Drug Policy Alliance. Jeannette Zanipatin is California state director for the organization.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The author, a citizen of Yemen, was detained by the U.S. military from 2001 to 2016 without charges, collateral damage of the American “war on terror” that began 20 years ago after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. The detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, opened four months after 9/11 and has proved impossible to close.

◆

Time slipped away from me. I had been detained at Guantanamo for six years, long enough to know that I wouldn’t leave anytime soon. We had no clocks or watches, and we struggled to keep track of the hours, days, weeks … even years. My life narrowed to the sight of green walls, the smell of pine cleaner, and the roar of machinery around me. We were suspended in time while the world spun on without us. And then in 2008, something unexpected woke us with wild debates. The hot topic that occupied us all was the American presidential election.

We lived in solitary confinement, locked away in our cells almost 24 hours a day. Many of us were on hunger strike again, protesting our endless detention and inhumane treatment. Twice a day, we had force-feedings in the block hallways that kept us alive. If we were lucky, we had one hour in the rec yard, sometimes with another brother in the cage next to us. Every chance we got, we talked about the election.

When guards turned off the noisy fans, we called to each other under the doors. We hated the killer George Bush, so we wished the Black guy Barack Obama would win. We didn’t have access to TVs or any news, just DNN — the Detainee News Network, which was rumors and news we called out to each other from block to block. It wasn’t the most efficient or accurate network, but it’s all we had. That’s how we heard that Obama promised to close Guantanamo.

Advertisement

Some of us also liked him because he was African American. I’m sorry to say this, but our hearts were not full of warmth for most of the white guards. It wasn’t because they were white, but because they were racists and didn’t think of us as humans. Generally speaking, Muslims are forbidden from treating people differently based on color or any another reason. But the Americans were really good at their racism and brought it to new heights. They had so many names for us, and it always hurt. They called Black guards and brown guards the same names and worse.

Now when we had a problem with a white guard, we could say something like, “Just wait and see. Your next boss is going to be a Black man.” Saying this to some of the guards was worse than when brothers would splash them with dirty toilet water.

I was on force-feeding one day with several brothers and we went straight to our favorite topic.

“Personally,” I said, “I wanted Hillary to win the primary.” I was trying to turn up the heat on the conversation.

“If Obama wins the election,” Adnan said to the nurse, “I’ll stop my hunger strike.”

We asked some of the guards and other medical staff whom they wanted to win. All of the Black guards supported Obama, and it was clear that a lot of the white guards didn’t want him to win. Magid, who was really educated, turned to me and said, “If Obama wins the election, it will be one of the most important events in U.S. history.”

I knew nothing about American history. I didn’t know if either of them would change anything. I’d wanted Hillary Clinton to win because I liked the idea of a woman president and I thought she would be more reasonable about our situation here.

I was very surprised when an older brother told me that he had sent a letter to Obama in 2006 telling him that he would be the next president. This brother had lived in the United States for many years and was very educated in politics. He believed that Obama would win and close the camp.

Advertisement

“He could do it with one stroke of his pen,” Magid said. “It’s called an ‘executive order.’” We had many debates about this point. Could it be that easy to close Guantanamo? I had my doubts. It seemed too good to be true.

Tensions rose all over the camp the closer we got to the election, until it turned into an election war between us and the camp. The guards and the admin really didn’t like Obama. They were afraid of him. Maybe because he was Black. Maybe because his name sounded Muslim. Maybe because if he won, it would be like saying there was something wrong with Guantanamo and that would make the guards and camp staff feel like they had been part of something really bad. For years, guards and camp staff had made our lives miserable.

Now it was our turn.

We were determined to know who won right away, as soon as the announcement was made on TV. If it was Obama, we wanted to celebrate and make the guards feel worse. We became obsessed with this. We wanted to send a message to the interrogators that no matter how hard they tried to cut us off from the world or from each other, we still got news and could spread it quickly.

Advertisement

Some brothers decided they weren’t going to sleep on election night until they knew who won. San, a Yemeni brother a little older than me, really wanted to make a big party if Obama won. San had gone to Pakistan to get treatment for a head injury and was sold to the CIA. He didn’t fight that much with the camp admin. But he had been imprisoned for seven years without any reason and wanted Obama to win and close the camp. He swore that if Obama won, he would wake up the entire camp.

On the big night, San stood at his door hunting for any guard he could ask about the election. He finally spotted one of the Black guards coming back from a meal break.

“Hey!” San called out.

The guard didn’t say a word; he just smiled from east to west and touched his own skin.

Advertisement

“OBAMA WON!” San screamed. “IT’S THE BLACK HOUSE NOW!” He banged and kicked his door and called out to guards. “It’s the Black House! It’s the Black House! Who’s your boss now? It’s the Black House!” He woke everyone up on the block.

We all laughed. He was so excited; it was like he had seen his mom dancing down the block.

On another block, brothers quizzed a white guard who didn’t like Obama.

“Hey, man!” Hamzah called out. “How do you like your new boss?” The guard shouted, “I don’t care, man!” Hamzah said he looked really upset.

Advertisement

Before the big night, San had spread word through DNN that if Obama won, he would get guards to call a Code Yellow. When those high-level emergencies were called on one block, special guards came running from every other block, banging doors, stomping up stairs, making so much noise that everyone in the camp knew what was going on.

As soon as San learned about Obama’s win, he covered the window of his cell door with a towel.

When the guard asked San to take the towel down, he didn’t. And when the guard called to him to answer, San stayed silent. This was a big deal. Ever since three brothers had died in their cells, we weren’t allowed to cover our windows, so that guards could see that we were alive. “Code Yellow!” the guard called. “Code Yellow, Alpha Block!” Soon, guards in riot gear came stomping from every block, making so much noise that brothers everywhere woke up.

“Allahu Akbar!” brothers yelled out in celebration. It was chaos. When the guard team gathered at San’s cage to go in, he uncovered the window.

Advertisement

“I want to talk to the watch commander,” San said. “And the camp officer!”

The watch commander came, and so did a medic with the suicide kit. The watch commander refused to call the camp officer, so San covered his window again.

In a few minutes, the camp officer was standing in front of San’s cage.

“Now that you are here,” San said, “I have a message for the chicken colonel. Please tell him, THERE IS NO MORE WHITE HOUSE! It’s the Black House now!” San laughed and laughed. He was crazy with laughter.

Advertisement

It was after midnight and brothers in every block were talking to guards, either congratulating the Black guards or making fun of the white ones.

“How did you all know who won?” guards asked.

“Obama called me himself!” one brother said.

“I just came back from the Black House,” another said.

Advertisement

Many of us simply said, “It’s classified.”

But one brother joked, “We have a radio.”

Not even an hour later, dozens of guards stormed into the camp. Day shift, night shift, guards we had never seen before. They came with civilians and cameras and many high-ranking officers. The last time we saw the camp admin send in so many guards and officers was when our three brothers died in 2006. At first, we thought one of our brothers had died.

Guards searched every cage in every block in every camp, and we thought we were being punished because Obama had won. That wasn’t it. The camp admin was shocked that we seemed to know that Obama had won the election, all at the same time, even before some of the guards. It didn’t make sense to them. None of the guards had told us; that would have been a security breach. And they thought it was impossible for us to communicate from block to block and camp to camp so quickly. When our brother had joked that we had a radio, they’d thought he was serious.

Advertisement

One thing we had learned about the Americans was that they were really good at overthinking everything. Instead of believing that we were telling the truth all these years about having no connections to terrorism, they believed we were trained in special counter-interrogation techniques. Instead of thinking about how the Code Yellow woke up the entire camp, they believed we had somehow built a radio network. Imagine the logic.

It didn’t matter that night. The Americans had a new president, and we all wondered if the time had finally come for change.

Thirteen years and two presidents later, we now know we were right to question whether Obama could close Guantanamo with the stroke of a pen. He tried. On Jan. 22, 2009, he signed that executive order to close the detention center within a year. But Congress blocked it. Before Obama left office, he released dozens of men. Of the 779 men who have been detained there, about 730 have been transferred out, including me in 2016. I was sent to Serbia. Last month, President Biden resumed Obama’s efforts, approving the release of three men, and releasing Abdul Lattif Nasser, held for 19 years. Like me, he was never charged with a crime.

Mansoor Adayfi currently lives in Serbia. This article is an adapted excerpt from his book “Don’t Forget Us Here: Lost and Found at Guantánamo,” which will be published Tuesday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I got my ballot in the mail last week, but in a fit of pique, I didn’t vote on Question 2.

For those of you who haven’t been paying attention, I’m talking about the second question in the two-part recall election that we’re conducting here in California. The election is underway and ends on Sept. 14.

As far as I’m concerned, this whole recall is a big, unpleasant joke. Set in motion by a group of Trump-loving malcontents, it offers us an extra, unscheduled opportunity to vote against Gov. Gavin Newsom — in the middle of his first term no less — even though he hasn’t done anything particularly wrong.

It’s a circus, but it’s also seriously problematic. It could leave us with a new governor supported by only a tiny portion of the electorate. It will cost hundreds of millions of dollars. It may be unconstitutional. What’s more, it’s entirely unnecessary, since the regularly scheduled election is only a year away.

Advertisement

California has only recalled one governor since the option was added to the state Constitution 110 years ago. That was in 2003. That year, there were 135 random candidates vying to replace Gov. Gray Davis, including a pornographer, a sumo wrestler, some college students and an action hero movie star. The movie star won.

That was not a great outcome. And now, we’re doing it again.

Here’s the way it works. The first question on the ballot asks: “Shall Gavin Newsom be recalled (removed) from the office of Governor?” The second asks voters to select a candidate to replace him in the event he is recalled, offering a long list of candidates who have met the state’s minimal candidacy qualifications.

Even if you vote no on the recall you may vote for a Newsom replacement. Your 46 choices include former Olympian and Wheaties spokesperson Caitlyn Jenner; perennial candidate John Cox, the guy who’s running around the state accompanied by a 1,000-pound Kodiak bear and an 8-foot-tall ball of trash; pink Corvette-driving self-promoter Angelyne, and a crop of others you’ve mostly never heard of. Newsom cannot run to replace himself.

Perhaps the two most likely-to-win candidates are Kevin Faulconer, a former Republican mayor of San Diego, and right-wing talk show host Larry Elder. Another recent poll showed Kevin Paffrath — who has a million and a half followers who watch his real estate and finance videos on YouTube — at the top of the heap.

When I opened my ballot, I was utterly depressed by the possibilities.

There were Republicans I disagreed with. There were way too many amateurs and unserious glory seekers. (It’s simply too easy to become a candidate; just gather 7,000 signatures and pay a fee of about $4,200.)

And there were no viable, experienced, appealing Democrats.

Advertisement

When we played this silly recall game in 2003, there was at least one Democrat with experience who ran — then-Lt. Gov. Cruz Bustamante. You could vote against recalling Gov. Gray Davis, a Democrat — but then you could also vote for a Democrat to replace him, just in case.

But this time, thanks to Newsom’s machinations, there are no Democrats with substantive political experience in the race. The governor, apparently worried that having a tested Democrat on the replacement ballot could harm his chances of surviving the recall, urged his party mates not to run.

That strategy, however, could backfire. If a majority of Californians vote to recall Newsom but there is no reasonable Democrat on the replacement ballot, then what? A Republican governor would probably be elected — even though Democrats in California outnumber Republicans by nearly 2 to 1.

Or we could end up with someone like Paffrath, I guess, who is a Democrat but seems thoroughly unqualified. It’s idiocy to check a box next to the name of an untested YouTube star who wants the National Guard to rid the streets of homeless people and would do away with income taxes for anyone who earns under $250,000.

Advertisement

So I voted no on the recall. And I left Question 2 blank.

My only other option, as I see it, would have been to vote strategically. In the absence of a candidate I liked, I could’ve targeted my vote to help ensure the defeat of the candidate I liked least — Larry Elder, who has said in the past that climate change is a myth, has defended President Trump vociferously and whom many consider the front-runner if Newsom is recalled.

To help block Elder, I could’ve voted for Faulconer, a Republican with experience in public office. Unlike many in the GOP, he at least believes climate change is real and doesn’t hate immigrants. A few years of Faulconer probably wouldn’t destroy the state.

Advertisement

But here’s the problem — and I am sorry if I sound like a foot-stomping 6-year-old: I don’t want to vote for Kevin Faulconer. It may be the shrewdest move in this dumb situation, but I wasn’t about to do it.

Faulconer is moderate, but only by GOP standards. He’s called the Democratic Party “captive to the far left.” He voted for Trump in 2020 — that’s pretty much a deal breaker for me. Even after Jan. 6 and the second impeachment, he reiterated that “it was the right choice.”

Frankly, I resent that a) the state b) the governor and c) the dummies who started this recall have put me in a position where my only rational choice is to vote for the likes of Faulconer.

Maybe I did the wrong thing. If Elder becomes governor, I will rue my decision. If Newsom keeps his job, as I still believe he will, I’ll be glad I didn’t vote for a Republican I don’t want in office.

Advertisement

As I trudged to the ballot drop-off box, I remembered a 2003 headline that called California “ungovernable” and another that ridiculed the recall as “A Circus Fit for the Fruit and Nut State.”

If we’re going to have a recall process, let’s fix it so it works and, even then, use it sparingly.

@Nick_Goldberg
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If anyone still thought that the United States’ “maximum pressure” sanctions campaign against Iran was still working, a drone strike in late July on an Israeli-linked merchant ship in the Indian Ocean should put the lie to that notion. Iranian proxies are accused of carrying out the attack.

A sanctions-happy American foreign policy repeats the same pattern over and over, imposing sanctions on a country we judge profligate and, in turn, impoverishing its people. Yet we expect that those same people will overthrow their offending regime and thank us for our actions. Then we are surprised when it doesn’t happen. As chairman of the National Intelligence Council, I had a ringside seat to this sort of behavior.

Iran is the latest in this long dreary line. The “maximum pressure” sanctions have produced neither regime change nor much visible restraint by Iran when it comes to its other offenses, including its missile program or interventions in the region. The sanctions have given the regime a handy scapegoat for its economic failings.

Before the ayatollahs took power in 1979, and long after, Iranians (especially younger ones) were perhaps the most pro-American people in the greater Middle East. No longer: Now even young Iranians who are no friends of their country’s theocratic regime blame U.S. sanctions for at least part of the country’s economic plight.

Advertisement

Cuba provides another decades-long example. Who knows how the current unrest will play out, but over more than a half century U.S. sanctions were the best thing the Castro regime had going for it. As in Iran, they could be — and were — blamed for anything bad that happened in the country.

More than once in my career, a member of Miami’s Cuban exile community has taken me aside and said a version of this: “Our Cuba policy has failed. Instead, we should have done what we did to Eastern Europe during the Cold War, seduce them with contact and commerce.” The conversation invariably ended with: “Please don’t tell anyone in Miami I said this.”

When the U.S. has succeeded in encouraging changes in regime or behavior by offending states, those successes have rested on policies far different from sanctions. One example is the aforementioned seduction of Eastern Europe. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, set in motion in 1973, was central to that initiative. What the Soviet Union accepted in the hope of sustaining its control of Eastern Europe, Western Europe used as a means of reducing tensions in the region, increasing economic interchange and improving the humanitarian conditions of communist countries.

It took a generation for the seduction to end in regime change in the 1990s in Eastern Europe, but in retrospect there seems little doubt that a policy that pursued increasing contact played an important role.

For example, West Germany tried to make sure that East Germans could access West German television, but two regions in East Germany remained out of reach. In the mid-1980s, East Germany solved the access problem by installing a cable from West Germany to the Dresden area in the east “in the wishful belief that if East Germans could watch West German television at home they would not feel the need to emigrate,” wrote historian Tony Judt.

In the long, hoary history of efforts to contain North Korea’s nuclear program, the singular success — the Agreed Framework of 1994 that froze the country’s nuclear efforts — depended on carrots, or positive inducements, not sticks in the form of sanctions. The United States agreed to provide oil and build “light-water” power reactors fueled by uranium and cooled with water in exchange for North Korea freezing, and later dismantling, reactors more capable of producing weapons-grade fuel, including one in operation and others under construction.

Implementation of the framework was checkered almost from the start, not least because partisan politics made it hard for the U.S. to deliver on its commitments, but the episode did produce what nothing has before or since — a slowdown in North Korea’s nuclear program. It lasted from 1994 until about 2002.

Advertisement

Before defaulting to sanctions, which often reflect our own temper tantrums, we should consider whether they would bring about a different outcome this time around — in Iran, Cuba, North Korea or elsewhere. Still, sanctions can work.

Their most notable success may be bringing about the end of apartheid in South Africa in 1994. They worked because the international sanctions and boycotts were political as well as economic, and they targeted what white South Africans held dear, not just money but participation in international sports. In contrast, when the United States targets individual Russians or Chinese or Iranians, it is almost always a symbolic gesture, like indicting foreigners who will never be extradited. Symbols matter but concrete results are better.

Albert Einstein is often credited with observing that “insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results.” He could have been talking about the U.S. sanctions policy. As the U.S. imposes new sanctions on Cuba, we need to move beyond what we hope they will accomplish and ask: What do we expect to gain from them?

Gregory F. Treverton, chairman of the U.S. National Intelligence Council from 2014 to 2017, is a professor of international relations at USC.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@