Before the women’s marathon was added to the program at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics, the longest race for female runners was the 1,500 meters — and that became part of the Summer Games only in 1972. Delicate flowers couldn’t be expected to run long distances without doing unspecified but implied grievous harm to themselves or — heaven forbid — becoming sweaty.

During the Tokyo Olympics, which concluded Sunday, Sifan Hassan of the Netherlands won gold medals in the punishing 5,000- and 10,000-meter races and bronze in the 1,500 meters. The longest race was her last, and she won it by outkicking two rivals in the last 100 meters. Including preliminary rounds she ran nine races and completed 61 ¼ laps of Olympic Stadium. She won the 10,000 less than 24 hours after she had finished third in the 1,500 and five days after her victory in the 5,000. She ran a heat of the 1,500 the same day as the final of the 5,000.

No delicate flower was she. Nor were any of the other women at the Tokyo Games who soared, sprinted, swam, surfed, skateboarded, golfed, hurdled, biked, climbed rocks, tumbled, pitched, hit, dived, shot arrows, or stepped onto a beach or indoor volleyball court while comprising a greater percentage of Olympic competitors than ever before.

These Olympics were billed as the first gender-balanced Games, with 49% of the 11,656 athletes here being female. And women delivered many memorable moments in Games staged in an anxious, COVID-driven hush without the invigorating energy of fans.

Advertisement

Hassan pushed herself to nearly inhuman limits. On the medal stand after the 10,000 she said her only thought was, “It is over. Now you can sleep.” Gymnast Simone Biles brought mental health issues to the forefront when she developed “the twisties,” losing awareness of where she was in the air and withdrawing from most of her events to protect her physical and mental well-being. The U.S. women’s basketball team won its seventh straight gold medal as mainstays Sue Bird and Diana Taurasi became the first five-time basketball gold medalists. The U.S. women’s volleyball team defeated Brazil to win its first Olympic gold medal.

Weightlifter Hidilyn Diaz became the first Philippine athlete to win an Olympic gold medal. Triathlete Flora Duffy won Bermuda’s first Olympic gold medal. Los Angeles native Allyson Felix, competing in her fifth Olympics but first since becoming a mom, won her 10th and 11th medals and became the most successful American Olympic track and field athlete. Gymnasts from the Russian Olympic Committee won gold in the team event for the first time since 1992, when their delegation was called the Unified Team. Japan’s women’s basketball team won its first medal — silver — and delighted fans with its fast, fun, small-ball game.

That’s all worthy of the standing ovation they didn’t get at venues that were empty of spectators. One by one, team by team, these women may have saved the Games with their courage, talent, and advocacy of worthy causes such as Felix’s child care grants that support fellow athletes who are moms.

But their success raises two questions: What took the International Olympic Committee so long to promote equity, and why doesn’t a similar balance exist in the IOC’s power structure? Its executive board is only about 33% female and its committee membership is about 37.5% female. Before IOC President Thomas Bach sprains his arm patting himself on the back for pulling off these postponed and COVID-muted Games, he must erase that disparity.

Of China’s 88 medals, 47 were won by women. Women won 18 of Canada’s 24 medals and the telecast of the women’s soccer team winning gold drew 4.4 million viewers and was the most watched moment of the Olympics in Canada, according to the CBC. Women won seven of Jamaica’s nine medals. Of the 36 medals won by the Netherlands, 21 were won by female athletes.

The U.S. sent 626 athletes to Tokyo. It won 113 medals. Taking into account team and relay performances that count as one medal (even though each athlete receives a medal), 257 athletes contributed to the U.S. medal count, according to the U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Committee. Of that number, 164 were female and 93 were male.

“That’s a good statistic to know,” said U.S. basketball center Sylvia Fowles, who became a four-time gold medalist Sunday after the Americans defeated Japan 90-75 at Saitama Super Arena. “I’m happy that us women can do it. I think men can do it, too, but I think we do it a little bit better.”

Advertisement

The Netherlands’ Sifan Hassan celebrates as she crosses the finish line to win the women’s 5,000-meters final at the Tokyo Olympics on Monday. (Petr David Josek / Associated Press)

Brittney Griner, who dominated the paint against Japan in scoring 30 points, also wasn’t aware of the extent of female athletes’ success in Tokyo. But she quickly saw bigger implications beyond raw numbers.

“Women power,” she said, smiling. “Didn’t know that, but it just shows that we can play, whatever sport it is. And it’s just growing even more.

“I know there’s a bunch of little girls at home that’s probably watching the Olympics and thinking, ‘I want to be like them.’ The Games just keep getting better across the board in every sport.”

Advertisement

Griner has played a part in that by offering an empathetic message to aspiring basketball players. “Be different. Love being different. The world would be boring if we were all the same,” she said. “And own it. I love being tall, love being bigger. Even to my 17 men’s shoe that I wear.”

Bird, 40, said these were her final Games; Taurasi, 39, was less definitive. Coach Dawn Staley paid tribute to them and the culture they enhanced with their staunch work ethic and all-consuming commitment to USA Basketball.

“The start of this winning occurred before them, but they finished it off,” said Staley, who declared this her Olympic finale after three as a player, two as an assistant coach and one as the first Black U.S. women’s basketball coach. “They took the torch and they took it to another level and they are putting so much pressure on the next coach and next players.”

Advertisement

That’s a good kind of problem. “In the ‘04 Games I was there to learn and take the torch from Dawn and carry it. The older players taught us what it meant,” Bird said. “And now from us, hopefully we’ve left some sort of legacy with the younger players where they have to carry that torch.”

Not every female athlete who competed here left with a medal. But they all left a legacy of strength that proves there’s infinite beauty in sweat.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Tokyo Games produced historic moments and triumphs.

Adam Krikorian, coach of the victorious U.S. women’s water polo team, said every athlete who made it to Tokyo deserved a gold medal simply for persevering through a global pandemic.

He’s correct.

But there were some performances that stood out.

Advertisement

The Games also featured performances that fell well below expectations — not only those projected by the media but by the competitors and officials themselves.

WINNERS

Simone Biles

Showed uncommon courage and strength to acknowledge she wasn’t in the right place mentally to compete in events she was expected to win. Her actions focused a white-hot spotlight on mental health and underscored that winning isn’t the only thing.

U.S. women’s track and field team

Allyson Felix became the most decorated track and field athlete in U.S. history, Sydney McLaughlin and Athing Mu each won two gold medals and Dalilah Muhammad won two medals for a team that also produced gold medalists Valarie Allman in the discus and Kate Nageotte in the pole vault.

Kevin Durant

The NBA star burnished his legacy by winning his third gold medal. JaVale McGee — added to the roster at the last minute — joined mother Pam as a gold medalist, the first mother-son combo to win gold in the Olympics.

U.S. women’s volleyball players

Veteran outside hitter Jordan Larson helped lead the United States to its first gold medal in the indoor game. Coach Karch Kiraly is the only person to win gold medals as an indoor player, beach player and indoor coach. In beach volleyball, April Ross and Alix Klineman dominated en route to gold.

Katie Ledecky

She won two gold medals to give her seven individual golds in her career, the most for any female swimmer. She swam an unprecedented 6,200-meter program at the Games. Caeleb Dressel won five gold medals — three individual.

U.S. women’s basketball team

Dawn Staley, a gold medalist as a player, assistant and coach, guided the team to a seventh consecutive Olympic gold medal. The team extended its winning streak to 55 games with a victory over Japan in the gold-medal game.

Advertisement

LOSERS

Patrick Moster

The German cycling federation’s sports director was sent home after he used a slur while a German rider chased opponents from Algeria and Eritrea during a race. He has been suspended by the International Cycling Union.

Kim Raisner

Germany’s modern pentathlon coach was disqualified after she punched a horse and urged a rider to “really hit” the horse when it refused to jump. Modern pentathletes ride horses for show jumping that are drawn at random, and then get 20 minutes to warm up with it before competing.

Novak Djokovic

The tennis star rightfully complained about heat and helped all competitors by getting tennis matches shifted to evenings. But he grew angry and threw his racket when losing both semifinal and bronze matches to players ranked much lower.

Advertisement

U.S. men’s track and field team

Ryan Crouser won a second consecutive gold medal in the shotput, but track athletes won only one gold in the 1,600-meters relay. Two gold medals are the fewest by an American men’s team in Olympic history.

U.S. women’s soccer team

It claimed a bronze medal in soccer but only after seeing its 44-game unbeaten streak end in the opener against Sweden and suffering a semifinal loss to Canada. One player said, “Obviously, we don’t want to lose to Canada.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There’s barely even time to pack up the five Olympic rings — symbols of unity, competition and controversy — before they’ll need to be dusted off for the 2022 Winter Games in Beijing.

In the 181 days between the end of the closing ceremony in Tokyo and the start of the opening ceremony in Beijing on Feb. 4 (nine days before the Super Bowl at SoFi Stadium), the sporting world will need to reset and re-configure its plans for a competition sure to face scrutiny similar to these Games with added political pressures because of China’s record of human rights violations.

The Summer and Winter Olympics have been separated by two years, last happening in the same year in 1992. The postponement of the 2020 Tokyo Games pushed the two Olympics even closer together than they were between the 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, and 1996 in Atlanta when the Games went on a two-year cycle.

Advertisement

Olympic delegations in Japan have already begun to deal with questions about boycotting the Beijing Games because of China’s treatment of the Uyghurs and its ongoing tensions with Hong Kong. As the Olympics get closer, it’s expected those calls will get even louder.

China is “in the midst of an incredibly repressive crackdown on human rights in China. All governments commit human rights violations, but China is the only Olympic host actively committing crimes against humanity,” the Human Rights Watch recently wrote.

There’s also the real possibility of another Olympics altered, in part, because of COVID-19. Though vaccination rates in Beijing are reportedly as high as 90%, it’s impossible to know the twists and turns the coronavirus will take in the next six months.

Activists wearing masks of International Olympic Committee President Thomas Bach, left, and China President Xi Jinping pose in front of the Olympic rings during a street protest in Dharmsala, India, in February. (Ashwini Bhatia / Associated Press)

Tickets haven’t been sold yet, and IOC officials have acknowledged the possibility that the Games will be held without spectators.

Beijing will be the first city to host the Summer and Winter Olympics.

It’s also unclear if the Games will be held without NHL players for the second-straight Olympics. The men’s hockey competition became a headline event, especially after the introduction of professionals from the NHL in 1998.

Figure skater Nathan Chen, a world champion, figures to be a big story after he fell short of expectations in 2018. He could once again square off with Japanese star Yuzuru Hanyu, who is toe-looping his way toward a third-straight Olympic gold.

Advertisement

The Americans should again be favorites in snowboarding events, with Chloe Kim in prime position to repeat as one of the stars of the Winter Games. America could also once again fall in love with its curling teams, especially after the men’s gold-medal victory in 2018.

There will be seven new events in Beijing — women’s monobobsled, men’s and women’s freestyle skiing big air and mixed-team events in short track speedskating, snowboarding, skiing and ski jumping.

After a quick exhale (while masked) in Tokyo, there are only six months to build new story lines, to create new heroes and to battle human rights abuses and a global pandemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Carmelo Anthony is 37, was how the question began, and LeBron James turns 37 on Dec. 30 …

“We don’t care,” Anthony answered before the question was finished.

Dwight Howard is 35, Trevor Ariza is 36, Marc Gasol is 36 ….

“We … don’t … care …” Anthony said, smiling. “We make our own narrative.”

Advertisement

The storyline is that the Lakers are old by NBA standards or they are a very experienced team, depending on your view.

The truth is that eight of the 12 players on the Lakers’ current roster are 30 or older, six of them joining the team this summer.

Lakers Dwight Howard and Lakers are ‘just supposed to be together’ Dwight Howard signed on Friday to join the Lakers for a third time because it feels right. Trevor Ariza and Talen Horton-Tucker agree with sentiment.

With the 20-something players of Anthony Davis (28), Talen Horton-Tucker (20), Malik Monk (23) and Kendrick Nunn (26), the Lakers’ average age is 31.2 years.

Anthony, in his first news conference with the Los Angeles media on Monday since joining the Lakers on a veteran minimum deal, talked about how players of his generation have taken care of their bodies and that has allowed them to extend their careers.

“I think just the concept and the seriousness behind taking care of yourself, like, we really understand what that means from a holistic standpoint — the mind, body and soul,” Anthony said. “We are there at that point of our career where we understand the importance of what it means to take care of your body. What it means to take care of your mind. And in this situation, experience comes into play.”

The saying “age ain’t nothing but a number” is something Anthony embraced.

“I like when people talk about the age. It gives a better story. I think it gives a better story,” Anthony said. “I think people forget, at the end of the day, it’s about basketball. You got to know how to play basketball. You got to have that experience. I think that’s what we bring at this point and time. Our talent, our skill, but also our experience.”

Advertisement

Anthony and James are longtime friends and they have yearned to play together. After 18 years in the NBA, Anthony and James have finally become partners in the league.

Carmelo Anthony and LeBron James (center, left and right) are flanked by Kevin Durant and Kobe Bryant as they pose with their gold medals at the 2012 Summer Olympics.

(Charles Krupa / Associated Press)

“I think timing is everything. I mean, for years, we’ve always laughed about it and spoke about it — what it would be like,” Anthony said. “We had a little bit of experience with the USA Basketball and playing together, but that’s totally different than a situation like this. But we’ve always talked about it, laughed and joked about it. But I thought and he thought at this moment now, everything comes back full circle for us. And I think the time is now for us to be on the same team. It couldn’t have come at a better time.”

Out of the 1,191 games Anthony has played, he started in 1,117 of them.

Advertisement

Last season in Portland, he started in just three of the 69 games he played. He averaged 13.4 points and made 40.9% of his three-pointers as a valuable reserve for the Trail Blazers.

He didn’t say what his role will be with the Lakers, but he learned a lot about coming off the bench for the first time in his illustrious career.

“So, you go for 16, 17 years and you’re the guy on the team and you’re the star, and then all of a sudden somebody is like, ‘Listen, come off the bench.’ I had to swallow that ego,” Anthony said. “I had to swallow that pride. But I also had to use that ego and that pride to keep me on edge and keep me motivated. And I’ve accepted that. It played out well in Portland.

Advertisement

“Again, that was my first time doing it and experiencing that at that level. But I enjoyed it. It was fun, it was basketball, and I was still able to do my thing and play ball and have fun and have the love for the game again. So, I don’t know what’s going to happen [with the Lakers], you know what I’m saying? I just know I’m prepared, like I’m ready, you know what I’m saying? I’m ready to go play basketball. I know what’s at stake here and I’m totally locked.”

Anthony said he’s coming to the Lakers “with a championship on my mind.”

He knows it won’t be easy, but he’s prepared to do his part.

“This is the one thing that it keeps me up at night, it motivates me, because I don’t have it,” Anthony said of a title. “I want that experience. I want to experience what it’s like and going through the ups and downs of a championship season with a team, right? The turmoil. How we come together when those things are not going right. That adversity. When adversity hits, how we going to come together even tighter. How we going to have each other’s back. How we are going to support each other. Because the basketball part of it is going to take care of itself.

Advertisement

“We have the talent. We just got to put it all together. And in order for us to put that all together, we really got to have one common goal and that’s winning a championship. I know that for a fact that the guys that we have on this year’s roster, that’s the ultimate goal. There’s nothing less of that. That’s the ultimate goal.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This was a good weekend for the Dodgers. They beat the Angels twice, they marveled at Trea Turner scoring from first base on a single on Sunday, and they moved three days closer to their ninth consecutive postseason appearance.

This was a good weekend for the Angels too. They lost the Freeway Series, but they got encouraging performances from the young arms needed to get them back to the postseason for the first time since 2014, and they got a look at the bat they could use to fortify a potent offense come 2022.

Turner should be the Dodgers’ shortstop next season. Corey Seager should be the Angels’ shortstop.

Turner’s speed provides an offensive dimension rare in today’s game. The Dodgers cherish the positional flexibility he offers. Advanced metrics — including runs saved, ultimate zone rating, and outs above average — rate him as superior to Seager on defense. And, unlike Seager, Turner cannot leave as a free agent after the season.

Advertisement

If the Dodgers let Seager go in free agency, he would be available to the Angels. Seager has not played a major league season that did not extend into October. Could the Angels convince him they can get there?

He would know the issue. You would know the issue. Angels manager Joe Maddon knows the issue.

The Angels cannot identify young starting pitchers until they audition them, and not just over the last couple weeks of another lost season. Throw them against teams like the Dodgers, sink or swim, and see who stays afloat.

“That’s what we need to know going into the offseason,” Maddon said. “That’s the foundation. Without that, we will languish in the area of .500 for a long, long time.”

In fact, the Angels stand at exactly .500 today. They could finish with their sixth consecutive losing season, for the first time since Jimmy Carter occupied the White House and KC and the Sunshine Band occupied AM radio.

The Angels drafted nothing but pitchers this year. None of the pitchers they drafted in the 2010s have thrown even 100 innings in a season for them.

So, for the last three years, they have thrown millions at middling veteran arms, just to be able to fill out a starting rotation: $20 million for Trevor Cahill and Matt Harvey in 2019, $14 million for Dylan Bundy and Julio Teheran last year, $21 million for Bundy, Alex Cobb and José Quintana this year.

Advertisement

That, as Maddon noted, is a recipe for .500. It is the difference between a team that aspires to compete and a team that aspires to contend.

Since the All-Star break, the Angels have let the kids pitch. And, since the All-Star break, the Angels starters have pitched more innings than the starters on any other major league team.

They have posted a 3.62 earned-run average. That ranks fifth in the American League, behind four potential playoff teams: the Chicago White Sox, New York Yankees, Oakland Athletics and Toronto Blue Jays.

You can learn a little when your pitchers can handle the Texas Rangers. You can learn a lot when your pitchers can handle the Dodgers.

Advertisement

“If we don’t pitch, you can’t beat teams like this,” Maddon said. “You cannot. Impossible. Ain’t gonna happen.”

On Friday, Patrick Sandoval held the Dodgers to two runs in five innings. On Saturday, Jaime Barria held the Dodgers to three runs in six innings.

Reid Detmers of the Angels throws a pitch in the second inning against the Dodgers on Sunday at Dodger Stadium. Detmers gave up five runs in five innings. (Alex Gallardo/Associated Press)

On Sunday, in his second major league start, Reid Detmers showed flashes of why the Angels made him their top draft pick last year. He gave up two runs in the first inning and three in the second, but he pitched three more innings, all scoreless.

Advertisement

Detmers threw two quick strikes to Turner, the Dodgers’ first batter, but Turner fouled off two more pitches and doubled on the next one. He threw a marvelous 75 mph curve to the next batter, Max Muncy, who then whacked a two-strike fastball for an RBI single.

He faced eight batters in the inning but did not nibble or pitch scared, throwing 22 strikes and five balls. In the next inning, with two out and a 3-0 count, he threw a third consecutive fastball to Albert Pujols, who homered.

“I got caught up in the moment,” Detmers said, “and tried to sneak a fastball by him. He was sitting on it.”

If the Angels can cobble a rotation out of some mix of Sandoval, Barria, Detmers, José Suarez, Griffin Canning, Chris Rodriguez and Shohei Ohtani — perhaps supplemented with one veteran starter, and with the return of closer Raisel Iglesias — they can focus their financial resources on the offense.

Advertisement

Ohtani is the designated hitter and Max Stassi the catcher, with Mike Trout, Jo Adell, Brandon Marsh and Justin Upton manning the outfield. Jared Walsh plays first base, David Fletcher second, and Anthony Rendon third.

That could leave a Seager-sized hole at shortstop, and the possibility of a power-packed lineup that could ease the pressure on young starters.

The last thing the Angels need, of course, is another enormous contract for a past-his-prime position player. But consider this: Pujols was over 30 when the Angels acquired him. So were Josh Hamilton, Zack Cozart, Gary Matthews Jr. and Vernon Wells.

Advertisement

Seager is 27. He plays a premium defensive position, and the World Series MVP and two-time All-Star has been above league average as a hitter every season of his career — even this one, when his power has been slow to return after a hand injury.

The Angels will finally be done with the Pujols contract this year. They should invest the savings in an impact bat, not another collection of mediocre arms. With Pujols gone in Anaheim, No. 5 is waiting for Seager.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chip Kelly’s first recruiting class signaled the beginning of a new era for UCLA football. The 2018 group headlined by quarterback Dorian Thompson-Robinson signed with immense promise and high expectations but carried a large warning label.

Some assembly required.

Three years of program building later, the Bruins have grown into one of the most experienced teams in the Pac-12 with Kelly’s first recruiting class entering its senior year. The table is set for what should be their long-awaited breakout season.

“We’re all old now,” senior offensive lineman Jon Gaines II said. “It’s on us to have the standard that we hold ourselves to. … The time is now.”

Advertisement

UCLA lost just two starters on offense and defense combined — the fewest of any team in the Pac-12 — and is tied with California for the third-highest percentage of upperclassmen in the conference, trailing just Stanford and USC.

The Bruins are “extremely old in a good way,” fifth-year senior defensive lineman Odua Isibor said. They’re not only the deepest team Kelly’s ever coached at UCLA but also have experienced players who set the tone for success.

“Any really good team is player-led, not coach-fed,” Kelly said, “and I think this team is really player-led.”

The Bruins, who are 10-21 under Kelly, have a large group of leaders who are selected according to individual workout groups. The top voices include Thompson-Robinson, Gaines, Isibor, receivers Kyle Philips and Chase Cota, offensive lineman Sean Rhyan, linebacker Bo Calvert and defensive backs Quentin Lake and Qwuantrezz Knight.

UCLA offensive lineman Jon Gaines II (57) walks off the field before a game against Stanford. (Ringo H.W. Chiu / Associated Press)

Freshmen are falling in line seamlessly behind the returners and Kelly noted that young players are accelerating quickly, likely because they have the advantage of such strong leadership to show them the ropes and challenge them.

“The young guys are kind of realizing that if they don’t step up, they’re getting left behind,” Rhyan said. “If they don’t know [the plays], then the next guy is going to surpass them. So they got a little edge to them because they don’t want to get left behind.”

Veteran players hand out corrections to teammates instead of coaches and encourage each other to keep their locker room tidy. If someone didn’t touch the line to finish a drill in the summer, coaches weren’t delivering tongue lashings before requiring the offending player to repeat the exercise. One of the team’s chosen leaders took care of it.

Advertisement

“You gotta finish,” said Rhyan, a junior left tackle who has started all 19 games of his UCLA career. “That’s what we emphasized in the preseason: finishing in training because that’s how we win games.”

UCLA’s four losses last year came by a combined 15 points. With nearly all their impact players back for the 2021 season, the Bruins have a leg up on erasing the memories of that haunting point differential. UCLA returns all its passing yards from last season in Thompson-Robinson and backup Chase Griffin, 58.6% of its rushing yards, 85.9% of receiving yards and 89.1% of tackles.

The Bruins are one of four Pac-12 teams to reach the 80% threshold in three of the four categories. Arizona State, which returns all its defensive starters, is higher than 90% in all four.

Not only is Kelly’s first UCLA recruiting class entering its senior year, but the experience is compounded by the additional year of eligibility granted during the COVID-19 pandemic. Four graduate transfers from last year — Knight, cornerback Obi Eboh, offensive lineman Paul Grattan and running back Brittain Brown — used the bonus season to return for sixth years.

Advertisement

The circumstance that led to UCLA’s stacked veteran roster is unprecedented, sixth-year running back Ethan Fernea said, but that’s precisely why the former walk-on also chose to come back for his additional year. He didn’t slog through a coaching change and losing records to not see a final, winning result.

“There’s a ton of teams with returning guys, but the last four years, we haven’t really had the record that we’ve been working for and hoping for, so I just think we’re coming back hungry and coming back with a little bit of a chip on our shoulder,” Fernea said. “We’re trying to prove to the Pac-12 that we can contend and we can win games.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Tokyo Olympics will be remembered primarily for what was here — the pandemic, which forced everyone involved into a strict regimen of mask-wearing, COVID-19 testing and social distancing — and for what wasn’t here, mainly fans and tourists.

But beyond that there was competition, much of it fierce, and incredible performances, all of them memorable. Here are the six moments you won’t forget.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When Nneka Ogwumike had every reason to shrink away from the spotlight, the Sparks forward kept a brave face front and center.

Nursing a knee injury last month, she was still cheering and coaching her teammates during a six-game losing streak. She did media events as a star in “Space Jam: A New Legacy” and spoke to kids about her experience in the movie. She never let on that she was dealing with the personal and professional disappointment of a third consecutive Olympic snub and the longest injury absence of her career.

On Monday, it became too much to bear.

“I just want to play basketball,” Ogwumike said through tears while discussing the last two months that have been among the most trying of her illustrious career.

Advertisement

First there was a Grade 2 knee sprain that sidelined the star forward for more than a month. Then came USA Basketball’s controversial decision to keep Ogwumike off the Olympic roster despite earning most valuable player of the 2019 qualifying tournament. When she tried to make lemonade out of the sour situation by looking for an opportunity to play for Nigeria, FIBA denied her waiver request. She is still the only WNBA MVP to not be named to an Olympic roster.

The continued setbacks tested Ogwumike’s spirit and had the WNBPA president second-guessing her place in the game despite having become one of the league’s biggest stars.

“I’ve always been described as resilient,” Ogwumike said, “and I think I had to kind of tell myself that a lot to make sure that I believed it because it’s been a few weeks of feeling unvaluable or unworthy.”

For the Sparks, who restart their season Sunday after the Olympic break, Ogwumike is invaluable. She averaged 16.4 points and seven rebounds per game while shooting 58.6% from the field before getting injured.

“She’s one of the foundational pieces of this team, her leadership, her positivity, her athleticism, her IQ, her experience,” guard Kristi Toliver said. “Just to have her presence back on the floor will speak dividends for us, whether she’s 100% or not, it really honestly doesn’t matter because her presence on the floor is gonna be a game-changer for everybody.”

Ogwumike sustained the injury on June 1 against the Dallas Wings. She rested for a week before returning to the weight room and was cleared to return to the court four weeks after the injury and participated in a shoot-around with the Sparks during the last week before the Olympic break. When playing for Nigeria’s Olympic team looked like a possibility, Ogwumike was healthy enough to practice with the squad in Las Vegas.

Instead of playing in Tokyo, where Team USA won its seventh straight Olympic gold medal, Ogwumike tested her knee during personal on-court workouts before the Sparks reconvened as a team.

Advertisement

Each day is incrementally better, Ogwumike said. She sticks to a strict routine involving daily vitamins, activation exercises and workouts. After a lukewarm relationship with the weight room earlier in her career, the 31-year-old has gained an appreciation for weightlifting and kept it as part of her recovery regimen. She worked on trying to speed up the release on her shot.

“For me, it was less about, ‘OK, I gotta get back to Nneka’ and more about, ‘OK, [which] Nneka is about to rise from the ashes out of this?’” Ogwumike said.

Sports Rising Sparks star: Allow Erica Wheeler to reintroduce herself Erica Wheeler, the only undrafted WNBA player to win All-Star game MVP, is authoring the latest act of her unexpected career with the Sparks.

Like their star player, the Sparks are looking for a rebirth in the second half of the season. Struggling with injuries to Ogwumike, her younger sister Chiney and Toliver, the team is tied for second-to-last place in the WNBA standings. Toliver, who missed the last six games because of an eye injury, is expected to return Sunday. Chiney Ogwumike is questionable with lingering right knee soreness.

Advertisement

The Sparks are optimistic about their chances to make a playoff push with their stars back. They know which version of Nneka Ogwumike they will have after this summer’s adversity.

“Nneka is always that light for herself, for us,” Toliver said. “Any room she steps in, any court she steps on, her presence and positivity is going to be known and felt and I’m proud to be her teammate.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For the first time in five weeks, the Clippers are playing basketball again. At least one version of them, anyway.

The roster coached by assistant Jeremy Castleberry during NBA Summer League in Las Vegas is hardly the same that will begin training camp in late September under the guidance of coach Tyronn Lue, of course. That doesn’t mean that everything that happens over the course of the next week-plus in Las Vegas will stay inside Nevada Las Vegas’ Thomas & Mack Center and Cox Pavilion. The Clippers are hoping that the development shown there carries into the fall and winter.

With the Clippers playing five games during their stay — a schedule that begins Monday night against Milwaukee — here are five reasons to watch their action closely.

Brandon Boston’s scoring

Advertisement

An injured hand hampered the former blue-chipper early during his lone season at Kentucky, but he still shot only 38% inside the arc and 30% behind it for the entire season.

By giving the 51st overall pick a three-year, standard contract with the first two seasons guaranteed — and reportedly $2.5 million is guaranteed, some of the most guaranteed money ever given to a player taken in his draft range, according to Spotrac — the Clippers clearly believe he can play like the prospect said to be very impressive shooting from three-point range during his pre-draft workouts.

Clippers Jason Preston, other young Clippers ready for Summer League A few years ago Jason Preston was a longshot to make the NBA. Soon he’ll be with Clippers teammates showing their potential in summer league games.

One NBA scout said he was most interested to watch Boston’s ability to score and how he influences games in ways other than scoring. Another league talent evaluator — who, like the scout, was granted anonymity in exchange for their candor on the rookies — said he was curious to gauge the 19-year-old’s shot selection and whether he can use his length to disrupt on defense. Boston has a nearly 6-foot-11 wingspan, according to measurements at the NBA combine, more than five inches longer than his height without shoes on.

Preston’s feel for the game

Jason Preston turns 22 on Tuesday and is seen as a more polished product at this point than Boston and first-round pick Keon Johnson, both of whom are only 19, in part because of the point guard’s feel for the game.

“Feel” is subjective and Summer League, with its hastily assembled offenses and rosters full of players on short-term deals hoping to make plays and leave impressions, is often an even more difficult place to evaluate it. Within that chaos, and against physical and fast competition, the talent evaluator and scout both said they wanted to watch how Preston would organize and direct an offense and how often his passing, rated second in the entire draft by the Clippers, will free teammates for shots.

How consistent will his shooting be from the deeper NBA three-point arc after making at least 37% of his three-pointers each of the last two seasons at Ohio? Defensively, there is also interest in how well he will defend quick opposing guards.

Advertisement

Preston, like Boston, has signed a three-year contract with the first two seasons guaranteed.

Keon Johnson participates in vertical leap at the NBA draft combine in June. (Charles Rex Arbogast / Associated Press)

Johnson’s defense

Johnson, the 6-5 wing from Tennessee, was high on the Clippers’ draft board, which led them to trade up four spots to get him with the 21st overall pick. His athleticism, with a combine-record 48-inch vertical leap and this year’s second-fastest three-quarter-court sprint, commands enormous respect. The next step is knocking down shots consistently to keep defenses honest and not sag off of him in anticipation of a slash to the rim.

Advertisement

However, it should be noted that his opportunity to play rotation minutes during the regular season won’t necessarily hinge on his shooting — it’s his ability to cover ground defensively thanks to that speed and agility that has the Clippers most excited.

The class of 2020

When Jay Scrubb was taken 55th overall last year, he became the first player drafted out of junior college in 16 years — the kind of gamble a team only takes if it sees something unique. Too bad there was no opportunity to see it early, thanks to COVID-19 concerns that canceled last year’s Summer League and foot surgery that knocked the 6-5, 220-pound Scrubb out for the regular season’s first five months.

He is renowned as an athlete and scorer but this will be his first extended opportunity since entering the league to show either against live competition. Currently the only Clipper on a two-way contract, Scrubb could be headed for more development time in the G League next season. Before then, this is a chance to show off his health and gifts under a larger spotlight.

Advertisement

There are similar questions about what kind of player Daniel Oturu is, and whether he can hold onto the third-string center role. (It was only last season that the Clippers showed, with Mfiondu Kabengele, that they’re willing to quickly move on from a former draft pick if they’re not persuaded he is a fit.) After being taken early in the 2020 draft’s second round out of Minnesota, a quad injury limited Oturu’s time in the G League. He is more comfortable as a pick-and-pop option in pick-and-roll plays, not the rim-runner whose shot was repeatedly blocked in the regular-season finale. Showing off his jumper again in Summer League would be a boost for Oturu entering training camp.

A numbers game

In the background of the Clippers’ on-court action is the numbers crunch happening on their roster. Teams are allowed to carry 17 contracts: 15 standard and two additional players on two-way deals, who can come and go between the NBA and its developmental system. The Clippers currently have 18 players either under contract — including free-agent signing Justise Winslow, whose two-year, fully guaranteed deal is worth $8 million and uses a portion of the team’s taxpayer mid-level exception, a source said — or who have committed to new contracts, including Kawhi Leonard, Nicolas Batum and Reggie Jackson.

Advertisement

The team also has a qualifying offer on restricted free agent Amir Coffey, one of last season’s two-way players. The possibility remains that he returns.

There is no date by which backup point guard Yogi Ferrell’s contract guarantees next season, which makes him a potential candidate to be waived, but even if that were to occur, it’s still an imbalanced group, with more players capable of playing around and defending the perimeter than the rim. That could suggest more roster movement via trades to slim down the guard options and add more depth in the frontcourt.

Giving all three rookies standard deals, instead using one of their two-way slots, means that they will be along for the ride next season with the Clippers, who are hoping to develop at least one into the type of player who can make a playoff team better in the future. For now, the stakes are lower, but not insignificant. Welcome to Summer League.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When the Dodgers acquired Danny Duffy from the Kansas City Royals last month, they traded for a pitcher on the injured list. They hoped to activate him for the final weeks of the season.

The final two weeks, as it turns out.

The Dodgers put Duffy and Clayton Kershaw on the 60-day injured list Monday, creating 40-man roster spots for catcher Anthony Bemboom and pitcher Conner Greene, each of whom they claimed off waivers. For Kershaw, who already has missed a month because of what the team says is elbow inflammation, the move amounts to paperwork: Manager Dave Roberts said Thursday that Kershaw would not return until “sometime in September.”

Duffy, who has not pitched since July 16 because of a strained left flexor muscle, said last week he had been advised he could return anywhere from late August to early September. The move to the 60-day IL means he can return no sooner than Sept. 15. At that point, the Dodgers would have 16 games left in the regular season.

Advertisement

Duffy remains eligible for a postseason roster, like any player in the organization by Aug. 31. With teams no longer allowed to make major league trades in August, a pitching staff can be fortified with free agents, minor leaguers and waiver claims.

The Dodgers have done all three in recent days, signing Cole Hamels to a major league contract and former Angel Nick Tropeano to a minor league contract, and claiming Greene off waivers from the Baltimore Orioles. Greene, 26, who played at Santa Monica High, made his major league debut in July. He pitched in three games for the Orioles, giving up six runs in 3 2/3 innings.

The Dodgers set a franchise record Sunday by using their 32nd pitcher this season. The Dodgers currently control 30 pitchers, either on their 40-man roster or 60-day IL. That does not include Trevor Bauer, on indefinite leave amid investigations into allegations of sexual assault.

Bemboom was claimed off waivers from the Angels, who had claimed catcher Chad Wallach on waivers from the Dodgers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Steve Flack volunteers at the Pro Football Hall of Fame just about every day, spending hours showing visitors from all over the world the displays and artifacts of the hallowed museum.

On rare occasions, Flack even gets to actually set foot in the place.

He lives in London, you see, and works from his home as a virtual docent, speaking to visitors via a digital tablet mounted to a metal stand on wheels. He has an encyclopedic knowledge of Hall of Fame history and stories about the bronze busts, gold jackets and individual NFL teams.

“I’ve always loved the Hall of Fame,” said Flack, 42, whose paying job is working in merchandising for the London Lions, a professional basketball team. “It’s the very first place in America I wanted to visit growing up. The first time I went was for an 18th birthday present and then I was coming back for different enshrinements and events.

Advertisement

Sports Pro Football Hall of Fame class has something for everybody Former Rams star wide receiver Isaac Bruce was among the players who entered the Hall of Fame on Saturday, a year late because of the COVID-19 pandemic.

“Finally, someone suggested, `'Would you think about being a volunteer?’ I jumped at the chance. I love just being a part of the Hall of Fame in any way possible. Now I’ve been able to talk to fans and help them to love the place like I do. That means everything to me.”

His fascination with football began as a child in the 1980s when he spotted the broadcast of a game while one of his parents was channel surfing.

“I was glued to the screen and that was it,” he said.

Before the COVID-19 pandemic, Flack would try to vacation in Canton twice a year, but COVID-19 has made that impossible so far. He purchased a nearby house in 2011, soon after attending Jerry Rice’s 2010 enshrinement. He’s a big San Francisco 49ers fan and was at the ceremonies when Joe Montana and Ronnie Lott were inducted.

Sports Mexican American trailblazer Tom Flores finally gets to the Hall of Fame Tom Flores, who has played on and coached championship teams, won one of his Super Bowls in Los Angeles and left his mark on Southern California .

“When you talk about it being the most inspiring place on Earth, here’s a guy that believes that,” said David Baker, the Hall of Fame’s chief executive. “There’s a lot of people who have great hearts for the Hall of Fame and what it represents. Steve is at the top of the list.”

Not every visitor grasps what Flack does or how he’s doing it.

Advertisement

“Some people understand it and get it straight away,” he said. “Others are startled. Some are not sure exactly where I am. I know my accent gives it away, but I had a lady once who once said to me, ‘Can you please show me Buckingham Palace from outside your window to prove you’re in England?’ I had to say to her, ‘It’s a small country but it’s not that small where the queen’s my neighbor.’”

He generally stays in one place at the hall, but some museum visitors occasionally want to take him with them.

“I’ve had people who have wanted to wheel me around, to see if they can take me around the museum with them,” he said. “We even had to quickly work out what would happen if someone tried to walk out the front door with me.

Advertisement

“I’d have to sort of scream and let out a few noises for someone to rescue me.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Colorado Rockies said a fan suspected of repeatedly yelling a racial slur at Miami Marlins outfielder Lewis Brinson was actually hollering at Dinger, the club’s purple, polka-dotted dinosaur mascot.

The team said Monday that fans who were seated nearby contacted the club in defense of the fan after it put out a statement saying it was disgusted by epithets hurled at Brinson when he was up in the ninth inning of Colorado’s 13-8 victory Sunday.

The club then contacted the fan, who explained it was just a big misunderstanding and that he was only trying to get the attention of Dinger, who was two sections over.

Brinson initially said he didn’t hear the fan shouting. But later Monday, he’d reviewed the tape and had a different opinion.

Advertisement

“So I watched the video at least 50 times in the past 15-16 hours,“ Brinson said before a game at San Diego. “I watched it a lot, especially when I heard that he said Dinger instead of the N-word.

“I personally — this is again my personal opinion — I personally keep hearing the N-word. It’s not that I want to hear it, I never want to hear it. Personally I’ve never been called that in person to my face on the baseball field, outside the baseball field, ever, so I don’t know what my reaction would be if I got called that.

“But to now, saying that again, I haven’t talked to the Rockies or that fan personally, if that’s the case, then I’m sorry for any backlash or anything he’s getting right now.”

The Rockies did not identify the fan, whose shouts were picked up by both teams’ broadcasts, although the Bally Sports Florida broadcast was clearer than Colorado’s because Rockies broadcaster Drew Goodman was talking at the time.

“After a thorough investigation that included calls, emails and video clips from concerned fans, media and broadcast partners, the Colorado Rockies have concluded that the fan was indeed yelling for Rockies mascot Dinger in hopes of getting his attention for a photo, and there was never any racial slur that occurred,“ the team said in a statement.

“The Rockies remain dedicated to providing an inclusive environment for all fans, players and guests at Coors Field,” the team added, “and any fan using derogatory language of any kind will be ejected from Coors Field.”

Nobody on the field, including Brinson, reacted to the shouts.

After the game Sunday, Marlins spokesman Jason Latimer said the team was aware of the clip.

Advertisement

“Neither Lewis, nor any other Marlins on the field or in the dugout, heard what was shouted,” he said in a text message to the Associated Press. “We brought the matter to the attention of the Rockies. How the matter is being handled, I would have to defer to them.”

The Rockies condemned the suspected conduct in a statement released Sunday night.

“The Colorado Rockies are disgusted at the racial slur by a fan directed at the Marlins’ Lewis Brinson during the ninth inning of today’s game,” the team said. “Although the subject was not identified prior to the end of the game, the Rockies are still investigating this incident.

“The Rockies have zero tolerance for any form of racism or discrimination, and any fan using derogatory language of any kind will be ejected and banned from Coors Field.”

Advertisement

Fans had started to fill the lower deck of the stadium in the late innings, moving closer for a postgame concert that was part of a Faith Day celebration.

Team officials weren’t able to debrief ushers in the area where the fan shouted until after the concert ended about an hour later.

Brinson got two hits and scored twice, and drew a walk in the ninth inning. The 27-year-old Brinson is in his fifth season in the major leagues.

The Rockies don’t plan to make any changes to the mascot’s name.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hi, and welcome to another edition of Prep Rally. My name is Eric Sondheimer. It’s an exciting time. Everyone is 0-0 in football and players get to show off how much they’ve improved in the off season. The Times begins a nine-part daily series previewing Southern California’s top players. First up is wide receivers.

Servite WR is tops

Servite wide receiver Tetairoa “TMac” McMillan leaps in the air to catch a pass but can’t hold onto it while being pressured by St. John Bosco cornerback Jahlil McClain.



(Allen J. Schaben/Los Angeles Times)

To understand how influential and impactful senior receiver Tetairoa McMillan of Anaheim Servite has become, let’s have quarterback Noah Fifita set the stage from a game in 2019 against San Juan Capistrano JSerra.

It was second and goal from the two-yard line. McMillan lined up on the left side. Fifita was in shotgun formation. As the ball was snapped, McMillan was one on one against his defender. He was running a fade.

Advertisement

“When the ball came out of my hand, I thought I missed it,” Fifita said.

The ball was thrown toward McMillan’s right shoulder. He turned and made a one-handed catch for a touchdown.

“Part of me was in shock,” Fifita said. “Part of me was, ‘I’m used to it.’ ”

Said McMillan: “I felt I wasn’t in reach for a two-handed catch. I practice it all the time. It wasn’t really that astonishing to me, but everyone else in the crowd was excited about it.”

For the rest of the profile and a look at top 10 receivers to watch, here’s the link.

Here’s the nine-part series previewing the top football players in Southern California that will appear daily in The Times and on line.

Monday: Receiver Tetairoa McMillan of Servite.

Tuesday: Quarterback Shea Kuykendall of Long Beach Poly.

Advertisement

Wednesday: Running back Jakob Galloway of Wilmington Banning.

Thursday: Offensive lineman Sam Yoon of Loyola.

Friday: Tight end Matayo Uiagalelei of St. John Bosco.

Saturday: Defensive lineman Arlis Boardingham of Birmingham.

Advertisement

Sunday: Linebacker Braydon Brus of Glendora.

Monday, Aug. 16: Defensive back Rodrick Pleasant of Gardena Serra.

Tuesday, Aug. 17: Kicker Chase Meyer of Santa Ana Mater Dei.

Newsletter Get our high school sports newsletter Prep Rally is devoted to the SoCal high school sports experience, bringing you scores, stories and a behind-the-scenes look at what makes prep sports so popular. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Advertisement

Searching for NIL guidance

Mater Dei coach Bruce Rollinson during practice this week. He’s trying to find out about NIL rules for his top athletes. (Eric Sondheimer / Los Angeles Times)

As if preparing his team for the 2021 football season isn’t enough of a challenge, Santa Ana Mater Dei coach Bruce Rollinson is also trying to do research on what his top players can and cannot do in regards to in the new era of name, image and likeness deals for college athletes.

“I have had some players that have been approached by organizations that want to represent them when they move on to college,” Rollinson said. “I’m assuming when they sign in December or early February, now they can foster opportunities for those kids, because their eligibility is done. But who knows? I don’t think anybody is going to get paid while they are in high school. Absolutely not. But I know they are being approached by representatives or businesses.”

Here’s the link to more information on NIL issues.

Advertisement

Enjoying this newsletter? Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Become a Los Angeles Times subscriber.

Kickers are characters

Kicker Zachary May of Sherman Oaks Notre Dame has plans to be a journalist. (Eric Sondheimer / Los Angeles Times)

Kickers are frequently given the flake label because they say and do sometimes strange things. So what should we make of senior Zachary May from Sherman Oaks Notre Dame. He says he wants to be a journalist. How crazy is that?

OK, it’s a pretty good job if you work at it and May is just starting out. He missed two days of football practice to complete a two-week online journalism course through Boston University. He has worked for Notre Dame’s school television network.

Advertisement

He said he likes investigating and talking, so journalism will hopefully be in his future. The first thing he did was go online and order reporter notebooks. Not just two or three but 50. That was a mistake, but he sees a positive.

“I guess I’ll have them through college,” he said.

Here’s the complete profile.

COVID-19 impact on games

Corona Centennial’s football program has become the latest to have its practices interrupted during a surge in COVID-19 cases in Southern California, and the school announced on Thursday that it will not be able to play its season-opening game against Santa Ana Mater Dei on Aug. 20 because of practice limitations.

Advertisement

In a statement released by the Corona-Norco Unified School District, Centennial canceled the game out of an abundance of caution after two players tested positive for COVID-19.

Corona Centennial pulls out of game against Mater Dei. https://t.co/VNd3aZxcY1 — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 6, 2021

Here’s a look at other schools dealing with COVID-19 issues.

Texas QB takes money and runs

One of the top high school football prospects from the class of 2022, quarterback Quinn Ewers from Southlake, Texas, has given up his senior year to enroll early at Ohio State, enabling him to accept NIL offers.

Advertisement

Here’s the story from 247Sports.

Spring cleaning

During spring cleaning while going through my closet, I found an old external drive that had several videos I’ve been searching years to find.

There’s one from 2008 when Loyola High had a standout running back named Anthony Barr. He’d go on to attend UCLA, switch to linebacker and become four-time All-Pro with the Minnesota Vikings.

I found my long lost video of Minnesota Vikings All-Pro LB Anthony Barr from his Loyola High days. pic.twitter.com/ElSuu1xpKq — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 4, 2021

Advertisement

I also found a video from Jack Flaherty’s freshman season at Harvard-Westlake when no one knew if he’d be a pitcher or hitter. He’d go on to be the ace for the St. Louis Cardinals.

Spring cleaning. I found a video of a freshman named Jack Flaherty. pic.twitter.com/UMkcUxB9Et — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 4, 2021

Then there was the video from Aaron Holiday’s freshman season at Campbell Hall. He’d go on the play for UCLA and in the NBA.

I'm doing spring cleaning. I found my video of Aaron Holiday as a freshman at Campbell Hall. pic.twitter.com/DXaLBdmEfg — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 4, 2021

Advertisement

Hesiman Trophy odds

The early odds are out for the 2021 Heisman Trophy, and a group of former Southland quarterbacks are listed among the favorites.

The contender odds by betMGM list former St. John Bosco quarterback DJ Uiagalelei of Clemson at 11-1 behind favorite Spencer Rattler of Oklahoma at 8-1.

Former Mater Dei quarterback Bryce Young of Alabama is also at 11-1. Former Mater Dei quarterback JT Daniels of Georgia is at 12-1. We’ll have to ask Mater Dei coach Bruce Rollinson who has the edge among his former quarterbacks.

Former Rancho Cucamonga quarterback CJ Stroud of Ohio State is at 16-1.

Advertisement

Trinity League media day

Servite players surrounding coach Troy Thomas as Trinity League media day. (Eric Sondheimer / Los Angeles Times)

If you arrived from another planet and showed up Friday for the Trinity League football media day in Long Beach and just listened to the presentation of the six coaches, you’d think, “These people know what they are doing.”

Yes, talent matters, but Jason Negro (St. John Bosco), Bruce Rollinson (Mater Dei), Troy Thomas (Servite), Scott McKnight (JSerra), Anthony Rouzier (Santa Margarita) and Rod Sherman (Orange Lutheran) are exceptional at what they do. Their schools are paying them big bucks to produce big results while developing young men on and off the field, and they all seem to have embraced the pressure, expectations and competition to be the best.

Servite coach Troy Thomas offers ringing endorsement of WR Mikey Welsh. pic.twitter.com/Z20ws8LE4t — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 6, 2021

Advertisement

Rollinson, in his 33rd season, is having so much fun that he insisted he has no intention of retiring as long as he stays healthy. Negro is 121-21 in his 12th year at St. John Bosco with the toughest schedule in America. Thomas was so emotional talking about his son, Houston, receiver Mikey Welsh and an injured player, Maxx Silao, that you wonder why a “Hard Knocks” for high school football doesn’t feature the Friars.

Here’s a look at Trinity League media day.

UCLA recruiting class intact

Shortstop Cody Schrier and pitcher Gage Jump, both UCLA signees from JSerra, decided to attend college rather than sign pro contracts.

(Eric Sondheimer / Los Angeles Times)

When the deadline passed for players taken in the amateur baseball draft to decide whether to sign or not, UCLA coach John Savage was busy with a camp. He also was feeling good.

Advertisement

Among the 13 players who signed letters of intent last fall, 12 will attend UCLA. That’s unheard of for the Bruins to keep a class ranked No. 4 by Baseball America mostly intact.

“This year we had 10 going out and we have 14 coming in. It all hit right,” Savage said. “It may be literally a first. It just doesn’t happen. We feel very fortunate. We love our class.”

The only player UCLA lost was pitcher Eric Silva from JSerra High. He was a fourth-round draft pick of the San Francisco Giants and signed for nearly $1.5 million.

Here’s the link to players UCLA gets to keep.

Advertisement

Notes . . .

Nate Berger is the new basketball coach at Los Alamitos. He used to be an assistant with Los Alamitos and was former head coach at Long Beach Millikan. . . .

Former Oxnard Pacifica DE Devin Aupiu has transferred from Notre Dame to UCLA . . . .

Former NFL defensive back Orlando Scandrick has joined Los Alamitos as an assistant football coach. . . .

John Fitzpatrick resigned as softball coach at Santa Margarita. . . .

Advertisement

Any football games canceled because of COVID-19 issues will be considered a no contest and not a forfeit in the Southern Section and City Section. . . .

The St. John Bosco-Miami Central football game on Aug. 20 will be televised on Bally Sports. . . .

Standout junior basketball guard Kylan Boswell has left Corona Centennial to enroll at Compass Prep School in Chandler, Ariz. He joins former Windward guard Dylan Andrews and former Sierra Canyon center Max Allen. . . .

This is like a pro athlete saying goodbye to a city. Hoffman, a senior tight end at Channel Islands, is leaving for a few miles away to attend St. Bonaventure High. Hey, it's a new era. https://t.co/MxuI6wGMpk — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 4, 2021

Advertisement

Cody Hoffman, who was a standout tight end last spring with Channel Islands, has transferred to St. Bonaventure. He’s 6 feet 5, 240 pounds. . . .

Linebacker Eoghan Kerry of Mater Dei has committed to Texas. . . .

Jason Olguin is the new baseball coach at San Pedro, which won this year’s City Section Open Division championship. . . .

The transfers keep coming to Sierra Canyon basketball. The latest is sophomore guard Isaiah Elohim leaving from Heritage Christian to join the Trailblazers. He’ll be teaming with Bronny James when Sierra Canyon moves to the Mission League in 2022-23. . . .

Advertisement

Junior receiver Makai Leonard of Los Alamitos announced he has committed to Oklahoma, where he’ll join his Los Alamitos teammate, quarterback Malachi Nelson. . . .

Senior cornerback Josh Hunter of Mater Dei has committed to San Diego State. He was the defensive player of the year in the Trinity League last spring. . . .

From the archives: Marcedes Lewis

In 2001, Marcedes Lewis tries to get past De La Salle defenders. (David Kawashima)

Marcedes Lewis is 37 years old and has been playing tight end in the NFL since he was a first-round draft pick by the Jacksonville Jaguars taken No. 28 overall in 2006 out of UCLA and Long Beach Poly. He has been with the Green Bay Packers since 2018 and shows no signs of slowing down.

Advertisement

He’s a legendary player and beloved by the community in Long Beach.

During his Poly days, the Jackrabbits were the best in Southern California. He played in the 2001 game against De La Salle that was nationally televised and matched No. 1 vs. No. 2 before a crowd of 17,321 at Veterans Stadium.

Here’s the link to a look back at that historic game.

He was a high school All-American at Poly, a college All-American at UCLA and All-Pro in 2010. He enters this NFL season with 37 touchdown receptions.

Advertisement

How he’s been able to stay healthy and keep producing is impressive, considering he’s 6 feet 6, 267 pounds.

Recommendations

From the Fort Myers News-Press, a story on sanctions leveled against a high school basketball coach and three players for alleged recruiting violations.

From the San Jose Mercury News, a look at what’s awaiting Northern California prep sports.

Tweets you might have missed

Corona sophomore baseball standouts Joshua Springer and Ethan Schiefelbein are the only Southern California players selected for the 15U National Team Trials roster among 37 players. Harvard-Westlake's Jared Halpert is manager. — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 2, 2021

Advertisement

Notre Dame gets Mater Dei receiver. https://t.co/ONWOSroCKY — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 8, 2021

Southern Section is recommending a plan in case there's an altercation during football game. Remember, you get suspended for leaving the bench. pic.twitter.com/1IilFYrCsq — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 2, 2021

Wilmington Banning is up to 75 players with several key transfers. Their QB could be soph Andrew DeVoe, who played at LB Poly. They've gotten 6-3, 240-pound LB Seth Fao from Servite. Other players from Carson and Rancho Dominguez. — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 2, 2021

Los Angeles High is oldest school in LAUSD. It's about time its athletic facilities received an upgrade. If bond money isn't used to help the Romans, then people have really screwed up badly. — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 3, 2021

Advertisement

You can play video games while practicing football at St. Francis. pic.twitter.com/9ZBWcojybu — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 3, 2021

"Living Legends 66-0" is story about 68-69 Compton HS national No. 1 teams whose state record win streak still stands 52 years later.



Terrific insight to #HSBB during a volatile time in CA



Google 👉https://t.co/3pFeCTFdcl



YT 👉https://t.co/Xjlnmrpdo7pic.twitter.com/7YY1NFAuHd — Ronnie Flores (@RonMFlores) August 3, 2021

For planning purposes, this is the playoff schedule in CIF for 2021-22. pic.twitter.com/FaCsQiDMUX — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 4, 2021

Advertisement

The Los Angeles Times nine-part series previewing the top football players in Southern California begins on Monday. You can get a digital subscription for six months for $1 and read everything. https://t.co/6SvhPVYEmN — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 4, 2021

Hawaii delays start of high school sports season. https://t.co/IWn8fcAzv3 — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 4, 2021

I want to see Domani Jackson vs. Erriyon Knighton in a special race next year at Arcadia Invitational. Come on Nike. Make it happen. — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 5, 2021

JT Daniels opens up about his mental health.



A powerful conversation with @MartySmithESPN & @ESPNMcGee. pic.twitter.com/StvKJqZjoV — SEC Network (@SECNetwork) August 6, 2021

Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A few dozen people gathered along the walkway at Symbol Promenade Park on a recent night to munch on bento box meals and strain for a glimpse as climbers scaled the enormous wall under the lights at Aomi Urban Sports Park.

The distant voice of the public address announcer floated through the muggy air and mixed with pleas by the police officers and security guards over loudspeakers for the spectators in front of them to move along.

“Please don’t stop around here,” signs posted every few feet said in English and Japanese. They were interspersed with posters warning to “Keep physical distance” to protect against COVID-19.

The specter of the pandemic hung over each moment of the Summer Olympics, much like the 65-foot-tall Gundam robot that towered over an entrance to a popular shopping mall behind the small crowd.

Advertisement

Though the Games, which ended Sunday, didn’t result in a widespread outbreak among the 42,000 athletes, officials, media and other credentialed visitors from outside the country, they played out in venues without spectators amid Tokyo’s worst surge of the pandemic.

Daily cases in the metropolis of almost 14 million soared from 1,359 the day of the opening ceremony to surpassing 5,000 for the first time in the final days of the Games, despite a state of emergency and ubiquitous mask-wearing.

But the Olympics bubble — built around aggressive testing, phone apps that tracked the health of each credentialed person, mandatory masks and a slew of other restrictions — remained largely intact. International Olympic Committee President Thomas Bach lauded the measures in his wrap-up news conference: “All the figures are confirming that this concept of anti-coronavirus measures have worked.”

In all, 436 people linked to the Olympics tested positive for COVID-19 in Japan since July 1. Of those, 32 were athletes, 112 Games-concerned personnel, 25 media, 10 Tokyo 2020 employees, 235 contractors and 21 volunteers. About two-thirds of the positives were Japanese residents.

Long-standing worries about a high-profile team or an athlete with a household name being removed from competition because of a positive test never materialized. Though 32 of the cases, including 18 athletes, came inside the Olympic village — the bubble inside a bubble — they didn’t trigger a larger problem.

Protesters demonstrate near Olympic Stadium in Tokyo on Thursday. (Carl Court / Getty Images)

Like others traveling to Japan, athletes had to test twice in the 96 hours before their flight. That resulted in a handful of U.S. athletes, such as basketball player Bradley Beal, golfer Bryson DeChambeau and tennis star Coco Gauff, pulling out of the Games because of positive tests.

Advertisement

From the outset, organizers decided to treat every credential-holder as if they weren’t vaccinated. That led to a routine unlike any other Olympics, in which bottles of hand sanitizer seemed more commonplace than pictures of Miraitowa, the cartoonish blue-and-white mascot of the Games, each person’s temperature was checked before entering a venue and ordinary residents wanting to get a peek at a competition were shooed away.

Athletes were tested daily — other credential-holders were tested regularly, as spitting into small plastic vials became as much a part of the Games as hearing national anthems — and faced precautions such as plastic dividers on tables in their dining hall. Medal winners had to hang the trophy around their own necks. They were only permitted to drink alcohol while alone in their rooms. Athletes had to leave the country when their competition finished, unlike past Olympics in which enjoying the social life in the village and exploring the host city after competitions was commonplace.

Media were subject to a 14-day soft quarantine upon entering the country, limiting movement to trips between their hotel, the main press center and approved venues, in addition to mandatory installation of health-tracking and contact-tracing apps on their phones.

Advertisement

Things such as public transportation and restaurants were off-limits during this period to separate the Games from the general population as much as possible. Signs taped to benches outside hotels banned drinking alcohol to prevent the spread of the virus, while media were often packed shoulder-to-shoulder in buses shuttling them between competitions.

Venues sat empty, aside from athletes, coaches, officials and media, after foreign spectators were barred from Japan earlier this year and domestic spectators were prohibited two weeks before the Games. Before competitions, public address announcers reminded the smattering of people inside to practice good hygiene, wear masks and stay apart.

“The Games obviously won’t occur without some COVID-19 cases,” said Zachary Binney, an assistant professor and epidemiologist at Emory University. “But I’m not sure zero is the proper standard to hold them to here, because some people would still get sick even if the Olympics were canceled.”

A handful of U.S. athletes — including beach volleyball player Taylor Crabb, gymnast Kara Eaker and two-time world champion pole vaulter Sam Kendricks — were among the positives in Japan.

Advertisement

“I’ll weather this predicament and isolation for the love of the game,” Kendricks said in a statement on social media after the test ended his Games before they started and landed him in isolation.

A few days later, he added: “I plan to be no one’s victim. We don’t quit ever!”

The lone athlete cluster came among Greece’s artistic swimmers late in the Games. Six tested positive and isolated for 14 days while the rest of the team withdrew from competition. No athletes have tested positive for three consecutive days as the number in the country dwindled with the Games winding down.

Advertisement

“We expected a certain number of positive cases, and we [would] have to take quick actions [to] respond to those cases,” Tokyo 2020 spokesman Masa Takaya said. “As a person who is involved in these Games, I understand all the athletes took their energy and effort to come all the way to Japan, and then they cannot participate in events that are taking place in front of them. I’m sure it’s really difficult for the athletes to accept this fact.”

More than 620,000 tests were performed on people credentialed for the Olympics since July 1. The average climbed to 25,000 tests a day in the last week, more than double the 12,000 tests a day for the non-Olympics population in Tokyo during the same period.

Bach boasted the Games were the “best-tested community anywhere in the world during the last few weeks.”

Meanwhile, the virus continues to tear through Tokyo. Bach bristled when questioned about whether the Games had an indirect effect on the dramatic increase in cases.

Advertisement

“These claims of indirect effects are pretty unsubstantiated,” he said. “I’m not aware of any figure which could support such a claim.”

He cited government officials and unspecified experts as having “made clear” that “there is no such influence, either direct or indirect.”

The Games went on. The virus did too.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The most anticipated athletic performance of these Olympics became a metaphor for the Games themselves.

Days after Simone Biles dropped out of the gymnastics team final because she suddenly lost the ability to figure out where she was when twisting in the air, she returned for the individual balance beam.

Biles made it through her routine. She won a bronze medal. She did well enough for her supporters to be able to convince themselves she was victorious in defeat, but the story’s brief shelf life in the aftermath of the competition pointed to an alternate, and more accurate, reality.

While courageous, her performance was underwhelming.

Advertisement

Similar feelings were evoked by these Olympics, which were staged against the backdrop of a global pandemic. The host city of Tokyo was under a state of emergency and the majority of Japan didn’t want the Games to happen.

The Pandemic Games produced some special moments, including Japan’s triumphs in judo that temporarily captivated the country as well as the 400-meter races in men’s and women’s track and field that were won in world-record times. Although the ultimate cost of these Olympics will be determined in the coming weeks by the number of reported COVID-19 infections, disaster was averted while the Games were in progress.

However, even when graded on the most lenient of curves, they disappointed.

These Olympics were joyless. In most parts of Tokyo, there were few, if any, signs of the Games being in town. And why would there be?

There were no foreign tourists to fuel the local economy, none of that warmth that comes when people from various parts of the world share drinks and unite under something as trivial as sports.

Empty seats tower over a beach volleyball match at Shiokaze Park in Tokyo. (Felipe Dana / Associated Press)

The locals were kept out of almost every Olympic venue, with some blockades extending into the surrounding neighborhoods. Some of these sites were expansive. For example, the beach volleyball stadium was placed in Shiokaze Park, which is nearly 40 acres and was entirely closed to the public. Many of the 80,000 volunteers stood around or roamed places like this with nothing to do.

Advertisement

The Games were here, but they weren’t. By the time they started, their purpose wasn’t to enhance Japan’s international reputation or tourism industry, but to ensure the country wouldn’t lose any more money than it already had. Those aren’t the motives behind a successful event.

The on-field competitions failed to blow away the stench of cynicism. Outside of the baseball team that won a gold medal, Japan’s most popular athletes and teams missed the podium. Interest levels varied, as athletes weren’t hyped up for months, as is the customary practice here. Media outlets didn’t want to appear as if they were endorsing an unpopular event.

In other words, there were no stars.

The U.S. had Biles, Megan Rapinoe and Kevin Durant, and that was about it. Biles and Rapinoe didn’t win. Durant won a competition in which a U.S. victory was considered a given. The Games were a reminder of how the world has changed, how transcendent fame is virtually unattainable for non-gymnast athletes who compete in sports that are ignored in non-Olympic years.

Advertisement

Under such conditions, no athletic display of the human spirit ever had a chance of washing over the cynicism associated with these Games.

Biles’ candor about mental health has contributed to an important dialogue about the burdens athletes are expected to shoulder. Perhaps a day will come when athletes aren’t judged on a binary scale of wins and losses, and Biles’ bronze medal in the balance beam will be appreciated as much as if it were gold.

The value of these Olympics will also be judged on the change they can impart — specifically, what organizers can do the next time a major international sporting event is threatened by a pandemic. Multiple postponements, which the IOC didn’t want, must be on the table.

Advertisement

Until then, memories of these Games will elicit feelings of disappointment, that they were something less than they should have been.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The battle lines were drawn last year.

With more and more American athletes choosing to kneel or raise a fist on the medals podium, joining a nationwide movement for social justice, the U.S. Olympic & Paralympic Committee relaxed its long-time ban on protests.

“We believe that Team USA athletes, in line with many other sports and leagues in the United States, can be a leading force for global good,” USOPC chairwoman Susanne Lyons said.

The International Olympic Committee refused to follow suit, offering only a slight modification in its “no politics” stance. The IOC and the Americans appeared to be on a collision course heading for the Tokyo Games.

Advertisement

“People say, ‘Oh, you’re just an athlete’ but we’re not just athletes, we’re people too,” gymnast Simone Biles said. “We have a right to speak up for what we believe in.”

But the expected confrontation has been unexpectedly muted.

With competition near the end, there have been only a few, relatively mild demonstrations by athletes from the U.S. and other countries. Whether because of the COVID-19 pandemic, a lack of fans at venues or the heightened atmosphere of the Olympic Games, the IOC’s traditional gag order has gone largely unchallenged.

At issue is Rule 50, which states: “No kind of demonstration or political, religious or racial propaganda is permitted in any Olympic sites, venues or other areas.”

In early July, IOC officials relented a little. The podium was still off-limits, but athletes could “express their views” on-field before competition began. So there was no violation when women’s soccer teams from the U.S., Sweden, Japan and other nations took a knee before their matches.

“For us it feels right to stand up for human rights,” Swedish defender Amanda Ilestedt said after playing the Americans. “There was communication with the U.S. team. It feels good to do that, it is something we stand for as a team.”

Advertisement

Last week, shot putter Raven Saunders crossed her arms overhead while receiving a silver medal. The gesture, she told reporters, represented “the intersection of where all people who are oppressed meet.”

The IOC quickly launched an investigation, but then Saunders’ mother died.

“We sent our condolences to her and her family,” IOC spokesman Mark Adams told reporters. “For the moment, I would say the process is parked and for obvious reasons we wouldn’t want to raise that issue any more at the moment.”

U.S. hammer thrower Gwen Berry competes at the Tokyo Games on Aug. 1. (David J. Phillip / Associated Press)

Advertisement

Hammer thrower Gwen Berry, who raised a fist on the podium at the 2019 Pan American Games, did the same before her competition here but did not win a medal.

Fencer Race Imboden, who kneeled at the Pan Am Games, expressed himself with a circled “X” on the back of his hand as the U.S. men’s foil team received its bronze medals. He had expressed a desire to tone things down in Tokyo.

“It’s not my position to cause a stir,” he said.

There was another, more conspicuous protest among the American fencers, though it arose from an internal conflict. Alen Hadzic, an epeeist, had been accused of sexual misconduct by multiple women before the Games, prompting much of the team to ask that he be prohibited from the athletes village.

Advertisement

Hadzic stayed in a separate hotel, and the other three members of his squad showed up for competition wearing pink masks.

Americans weren’t the only ones who arrived in Japan with protest on their minds.

Before the Games even began, the South Korean team hung banners outside their apartments at the athletes village making reference to past conflicts with Japan. Olympic officials quickly had them remove the banners.

“The guidelines are also saying very clearly that the Olympic village is one of the protected areas where the athletes can live peacefully together without having to face any kind of divisive messages,” IOC president Thomas Bach said.

Advertisement

Two Chinese cyclists wore Mao pins on the podium. After 10 Nigerian athletes were declared ineligible for missing pre-competition doping tests, some of them took to the streets of Tokyo, holding up cardboard signs criticizing their own sports officials for failing to administer the tests.

Bao Shanju, left, and Zhong Tianshi of China wear pins with depictions of Mao Zedong on the podium after winning gold in women’s sprint cycling. (Christophe Ena / Associated Press)

At the Ariake Gymnastics Centre, Costa Rican gymnast Luciana Alvarado ended her floor routine by taking a knee and raising a fist in support of equal rights.

“Because we’re all the same,” she said, “and we’re all beautiful and amazing.”

Advertisement

There was also the issue of demonstrations outside Olympic venues — beginning with the opening ceremony on July 23 — as some Japanese residents voiced their anger at the massive event being held during a pandemic. Shouting could be heard outside the men’s tennis championship, though the athletes downplayed it.

“I think the Olympics are very important to be happening right now,” gold medalist Alexander Zverev of Germany told reporters. “Not only for Japan, but the whole world.”

The dearth of widespread political and social rancor inside venues might not have been surprising, given the circumstances, but it was on Berry’s mind.

Advertisement

“I know a lot of people like me, a lot of athletes like me, a lot of people are scared to succeed or speak out,” the hammer thrower said. “As long as I can represent those people, I’m fine.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The baseball tournament at these Olympics has featured bigwigs from yesteryear, prospects on the rise and Asian stars in their primes. There have been exciting introductions and emotional goodbyes, thrilling finishes and gloomy heartbreak. But the star of the show might be the most prevalent, under-the-radar component on display every day: the baseball.

“They need this ball over in America,” said Joe Ryan, a starting pitcher for the United States. “It is amazing. It’s perfect.”

The baseball used in the major leagues, according to seemingly every pitcher you ask over there, is far from perfect. It’s slick. It’s inconsistent. It’s a problem. So much so that it became accepted for pitchers to use illegal foreign substances for better grip in recent years until Major League Baseball, after negative public comments from players, determined the cheating crossed a fuzzy line.

The substances allowed for unprecedented spin rates, which increased pitch movement and made hitting more difficult. Strikeouts, subsequently, steadily rose to historic levels in recent years. MLB determined the pattern was hurting its product.

Advertisement

In March, before the regular season started, MLB sent a memo to teams communicating plans to implement increased monitoring of baseballs and to crack down on the use of foreign substances. But the league stopped short of saying it would punish pitchers. That quickly changed.

In June, the league announced it would regularly check pitchers for substances in games and eject and suspend pitchers caught with sticky stuff for 10 games. The timing — midseason with little time to adjust — drew scorn from pitchers. At least one — Tyler Glasnow — has blamed the prohibition for a significant arm injury (Glasnow tore his ulnar collateral ligament and recently underwent Tommy John surgery).

If MLB wants to look across the Pacific for a solution, they’d probably start with a phone call to Koji Yasui.

Yasui is the general manager of the baseball division at SSK, the manufacturer for the Olympic balls. The company produces 3,500 boxes of 12 balls every month for a total of about 520,000 balls in a year.

U.S. second baseman Eddy Alvarez throws to first base against the Dominican Republic on Wednesday. (Yuichi Masuda / Getty Images)

The balls are used across different levels in Japan — youth, high school, college, industrial league — and for the renowned national baseball high school championship. Mizuno produces the balls for Nippon Professional Baseball, the country’s top league.

“But there is a history of pro teams using our balls to practice,” Yasui said.

Advertisement

Yasui said SSK only uses Japanese cow hides prepared by Japanese tanneries — and not just because of their expertise. Japanese tanners, according to Yasui, have encountered difficulty when trying to create similar balls in China and Taiwan, and they think the water is the reason. He claimed Chinese and Korean tanneries generate unstable results even with the same methods.

It’s definitely a different baseball. If you want to compare the two, I like the SSK ball a lot better. Scott Kazmir, on the difference between MLB and Olympic baseballs

“It depends on the number, but it’s not like we have a huge surplus just sitting around,” Yasui said. “We’d need some advance notice. We’d also have to secure the materials. I think we’d need time to prepare to produce whatever would be asked of us.”

Yasui, who has worked at SSK for 40 years, said all the balls are the same size, the result of a meticulous assembly process with segments devoted to a specific aspect and multiple quality checkpoints. The balls come individually wrapped.

Advertisement

“It’s got this tack that they put on it before,” Ryan said. “So when you open that thing up, it’s ready to rock and roll.”

Japan’s record-setting heat and stifling humidity during the Olympics have created difficult conditions for pitchers — a few have used so much rosin that a puff of dust explodes with each pitch — but those asked said they didn’t have trouble gripping the baseball.

“It’s definitely a different baseball,” said U.S. pitcher Scott Kazmir, a 13-year major-league veteran who appeared in three games this season. “If you want to compare the two, I like the SSK ball a lot better.”

Advertisement

Mexico reliever Oliver Pérez, a 19-year major-league veteran, said the ball moved more than usual for him, perhaps because of the stickier grip. U.S. reliever Scott McGough, who is in his third season with the Yakult Swallows, said he didn’t see a difference in his pitch movement. He added that the rosin bag used in Japan is also better compared to the rock rosin used in the U.S.

“With a little sweat and some rosin the ball can get really sticky,” McGough said.

It’s not just pitchers raving about the balls. U.S. first baseman Triston Casas, one of the tournament’s standouts, said he liked the balls too because, effectively, they’re easier to hit.

Advertisement

“I think they’re a little whiter,” said Casas, who has three home runs in the Olympics. “I can see it better.”

Ryan said the balls fit in his hand more easily than those in the U.S. — both he and Kazmir said they seem smaller. He noted that several major league pitchers have asked him to bring SSK balls back to the U.S., and he offered to give the company his address for a shipment during a postgame news conference after tossing six innings in the Americans’ Olympic opener.

For now, Ryan, a 25-year-old right-hander acquired last week by the Minnesota Twins, can only campaign for a future change.

“It is — I can’t say this enough — the best baseball I’ve ever touched,” Ryan said. “Yeah, we need this.”

Advertisement

Times staff writer Dylan Hernández contributed to this report.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Peyton Manning will be inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame on Sunday, the capstone of a spectacular career in which he directed the Indianapolis Colts and Denver Broncos to Super Bowl victories.

In the audience will be legions of fans, along with friends and former teammates. Some grew up with him in New Orleans, and lined up with him on the sports fields at Isidore Newman School, which is pre-K through 12th grade.

The Los Angeles Times gathered five of his former Newman teammates for a video conference to reminisce about the gangly, plodding, pranking kid who rounded into one of the best quarterbacks in NFL history.

On the call were Manning friends Baldwin Montgomery, Justin Reyna, Thad Teaford, Mike Keck and Nate Stibbs.

Advertisement

“I really value those friendships, and a number of others who I grew up playing Little League baseball with or went to school with at Newman,” Manning said. “I’m proud that I’ve been able to maintain those friendships for such a long time. They give me a hard time because they basically had an annual trip to see me play once a year either to Knoxville, for a Tennessee game, Indianapolis for a Colts game, or in Denver.

“When I retired they accused me of kind of ruining our annual trip, that I was selfish about retiring and screwing everything up. I took the heat for that.”

Getting together wasn’t easy during the pandemic, but Manning did gather his friends to take in a college game at Tennessee.

“Watched the game, sat in the stands, and had a good get-together. Have to be a little more creative and finding what to do on our annual trip. Football made it easy.”

Among the memories:

Forget me not

Even when he was a kid, Manning’s memory was something to behold. He could recall the smallest of details, and not just sports-related ones. Sometimes it was music.

“Back in those Little League days, sometimes you’d be going to play some game an hour or two away,” Reyna said. “Peyton was with us one time, and my parents put some Motown on the radio. We’re probably 11 or 12. He’s sitting back there naming the songs and who sings them. My parents were looking around like, ‘Who knows these songs as a 10-, 11- or 12-year-old?”

Advertisement

Manning still has that curiosity about his old classmates.

“He loves nostalgia, the childhood memories,” Montgomery said. “Every five years you have your high school reunion, and nobody’s more interested in what our classmates are up to or getting an email chain going: ‘Where are you? Who’s going to be there? How is so-and-so doing?’ There’s this keen interest in looking back.”

Peyton Manning helped bring another Super Bowl trophy to Denver. (Marcio Jose Sanchez / Associated Press)

Not surprisingly, football factoids were of particular interest. There, he was a walking Wikipedia.

Advertisement

“He knew every single player his dad played with,” Teaford said. “He knew every single play. He would listen to the radio broadcast and he would tell you exactly what the next play was going to be, who the receiver was that caught every touchdown, where they were from, what their brother’s name was. He could tell you stories about people he’d never even met.

“The light switch didn’t just go off when he started playing quarterback at Newman or got to Tennessee or got to Indianapolis. The light switch was on from the second he was born.”

A sticky solution

Did you ever watch “Homeland” or “The Wire,” where crime solvers would construct a wall of photographs or thoughts tenuously connected by pieces of string, a crazy visual aid untangling some type of convoluted conspiracy?

Basically, that was Manning’s bedroom.

Advertisement

“Back in 1993, we didn’t have computers in class, nobody had iPhones,” Stibbs said. “So whenever he had an idea, he would write it down on a little yellow sticky note.

Tennessee quarterback Peyton Manning launches a pass during a game against Kentucky on Nov. 22, 1997. (Ed Reinke / Associated Press)

“You’d go to his room at his house and he’d have 250 sticky notes all over his wall, just on little ideas that flashed into his mind that he didn’t want to forget about. So he kept a note and a pen in his pocket and he’d write it down. I always thought that was pretty incredible at that age to have that attention to detail.

“It could have been a homework assignment, something that popped into his mind. Something about watching game film or practice or preparation. It was all over the board.”

Advertisement

The crying game

Sometimes, Peyton was too smart for his own good — or at least he thought he was.

He was on a “bitty basketball” team when he was in grade school, and a teammate’s dad was the coach. The guy was a lawyer who lived in the Mannings’ neighborhood, and though he didn’t know a lot about coaching, he was focused on the kids having fun.

That didn’t sit well with young Peyton, not after the team lost a game.

The coach tried to give the team a pep talk in the wake of defeat, sort of: “Well, we didn’t play our best, but we’ll get ‘em next time.”

Advertisement

Peyton stood and countered with: “No, the reason we lost is you don’t know what you’re doing as a coach.”

Manning still cringes at the memory.

“I was dead wrong,” he said.

Advertisement

What’s more, young Peyton was in trouble with his own father, Archie.

“My dad couldn’t hear what I was saying,” Manning said. “He just saw me pointing my finger at the coach, and he could tell that I was out of line. Made me go over to the coach’s house that night and apologize. I remember I was crying. I was bawling and my dad was saying, ‘I’m not going to let you play next week.’

“The coach was very nice, accepted my apology and said, ‘No, I want you to play.’ It was a good learning lesson for me of what’s right and what’s wrong, being coachable and keeping your mouth shut. That was the most valuable lesson in that. My dad straightened me out real quick.”

Clash of the Titans

When it came to high school coaches in Louisiana, Billy Fitzgerald was larger than life. He was the head coach of two sports at Newman High for a combined 60 years, with his teams winning five state titles in basketball and two in baseball.

Advertisement

The 6-foot-5 “Coach Fitz” was a commanding presence whose decisions from the sideline or dugout were seldom questioned.

Then along came Manning.

Peyton, left, and Eli Manning visit Newman School in New Orleans, their alma mater, in 2015. (Jonathan Bachman / Associated Press)

“Peyton was a pretty intense, competitive personality as well,” Keck said. “I always thought to myself, man, when coach Fitz is upset you just kind of nod your head and, ‘How soon can we move on and get out of here?’ Peyton, he would butt heads with him. He would go after him, they would get into it with each other. They were very competitive.

Advertisement

“Those who played basketball probably noticed the most tension between those two. It was all healthy. It was all in the pursuit of excellence. But I remember they would get into it, and I was like, man, he’s the guy who makes me run wind sprints. I’m not going to fight with that guy. I just tried to get out of there as quickly as I could. I didn’t have the guts to have words and decide I had something to say back to him.”

Naked and afraid

Then there was the time Manning and his Newman baseball teammates were on the road for a tournament and stayed in a motel the night before their semifinal game. Fitzgerald reminded them to grab towels because they’d be showering before their five-hour bus ride home.

When Manning got off the bus to get a towel, Stibbs asked him to grab him one too. Prankster Peyton returned with a towel for himself and a tiny washcloth for his pal.

Flanked by coach Tony Dungy, Colts quarterback Peyton Manning celebrates his first Super Bowl victory. (Chris O’Meara / Associated Press)

Advertisement

That was fine and funny until Newman blew a big lead and lost a game it shouldn’t have lost. Fitzgerald was fuming. The disappointed team, sheepish and silent, hit the showers, and Peyton’s friend brought his washcloth, figuring he’d quietly exchange it for the full-sized towel of some unlucky freshman.

The towel swap happened, but the guy who wound up with the terrycloth postage stamp was the hotheaded coach Fitz, who emerged from the showers naked, soaked and steaming mad. He demanded to know who had left him with a washcloth.

“I remember looking over at Peyton sitting in the corner, and he was just hunkered down,” Stibbs said. “He wouldn’t look at anybody. And I remember thinking, ‘You almost got us killed because of your little prank.’ We still tell that story every time we get together once a year. It’s etched into all of our memories.”

Manning’s defense can be summed up in three words: not my fault.

Advertisement

“That was on Stibbs,” he said. “I was simply pulling a prank on my friend. It should not have gotten to the head coach. So that’s all on Stibbs. I’m not taking the heat for that one.”

The imposter

Manning was no stranger to mischief.

“When we weren’t water-ballooning cars at Thad’s house as teenagers, we did a lot of prank calling,” Montgomery said. “This was prior to Caller ID when you could actually get away with calling someone and acting as if you were someone else.

“It was always better to prank call a parent, because they were naïve and gullible and easier to go through with it, versus a peer who was going to recognize your voice.”

Advertisement

Some of the most memorable gags involved Manning posing as a reporter for a publication that specialized in rating high school football players for fans and college recruiters.

“He had this idea that we would call some players’ dads of one of our rival teams and act as if we were of Blue Chip magazine inquiring about their son,” Montgomery said. “So Peyton would get on the phone and call someone’s dad, an acquaintance, and act as if he was someone inquiring about their son.

“‘Hey, I hear your son’s a rising senior and a football player, can you tell me a little bit about him?’ These dads just took it hook, line and sinker. Everybody wants their son to be the next great athlete. So [the dad would say], ‘Oh, yeah, he plays both ways, linebacker, running back. Runs well. Works out in the weight room.’

Advertisement

“We would just pry and ask the most ridiculous questions and get into, ‘What does he power clean? Does he wear a neck roll? Does he wear a Breathe Right?’ Just see how far we could go with it. We got some good laughs out of it.”

It worked until it didn’t. Manning was nabbed when he left a voice message for someone and that person recognized the voice.

“He got in trouble,” Montgomery said. “I think Archie received a phone call, and he had to apologize to these dads for those prank calls.”

Self-made Manning

Manning is the son of an NFL star quarterback. His genetics certainly helped. But he didn’t stroll into high school as a phenomenal athlete. He was slow and skinny, and it was his relentless work ethic that molded him into the player he became.

Advertisement

“People make assumptions that because Peyton had all the success he had that he was born fast, born able to jump high, strong,” Teaford said.

“But we used to do a speed camp with the track coach when we were in the eighth grade. There was a heavyset guy who would run with us, and Peyton was running with him. In eighth grade he was probably close to a [6-second-flat 40-yard dash].

“When we went into the weight room, he practically couldn’t lift the bar. It’s a testament to who he is. It’s not where he started, it’s where he got to in the end that matters. I bet by his senior year he was probably running a 4.9[-second] 40 and I know he used to talk all the time about how much stronger he got at Tennessee. It’s pretty amazing. It’s not like he was born with that talent.”

Manning routinely would gather his receivers for impromptu workouts, and it was always with a purpose, not just to toss around the ball. Keck, who was a tight end, remembers the quarterback directing him to run five-yard out routes over and over.

Advertisement

“I didn’t understand that the five-and-out was critically important for spreading out the defense,” Keck said. “All I knew was it was the most boring play ever. You’re going to catch it and go out of bounds or get killed. You’re going to get four, maybe five yards if you catch it.

“I would do it 18, maybe 20 times and I was like, ‘This is so boring. Can we do different routes? Can we do a post or a long touchdown catch?’ But he understood the strategic nature of the timing of that route with each receiver. He was probably working on making sure that as soon as I swung my head around the ball was right there. Meanwhile, I’m just complaining. My feet hurt. I don’t want to catch another five-and-out. It’s just not that fun.”

Retired NFL quarterbacks Peyton Manning, left, and brother Eli have enjoyed post-football time on the golf course. (Eric Risberg / Associated Press)

The lesson?

Advertisement

“He got to this point where he decided he was going to be the best, and he just put his head down,” Keck said. “He out-prepares anybody.”

Along for the ride

Manning will be up on that stage in Canton, but his high school teammates and friends in the audience will feel as if they’re standing right beside him.

“It’s been a long journey for all of us,” Stibbs said. “We’ve been going to the games when he was in Knoxville in college every year. For the 18 years that he was with the Colts. In Denver, we would go to games every year. It almost feels like we’re going in with him. We’ve been part of that whole experience, that whole journey where it’s consumed our lives too.”

Said Montgomery: “Selfishly, I don’t think we ever wanted him to retire. It’s such a part of the last 20-plus years, whether it was going to Denver or Indy or some other NFL town to go watch him play, and how proud we were to be a part of it, and our families a part of it, whether it’s our spouses or kids.

Advertisement

“We knew five years after retirement he was going to be a first-ballot Hall of Famer, and here it is. It’s crazy to kind of put that cherry on top.

“He’s exceeded expectations every step along the way.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What could be Trevor Bauer’s last public comment in a Dodgers uniform was uttered in frustration as the pitcher stood up to leave a videoconference following a 3-2 victory over the San Francisco Giants on June 28.

“I can’t believe they didn’t ask me about f — ing Angel Hernandez,” Bauer said, making no attempt to hide his disdain for the much-maligned umpire.

Bauer had pitched well that Monday night, limiting the National League West-leading Giants to two runs in six innings and striking out eight. Nearly halfway through the season, Bauer was 8-5 with a 2.59 ERA and a then NL-best 137 strikeouts in 107 2/3 innings .

He received a rousing ovation from a Dodger Stadium crowd of 47,835 after escaping a sixth-inning jam, pounding his chest three times and pointing both arms toward fans above the third-base dugout as he walked off the mound.

Advertisement

Advertisement

But Bauer seemed irritated, a bit distracted, during a brief postgame video call in which several of his answers were clipped and his walk-off quote was tinged with scorn.

A day later, the scattershot strike zone of a notoriously erratic umpire and the inadequate inquiries of a few sportswriters would be the least of Bauer’s concerns. That morning a San Diego woman obtained an ex parte temporary restraining order against Bauer in Los Angeles County Superior Court. In the 85-page document, the woman alleged that the pitcher had choked her to the point of losing consciousness during two sexual encounters in the spring and injured her during the second. Bauer, through his representatives, said the encounters were “wholly consensual.”

Three days would pass before Bauer was placed on paid administrative leave — a non-disciplinary action — by Major League Baseball and he has remained there while MLB investigates the right-hander for a possible violation of its joint domestic violence, sexual assault and child abuse policy. Separately, the Pasadena Police Department has continued its investigation of Bauer, launched in May, for possible felony assault.

Already one of the game’s most polarizing players before these allegations, Bauer, 30, has sparked an outcry among fans, some who want the Dodgers to immediately sever ties with the 2020 NL Cy Young Award winner and question why a defending World Series champion signed him in the first place, and some who are concerned about a rush to judgment before Bauer has had a chance to defend himself in court.

Bauer’s career is in jeopardy, and his stay with the Dodgers could be over, the sexual-assault allegations having turned a pitcher in his prime into a pariah in his own clubhouse, where no teammate has spoken publicly about him or come to his defense. Two people with knowledge of Dodgers clubhouse dynamics, who are unauthorized to speak publicly about the situation, said that a majority of players do not want Bauer back under any circumstances.

Advertisement

Even if he is not charged with a crime, Bauer could be facing a lengthy MLB suspension without pay. Since MLB implemented its domestic violence policy in the summer of 2015, 14 players — five of whom were placed on paid administrative leave — have been suspended for violating it, with suspensions ranging from 15 to 162 games.

All of which raises the question: Will Trevor Bauer throw another pitch for the Dodgers or any other major league team? And, more consequentially, why was he here in the first place?

::

The first indication that the Dodgers were interested in Bauer came in a Dec. 16 story by The Los Angeles Times’ Jorge Castillo, who wrote that the team “would likely entertain adding Bauer only if he is open to a short-term deal.”

That possibility gained steam on Jan. 20, when ESPN’s Jeff Passan tweeted that the Dodgers were “monitoring the market” for Bauer and “could be a player depending on the price.”

Dodgers pitcher Trevor Bauer sits with manager Dave Roberts in Washington on July 1. Bauer was placed on administrative leave the next day. (Julio Cortez / Associated Press)

Starting pitching didn’t appear to be a need last winter. The rotation looked stacked with Walker Buehler, Clayton Kershaw, Julio Urías, Dustin May and Tony Gonsolin. Veteran left-hander David Price was returning after opting out of the 2020 season because of coronavirus concerns.

But the Dodgers’ hand was being forced by the upstart San Diego Padres, who had gone on an offseason binge, signing their electric shortstop Fernando Tatis Jr. to a 14-year, $340 million contract. They bolstered their rotation by acquiring Yu Darvish, Blake Snell and Joe Musgrove; the Dodgers, winners of eight straight NL West titles, did not want to lose an arms race to their division rivals.

Bauer would come with a cost beyond his salary. He had a history of harassing and bullying women online, mocking transgender people and spreading conspiracy theories. Still, the Dodgers, enamored with Bauer’s durability and dependability on the mound, continued their pursuit.

Advertisement

Then came a Feb. 4 USA Today report that Bauer had agreed to a deal with the Mets.

“I went to bed [that] night really bummed and thinking it wasn’t going to work out,” Dodgers president of baseball operations Andrew Friedman said.

Two people with knowledge of Dodgers clubhouse dynamics said that a majority of Dodgers players do not want Bauer back.

By the next morning, however , the Dodgers had hammered out the final details of a three-year, $102-million contract that would pay Bauer $38 million this season and included $32-million player options for 2022 and 2023.

Friedman touted the team’s vetting process, saying background checks of Bauer included conversations with former teammates, coaches, clubhouse personnel and athletic trainers from Arizona, Cleveland and Cincinnati, where Bauer previously played. He added that he and team president Stan Kasten had multiple conversations with Bauer about his use of social media.

“The most important thing,” Friedman said at a Feb. 11 news conference at Dodger Stadium introducing Bauer, “is every teammate we talked to, all the feedback we got from every organization he was with, was not only incredibly positive in terms of the type of teammate he is but also in terms of the impact that he makes on each organization.”

Bauer focused on local ties. The Santa Clarita Hart High graduate and former UCLA star chose the Dodgers over the Mets, he said, because he wanted to help his hometown team win a second consecutive World Series.

Trevor Bauer, pitching for UCLA in the College World Series in 2010, attended Hart High in Santa Clarita and grew up as a Dodgers fan. (Nati Harnik / Associated Press)

“I used to sit in the bleachers right over there as a kid, watching [batting practice] with my dad and listening to Vin Scully on the radio,” Bauer said during his introductory news conference. “I’ve been a longtime Dodger fan and couldn’t be more excited to be here with the group we have.”

Advertisement

He steered clear of more difficult subjects that day, notably his online behavior, vowing only to be better.

“Everyone makes mistakes in the past — I try to learn from them as quickly as I possibly can,” he said. “I’ve spent a lot of time talking to people to try to understand other peoples’ perspectives, and I’m doing my best to be better in all walks of life. I am committed to being better on social media, to being better on the field, in the clubhouse, and in life in general.”

::

The Dodgers were confident that Bauer would conform to a team-first culture cultivated by such veterans as Kershaw, third baseman Justin Turner and outfielder Mookie Betts. And the initial signs suggested clubhouse acceptance and buy-in.

“I think our clubhouse does a really good job of taking in all types of personalities, different people, and getting the best out of them,” Kershaw, a 14-year veteran and three-time NL Cy Young Award winner, said early in spring training. “And we expect that with Trevor. We’re going to let Trevor be himself and do what he’s continued to do over the course of his career.”

Kershaw and Buehler said their conversations with Bauer focused primarily on pitching — how to process and utilize advanced statistics, how to attack certain hitters and different grips with which they might experiment.

“I’m excited to talk to him about … different ways to get the most out of what you’re doing,” Kershaw said in spring training. “I think he’s going to make us all better.”

Betts, too, was more excited about Bauer’s credentials than he was concerned about his accompanying baggage.

“I mean, obviously, you get a Cy Young winner and you’re going to be excited,” Betts said in late February. “But all those things are ... he is who he is. You know what you’re getting, so I don’t really worry about it. It doesn’t bother me.

“He goes out there and competes, he gets wins … I don’t know what more you can ask for. He’s got to be Trevor Bauer. You can’t try to turn him into someone else.”

Advertisement

Bauer went through spring training and the first three months of the regular season relatively incident-free. He gave the Dodgers All-Star results — quality starts in 14 of 17 games, 11.5 K/9 and a 1.003 WHIP (walks plus hits per innings pitched).

“He has conversations with one guy, with four guys,” Dodgers manager Dave Roberts said as recently as May 31. “He’s different, but he likes to talk baseball, and I love it, because typically, as you guys have seen, our guys don’t sit around and talk.”

It was a social-media exchange that triggered the series of events that led to Bauer’s sexual-assault allegations.

After giving up one run and three hits in six innings of a 5-2 loss at San Diego on April 18, Bauer, according to the court filing, exchanged private messages with a woman who had tagged him in an Instagram post. Three days later, on April 21, the two met at Bauer’s Pasadena home.

In the restraining order request, the woman wrote that a sexual encounter that night was “consensual and non-threatening” until Bauer “began putting his fingers down my throat in an aggressive manner,” and soon thereafter “wrapped my hair around my neck and choked me.”

The two continued to communicate over the next three weeks. In a May 9 text-message exchange that Bauer’s representatives provided to The Times, the woman told Bauer that she had “never been more turned on in my life” by him choking her. “Gimme all the pain. Rawr.”

The Times has not been able to authenticate messages cited by the woman in the restraining order request or by Bauer’s attorney.

Dodgers Hernández: The Dodgers never should have signed Trevor Bauer The Dodgers unnecessarily signed a pitcher with a history of making troublesome decisions when they already had the best team in baseball.

The woman met Bauer at his home again on the night of May 15, after Bauer had thrown seven scoreless, two-hit innings, struck out 10 and walked none in a 7-0 win over the Miami Marlins.

Bauer, the woman wrote, again wrapped her hair around her neck, choked her and caused her to lose consciousness. This time, she wrote, Bauer “began punching my face,” and then “punched me hard with a closed fist to the left side of my jaw, the left side of my head, and both cheekbones.”

Advertisement

She wrote that she drove back to her San Diego home and awoke the next day with a split lip, a swollen jaw and cheekbones, two black eyes, “over 10” scratches on her face, and bruises on her gums, buttocks and vagina.

In the next 18 hours, she underwent two medical examinations, one that diagnosed her with “an acute head injury and assault by manual strangulation,” and sat for interviews with detectives from police departments in San Diego and Pasadena.

On Friday, May 21, the woman wrote that she drove to the Pasadena Police Department to record a “cold call” with Bauer in which she asked Bauer what he did when she was unconscious. The transcript of the phone call has not been publicly released.

That night, Bauer threw one of his best games of the season, giving up one unearned run and two hits and striking out 11 in 6 1/3 innings of a 2-1 win at San Francisco.

Trevor Bauer gestures to the crowd after being removed from a game against the Giants in San Francisco on May 21. (D. Ross Cameron / Associated Press)

“The more you see him,” Roberts said of Bauer after the game, “you just love the compete, the execution, the ability to make pitches when he needs to.”

::

Five weeks later, the temporary restraining order was obtained, throwing Bauer’s career into limbo. MLB has twice extended the pitcher’s paid administrative leave, which now runs through Tuesday . The Dodgers removed a Trevor Bauer bobblehead night, which was set for Aug. 19, from their promotional schedule and pulled Bauer merchandise from their online and stadium team stores.

A prolific Twitter, Instagram and YouTube user, Bauer hasn’t posted on social media since the sexual-assault allegations surfaced. He has been seen on social media only once, when a Twitter user posted a picture of Bauer and his agent, Rachel Luba, at Utah’s Zion National Park on July 12.

On Friday Bauer made his first public appearance since being placed on leave, attending a hearing in Los Angeles Superior Court to determine whether the restraining order will remain in effect. His accuser was also in attendance. After the two sides argued they needed more time to review recently-disclosed evidence, the judge granted a continuance until early August.

Advertisement

A lengthy MLB suspension of Bauer without pay would provide some salary relief for the Dodgers, who still owe Bauer about $75 million.

Bauer’s contract is not publicly available, so whatever grounds the Dodgers might have to void it are unknown. However, the standard player contract allows a team to terminate a deal should the player “fail, refuse or neglect to conform his personal conduct to the standards of good citizenship and good sportsmanship.”

Questions remain about the Dodgers’ vetting process, and why an organization that President Biden described as “a pillar of American culture and American progress” in a White House ceremony on July 2 — the same day Bauer was placed on his first paid administrative leave — would sign Bauer in the first place.

“You can talk to Andrew [Friedman] more about that,” Kasten said of the vetting process that afternoon, before a game at Nationals Park . “I think this would not be a good time for him to address that. But we did a fair amount, like we always do. And that’s really all I’m comfortable saying right now.”

And, of course, the biggest question of all: Will Bauer play again for the Dodgers?

“I don’t have any way of answering that because, right now, this is in the hands of the commissioner’s office,” Kasten said. “Let’s get through that [process] and then we’ll be able to discuss that more in-depth.”

The National Sexual Assault Hotline can be reached 24 hours a day at 1-800-656-4673.

Times staff writer Jorge Castillo and assistant sports editor Steve Henson contributed to this report.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Trea Turner paced the length of the Dodgers dugout a few times in the eighth inning Friday night, the team’s newest addition looking somewhat anxious in a tie game between the Dodgers and Angels.

Turner, the infielder who was acquired from the Washington Nationals with pitcher Max Scherzer on July 30, had cleared COVID-19 protocols and was added to the active roster about an hour before the game.

He did not start, but with the pitcher’s spot in the batting order nearing and reserves Billy McKinney and Cody Bellinger having already been used, it was clear that Turner was about to make his Dodgers debut and take his first at-bat in a game in 10 days — a tall task for even a player of his All-Star stature.

Dodgers Dodgers’ trade for Max Scherzer and Trea Turner is complete The Dodgers finalize a deal that will bring them Cy Young winner Max Scherzer and All-Star shortstop Trea Turner from the Washington Nationals.

Advertisement

“I think he was antsy most of the night,” Dodgers manager Dave Roberts said of Turner. “He’s a very intelligent ballplayer, so when you start seeing how the game is playing out, there were a couple opportunities early, from the sixth inning on, where we might have gone to him.

“So he was trying to stay in tune with me and Bob [Geren, Dodgers bench coach] and be ready when called upon.”

That opportunity came to start the bottom of the ninth, with the score tied 2-2. When Turner was announced as a pinch-hitter, most in a Dodger Stadium crowd of 50,822 rose to their feet and greeted him with a rousing ovation.

Turner swung at the first pitch from Angels reliever Austin Warren, an 85-mph slider, and sent a long fly ball toward the left-field corner that was foul. He swung hard at the second pitch, a 92-mph fastball, and popped out to the catcher. The Dodgers went on to lose 4-3 in extra innings.

“He took some good swings,” Roberts said. “He didn’t come up with a hit, but you can tell he’s a pretty special player. You would have never known he didn’t have an at-bat in 10 days, because that first one, he cleared the slider out, and he just missed a fastball in the zone. For me, he got two good swings off.”

Roberts said Turner would start on Saturday night and Sunday against the Angels and would spend the rest of this season as the team’s primary second baseman while filling in occasionally for shortstop Corey Seager, the reigning World Series and National League Championship Series most valuable player.

Turner has played shortstop exclusively for the last five years, and Roberts considers him a “premium” defender at the position, but Turner also played second base and center field earlier in his career.

Advertisement

“He embraced it,” Roberts said of Turner’s reaction to the position switch. “Obviously, his choice is shortstop. He sees himself as a shortstop, as he should. But understanding our roster, second base certainly made sense for him, and he understands it gives us the best chance to win.”

After the trade-deadline deal, Roberts said he wanted to speak with Turner and “look him in the eye” before making any lineup decisions. That conversation took place Friday with Andrew Friedman, the team’s vice president of operations.

“Basically, we asked him his preference on the defensive side, knowing that we view him as a premier shortstop and a superstar player,” Roberts said. “But we value Corey at shortstop, and Trea’s potential versatility with his athleticism allows for a couple of things.

Advertisement

“His preference was to stay on the dirt, which makes sense to me. I want to make sure Trea is comfortable. This is something different for him, as far as the trade. Getting him comfortable is really important for him and the Dodgers.”

The addition of the speedy Turner, who is batting .322 with an .890 OBP, 18 homers, 49 RBIs and 21 stolen bases in 96 games, moved Mookie Betts from second base, where he started the three previous games, back to right field.

Super utility player Chris Taylor, who has played shortstop and second base, will split his time between center field and left field while occasionally spelling Justin at third base.

Advertisement

The player who stands to lose the most playing time is Bellinger, the slumping center fielder who will now assume more of a platoon role, starting mostly against right-handers. Left fielder AJ Pollock may lose some at-bats as well.

“Every single night there’s gonna be a great player who is not getting the start — that’s just where we’re at,” Roberts said. “But right now, we have to win games. We’re four games back [in the division] and we have to win. I need to put the best guys out there every night who I feel can win a ballgame.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dodgers left-hander Clayton Kershaw, who has been out since July 7 because of elbow inflammation, acknowledged Friday that he will not be able to return until early September.

The three-time National League Cy Young Award winner threw a three-inning, 45-pitch simulated game before a July 27 game in San Francisco, but he was unable to throw a scheduled four-inning, 60-pitch simulated game Sunday.

“Basically, I just tried to come back too fast, which is a bummer,” Kershaw, who is 9-7 with a 3.39 ERA in 18 starts, said before the Dodgers’ 4-3 loss to the Angels on Friday night. “After the sim game, it really didn’t respond well. It’s frustrating. It’s still nothing serious, but it’s something that’s going to take a little time.

“It’s no fun being hurt. It’s miserable. I really don’t enjoy it at all, especially with what’s going on here. I want to be part of the stretch run so bad, so I’m going to do everything I can do to get back, and I think I will be. But it’s definitely looking more like September than August.”

Advertisement

Kershaw, who is partnering with the LA Dream Center to hand out 2,500 backpacks and school supplies at his foundation’s annual back-to-school bash Saturday, said he hopes to resume playing catch “soon.” He will need several weeks to build up enough arm strength to return to the rotation.

Manager Dave Roberts said several MRI tests on Kershaw’s elbow have been “clean” and that he’s just waiting for the soreness to dissipate.

“I was probably a little too impatient with my rehab — that’s on me,” Kershaw said. “I wanted to be back. I wanted to pitch. This time, it’s a little different because we’re up against the calendar.

“There’s only so much you can rest before you go. We’re gonna rest as long as we can to give myself the best chance to pitch some meaningful games in September and be ready to go in October.”

Mookie Betts malaise

Right fielder Mookie Betts left Friday night’s game after six innings after aggravating his inflamed right hip while running from first to third on Justin Turner’s first-inning double.

Betts singled twice in three at-bats in his fourth game since being activated off the disabled list Sunday. He hit three homers in his first three games, but it appears the leadoff man is going to get more days off moving forward.

Advertisement

“As we look out, we’re probably gonna have to manage it a lot, quite often,” Roberts said of Betts’ injury. “Ideally, we wouldn’t, but our reality is, it’s something that’s not going to go away.

“So Mookie is doing what he can to give us innings out there defensively, give us at-bats, play with a governor on, so we have to manage it, and fortunately we have a lot of good players who can help support him.”

Price check

David Price gave the Dodgers 5 1/3 solid innings Friday night, giving up two earned runs and four hits, including solo homers to Jose Iglesias in the fifth inning and Jack Mayfield in the sixth, striking out four and walking none.

But the highlight of the veteran left-hander’s night was a 105-mph line drive that he rifled into right field for a single off Angels left-hander Patrick Sandoval in the fourth inning. The hit put two on with two outs, and Betts followed with an RBI single for a 2-0 Dodgers lead.

Advertisement

“That’s one of the highlights of my career right there,” said Price, a career .088 hitter who takes pride in his at-bats. “That’s the hardest-hit ball I’ve hit in the big leagues, especially in a game.

Dodgers Cole Hamels signs with Dodgers, adds still-needed rotation depth The Dodgers reach terms with free-agent pitcher Cole Hamels, who could provide rotation depth if Clayton Kershaw is slow to recover from a sore elbow.

“Facing a lefty, I told the guys I was a walking out today. I told Walker [Buehler] I just wanted to get the ball to the infield dirt. I did that in my first at-bat (a groundout to second) and then I hit that next ball hard. That was fun.”

Rehab report

Reliever Corey Knebel, out since April 24 because of a right-lat strain, appears to be on the verge of a return to the Dodgers.

Advertisement

The right-hander struck out all three batters he faced swinging in the seventh inning for triple-A Oklahoma City Friday night. In five outings during his minor league stint, Knebel has given up one run and three hits over 5 1/3 innings, with 10 strikeouts and one walk.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Trevor Bauer will stay away from the Dodgers through at least Aug. 13, as Major League Baseball and the players’ union agreed Thursday on a fourth extension of his administrative leave.

Bauer remains under investigation for sexual assault. A court hearing on whether to extend or terminate the temporary restraining order against him is scheduled Aug. 16-19.

The woman accusing him is expected to testify for about two hours, according to a court filing from the attorneys representing her.

Advertisement

The court files also included an exchange of letters between attorneys that illustrates the acrimony between the parties. In a discussion of the woman’s medical records, Jon Fetterolf, an attorney representing Bauer, wrote: “Considering that [the woman] claims that she was choked unconscious for 30 minutes, the fact that this CT scan of the neck found no injuries is certainly relevant.”

In response, Doreen Marie Olson, an attorney representing the woman, wrote: “[She] is not clear how long she was unconscious, she believes it may have been 30 minutes, but how would she know for sure, she was unconscious? Is this really a point that you want to make? Clearly, your client would be in a far better position to provide this information, and he will no doubt be asked.”

The woman’s attorneys told the court they expected Bauer to testify for about two hours, although Bauer’s attorneys have told the judge they plan to advise him to invoke the 5th Amendment, because any testimony Bauer provides could be used against him in a potential criminal case.

The Pasadena Police Department has been investigating Bauer for felony assault since May 18, when the accuser first met with detectives, according to her request for the restraining order. He has not been arrested or charged with a crime.

The league also is investigating. The MLB domestic violence and sexual assault policy empowers Commissioner Rob Manfred to suspend Bauer without pay, even if he is not charged with a crime.

Bauer, the highest-paid pitcher in the majors this season, continues to receive his salary while on administrative leave. He has not pitched since June 28. The longer he remains on leave, the less likely he could rebuild enough arm strength to return to the Dodgers’ starting rotation this season.

As the Los Angeles Times reported last month, a majority of players do not want Bauer to return. After he won the National League Cy Young Award last year, for his work with the Cincinnati Reds, his hometown Dodgers signed him to a three-year, $102-million contract.

Advertisement

The woman who sought the restraining order alleged that Bauer had choked her to the point of losing consciousness during two sexual encounters — one in April and one in May — and injured her face during the second one.

The woman provided the court with a report from a hospital exam showing she had suffered “assault by manual strangulation” and “acute head injury.”

Bauer’s representatives have said the pitcher “vehemently denies her account of the two meetings” and that the encounters were “wholly consensual.” Shawn Holley, an attorney representing Bauer, argued in a court filing that, since the woman does not allege she has seen Bauer since May 16 or communicated with him since May 31, the request for the restraining order is “unfounded.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Full house, cheating Astros, desperate Dodgers.

Mad Max was riding Fury Road.

Tattered rotation, stalled season, savior needed.

Mad Max needed to take it Beyond Thunderdome.

Advertisement

“He’s definitely built for this,” said Dodgers manager Dave Roberts.

He definitely is, and he definitely showed it, Max Scherzer towering over Chavez Ravine on Wednesday night in a Dodgers debut that lived up to every syllable of his nickname.

It was mad. And he was Max.

He struck out the first batter he faced. He struck out the last batter he faced. He ended his night pumping his fist, disappearing into his teammates’ arms, then jumping back out of the dugout to wave to 52,724 of his newest best friends in a roaring curtain call for a breathtaking performance in an emotional masterpiece of a 7-5 victory.

“When the crowd is going nuts like that, you can definitely feed off it … really get some adrenaline from that, so to go out there and pitch well ... ,” Scherzer said. “That’s the first curtain call for me. I’ve never had that happen. That was a really cool moment, something I’ll never forget.”

Nor will anybody who witnessed it, this wondrous melding of new energy and abiding tradition in a game that felt like a giant exhale of joy.

If this is who he is, then Max Scherzer is going to be huge.

Advertisement

Facing the Houston Astros at Dodger Stadium amid a second consecutive night of jeering and banging and anger, the Dodgers needed an unruffled ace.

Scherzer was that ace, allowing two runs across seven innings, surrendering but five hits, walking one and striking out 10.

Seeking a morsel of revenge for those raucous fans who can never forgive the Astros for cheating the Dodgers out of the 2017 World Series — payback that was denied in Tuesday’s series-opening loss — the Dodgers were in dire need of a jolt.

Scherzer was that jolt, allowing a home run on his seventh pitch then settling down to dizzy the Astros with everything from 97-mph fastballs to 86-mph changeups.

Advertisement

“You’re out there pitching, crowd going nuts, gonna feel some adrenaline, but have to use your mind and stick to baseball instincts and how you want to sequence and attack the hitters,” Scherzer said.

One night after suffering a distracted loss to the Astros in this potential World Series preview, the Dodgers needed the stability of a split.

Scherzer was their rock, setting the tone for a resurgent offense to knock around the Astros — Mookie Betts hit two homers! — and muscle their way to a rejuvenating victory.

“That was vintage Scherzer,” said Astros manager Dusty Baker.

Advertisement

Dodgers pitcher Matt Scherzer delivers a pitch against the Houston Astros in the first inning at Dodger Stadium on Wednesday. (Luis Sinco / Los Angeles Times)

All this, and Scherzer endeared himself to the rocking stadium by winning battles with the three villains from 2017, striking out Jose Altuve three times while fanning Carlos Correa and pinch-hitter Lance McCullers Jr. once.

His average fastball this season was 94.2 mph. His average fastball Wednesday was a full tick higher at 95.2. He knew what the Dodgers needed, and he brought it.

Yeah, Max Scherzer is here, it’s real, he’s real, and the championship-favorite Dodgers just got a whole lot better.

Advertisement

Scherzer, 37, a three-time Cy Young Award winner, approved the Dodgers destination before being traded here last week from the Washington Nationals with Trea Turner for four prospects in what appears to be a stunning deadline steal.

Translated, Scherzer wanted to be here. He wanted title expectations. He wanted fans who roar with every strikeout. He wanted the pressure.

On Wednesday night, his 6-foot-3 frame hopping off the mound and his fastball roaring toward the corners, he embraced all that heat.

“You live to pitch in front of 50,000 people going nuts,” he said.

Advertisement

“This is a team that won the World Series last year and that is obviously talented … but there’s work to be done, and that’s why I’m excited to be here and to go out and win,” said Scherzer this week.

At 6:04, the crowd stood and cheered as he walked alone down to the bullpen, such was the anticipation. Soon thereafter, his debut began with a whoosh … but it was followed by a boom.

Facing the incessantly jeered Altuve for his first batter, Scherzer turned the boos to cheers by striking him out flailing on four pitches. Yet three pitches later, Michael Brantley turned on a 95-mph fastball and powered it 385 feet into the right-field corner seats for a home run. It was amazingly the first run Scherzer had allowed in a debut with a team, having previously thrown 18 scoreless innings in debuts with Arizona, Detroit and Washington.

The long ball set off an ominous murmuring among the crowd, especially after Correa followed Brantley with a sharply hit single to center. But then Scherzer took a deep breath and retired the next two hitters, striking out a protesting Aledmys Diaz looking to end the unruly 20-pitch inning.

Advertisement

Scherzer calmly retired the next seven batters before allowing another run on a pair of singles sandwiched around a groundout in the fourth. Then he cruised to his finish by retiring 10 of his last 12 hitters and ending his work with a whiffing strikeout of Chas McCormick, followed by a fist pump, followed by that curtain call.

“That was amazing,” said Betts, who continued breaking out of his doldrums with two home runs while watching Scherzer from second base. “Being able to see everything and how he works … that was just a great thing to witness.”

This being the first curtain call of his 13-year career, Scherzer said Clayton Kershaw had to basically push him out of the dugout.

“Kershaw said, ‘Hey, give them what they want,’” Scherzer said. “At that point, the crowd was going nuts, I wanted to go out there and tip my hat. I appreciate what they did, they brought an unbelievable energy tonight.”

Advertisement

How important was this start for a Dodgers rotation that previously had only two trusted starters?

The Dodgers are so desperate for starting pitching that earlier Wednesday they threw a million bucks at Cole Hamels, a 37-year-old left-hander who has thrown three innings in the last two years.

Dodgers Cole Hamels signs with Dodgers, adds still-needed rotation depth The Dodgers reach terms with free-agent pitcher Cole Hamels, who could provide rotation depth if Clayton Kershaw is slow to recover from a sore elbow.

Yes, he was once a World Series MVP, but that was 13 years ago. Yes, the Dodgers once should have acquired him at the trading deadline, but that was 2015.

Advertisement

Hamels had been sidelined with shoulder inflammation and fatigue but recently apparently impressed scouts with a 90-mph fastball. Yeah, he’s sort of underwhelming, but again, the Dodgers need help.

On Wednesday, Mad Max showed up, and the relief was palpable.

“I mean, it’s Max Scherzer, that speaks for itself,” said Betts. “You know he’s going to be a competitor and be great.”

“I understand why we’re here. I understand we have a great team,” Scherzer commented this week. “All I can do is go out there and pitch my game.”

Advertisement

Enough said. Enough done.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Angels third baseman Anthony Rendon is set to undergo season-ending surgery to repair a right hip impingement, the team announced Wednesday.

Rendon, the 31-year-old former All-Star who is in the second season of a seven-year, $245-million contract, had been out since July 5 with a left hamstring strain. It was his third time on the injured list this season.

The team expects Rendon, who was placed on the 60-day IL Wednesday, to be ready by opening day next season. Manager Joe Maddon said he didn’t know whether Rendon would be ready for spring training.

Advertisement

During his injury-plagued 2021 season, Rendon batted a career-low .240 with six home runs and 34 RBIs in 58 games.

He missed 11 games in April with a left groin strain, nine in May after suffering a left knee contusion when he fouled a ball off his leg, and then got hurt again on July 4.

“This year he was never able to get on track, for whatever reason,” Maddon said. “I don’t know how much that hamstring [or] hip had to do with it, but he never seemed to be able to gain any traction. Cause he gets, torrid is the right word, he gets so hot, but he just was not able to do that this year.”

Initially, Rendon’s hamstring injury wasn’t believed to be serious. The team had hoped he would be back by the start of the second half of the season following the All-Star break.

But Maddon said in recent weeks that Rendon’s recovery hadn’t been progressing. The announcement Wednesday was the first time the team had noted a problem with his hip.

Maddon said he didn’t remember when the hip became part of the issue, but seemed to connect that injury with the original diagnosis.

“I just guess, because he wasn’t feeling relief, they went a little bit more deeply with it and the conclusion was something with his hip,” Maddon said. “I guess an impingement. So it’s something I don’t understand, how it goes from [hamstring] to hip, but it did and now we have to treat it.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@During July, Angels two-way star Shohei Ohtani was the American League player of the month.

Closer Raisel Iglesias was the AL reliever of the month.

And Alex Cobb, Patrick Sandoval and Ohtani all ranked in the top 10 of AL starters (minimum 20 innings pitched) in ERA.

They were the kind of individual performances that could have lifted the club back into the thick of the playoff race, a timely combination of star power and standout pitching that had been missing earlier in the season.

Advertisement

But, the Angels couldn’t capitalize. Their bats went cold. Injuries to key players up and down the roster — most notably Mike Trout and Anthony Rendon — finally caught up with them. And instead of making a dent in their deficit in the standings, they went just 13-11 and remained on the fringes of contention.

The Angels still might not have acted like all-out sellers at the trade deadline, and players and coaches in the clubhouse might continue to maintain a belief they can get back in the hunt.

But, at 52-54 and 7 ½ games out of a wild-card spot following a Monday loss to the Texas Rangers, their best chance at a late-season turnaround has likely already passed.

And over the first two days of August, the club quickly began to reset its sights on figuring out the long-term future.

After top pitching prospect Reid Detmers made his MLB debut Sunday, the Angels’ sudden youth movement continued Monday. Pitcher Chris Rodriguez was recalled to make his first major-league start. Outfielder Jo Adell was also called up for the first time this season.

Angels Angels’ Reid Detmers showed major stuff quickly in the minors Reid Detmers was the Angels’ top draft choice in 2020. After losing a season to the pandemic, his composure, command and routine have him in the majors.

“We’re at that point organizationally right now, it’s the right time to give opportunities to young players like this,” manager Joe Maddon said before Monday’s game, before Adell’s recall had even been officially announced.

Maddon quickly reiterated that the moves weren’t a sign the Angels are conceding the season, insisting that “we believe these young guys are ready to play here and be part of a winning environment.”

Advertisement

But their recent roster moves — which has also included bigger roles in the last month for outfielder Brandon Marsh, pitchers José Suarez and Jaime Barria, and others — are also creating something of an audition period, giving the team an extended look at promising players on the cusp of the majors.

“It’s very important for us going into the offseason,” Maddon said, “to know exactly what we have and what we need to do to move forward for next year.”

The Angels should have financial flexibility this winter, with roughly $70 million of salary — including almost $30 million from the expiration of Albert Pujols’ contract — set to come off the books, according to Spotrac.

There are glaring areas to spend money: a frontline starting pitcher, a deeper and more dependable bullpen, another bat or two to give the roster added depth.

Advertisement

But free agency might not fill every hole, especially not when the Angels project to have multiple vacancies in the rotation and potential openings at shortstop and in the outfield.

The search for young pitching has been going on for a while now. Patrick Sandoval has increasingly looked like a long-term option, impressing since joining the rotation in May. Suarez and Barria have shown flashes of potential in smaller sample sizes. And other minor-league call-ups such as José Quijada, Andrew Wantz and Austin Warren have been given opportunities in the bullpen.

“Is huge a big enough word?” Maddon said rhetorically when asked about the value of homegrown pitching. “It’s so difficult to go out and obtain quality pitching that you can have for several years. When you’re able to grow it yourself, it matters exponentially.”

Advertisement

The Angels hope Detmers and Rodriguez can offer viable options as well.

Both pitchers surpassed expectations this year — Detmers, the team’s 2020 first-round pick, by ascending to the majors in his first full professional year; and Rodriguez, a former fourth-round pick who had previously battled injuries, by making the opening day bullpen before being stretched out in the minor leagues as a starter and returning to the Angels on Monday night.

If all goes well, an Angels organization that was once looking thin on pitching depth could enter next spring with as many as six starters age 25 or younger competing for rotation spots — plus a deeper overall pool of pitching talent in the farm system after the club drafted, signed or traded for 27 new prospects last month.

“Between the guys you’re seeing up here now and the group that has just been drafted, it’s really exciting,” Maddon said. “That’s the way to do it.”

Advertisement

The same dynamic is unfolding with Adell and Marsh, the club’s top two position player prospects who are now together in the big leagues for the first time.

Though Marsh’s numbers haven’t been great through his first 15 MLB games — he’s batting .167 with 18 strikeouts, two doubles and no home runs — Maddon continued to tout his talent.

“He hasn’t had a lot of hits, but I like his game a lot,” Maddon said of Marsh, who has been the everyday center fielder with Trout still battling a calf strain. “I like the way he moves a lot. Just give him time. It’s going to get real hot.”

Adell struggled in his debut season last year, but made improvements in all facets of his game in triple-A Salt Lake this summer, batting .289 with 23 home runs and 69 RBI before getting called up Monday.

Advertisement

Maddon said Adell will alternate in both corner outfield spots along with Justin Upton and Adam Eaton.

“Talking to [general manager] Perry Minasian, the [front office] guys felt it was the time, so we did it,” Maddon said. “Based on our lot in life right now, it was just the right thing to do. You don’t want to waste the opportunity to give opportunities to guys like this. That is no kind of concession. If we could get him as hot here as he had been [in Salt Lake], it could be a big boon to us.”

There are some risks to the Angels’ strategy. Calling up players too soon can disrupt their development, especially if they fail at the big league level. Several top prospects around baseball have also struggled this year, a signal to some around the sport that the gap between triple-A and the majors has perhaps grown wider than usual.

Advertisement

Still, the benefits of filling out the roster and cultivating young talent to bolster a veteran core are too great for the Angels to ignore.

They have Ohtani under team control for at least two more years. They have at least several more seasons of Trout in his prime. And they’ll seemingly have the opportunity to add a few more big pieces this winter.

But to truly maximize their championship window, they’ll need more options, more depth and more homegrown talent too. And over the final two months of this season, they want to find out how much they already have in store.

“To go through these next two months and not fully evaluate what you have, it gives you no vision for the offseason and next year,” Maddon said. “So it’s imperative that you do.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Lakers announced Friday afternoon that they signed coach Frank Vogel to a contract extension.

The three-year deal Vogel originally signed was set to expire after the 2021-22 season. Terms of the new deal were not disclosed.



For the record: The headline for an earlier version of this report said Frank Vogel’s contract extension was for three years. His original contract was for three years.

Vogel led the Lakers to the NBA championship in 2020, his first year on the job.

The Lakers finished the 2020-21 pandemic-shortened NBA season with a 52-19 record under Vogel.

Advertisement

Vogel has a 94-49 regular-season record in two seasons with the Lakers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dwight Howard sat in front of a camera wearing a black T-shirt with “Wealthy” printed on it while doing a videoconference after having officially signed his contact Friday to return to the Lakers for the third time, a radiant smile and an exuberant demeanor on full display.

He was upbeat and excited during an almost 20-minute conversation with reporters. He was thoughtful, happy and excited as he greeted most of the reporters by name.

His first stint with the Lakers lasted the 2012-13 season, his role as the sidekick to Kobe Bryant unfulfilling, sending Howard away to join the Houston Rockets the next season.

Howard’s second go-around was 2019-20, a season in which he won an NBA championship playing alongside LeBron James and Anthony Davis. Yet as fulfilling as that was, Howard departed to Philadelphia for the next season, where he averaged 7.0 points and 8.4 rebounds in 17.3 minutes per game.

Advertisement

Howard is back for a third run with the Lakers, signing a one-year deal for the veteran minimum.

“I just think that we supposed to be together. Just something about the Lakers and myself. It’s like we were just supposed to be together,” the 35-year-old center said. “I had some of my greatest times, some of my greatest moments here in a Lakers jersey playing in L.A. And I played with arguably the greatest player in the NBA with Kobe. Now playing with LeBron and AD and Russ [Westbrook] and Carmelo [Anthony], it’s like a dream.

“So I’m super excited, I love the city, I think that it fits me well and I’m just looking forward to being whatever I need to be for this team to win. We’ve had experience of winning together before, myself and with AD and Bron. … So, I’m just looking forward to … just this whole year.”

The Lakers also announced Friday, the first day free agents could finalize deals, the signings of forward Trevor Ariza as well as guards Talen Horton-Tucker,Malik Monk, Kendrick Nunn and Wayne Ellington.

When the Lakers re-signed the 20-year-old Horton-Tucker to a three-year deal for $32 million, the average age of the veteran-laden team went from 32.4 to 31.4 years.

Obviously having his youth and talent was a priority for the Lakers.

As for Horton-Tucker, who averaged 9.0 points, 2.8 assists and 2.6 rebounds last season, he had eyes only on staying with the Lakers.

Advertisement

“I was pretty focused on trying to get back here after the first day,” he said. “Just wanted to make it an emphasis to get back. So, I was happy we were able to get it done after the first day.”

Ariza played for the Lakers on their 2009 championship team, becoming a little brother to Bryant.

After playing last season in Miami, Ariza, who starred at Westchester High and UCLA, loved the idea of playing for the Lakers again because his daughter, Taylor, and sons, Tristan and Tajh, live in Los Angeles and “were ready for me to be home.”

Advertisement

Ariza also got a phone call to help him make his decision.

“Who recruited me?” he said, laughing. “It’s funny because Russ got traded, and 20 minutes after he got traded, he was on my phone. So, I don’t know if he was telling me he was happy to be home, or he wanted to go to dinner, or whatever, what he wanted to do. I just know he called my phone like, ‘Yo, what are you doing? Where are you at? I need to talk to you. I need to see you.’ And you know, from then on, we kept in constant communication. And it just so happened that I’m here. But I think the biggest recruiter, if you want me to be honest, was my children.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Justise Winslow, a former NBA draft lottery pick whose career has been diminished by injuries, has agreed to join the Clippers on a two-year contract, according to a person not authorized to speak publicly on the matter.

Winslow began his career in Miami, which selected him 10th overall in 2015 out of Duke and where he overlapped with top Clippers assistant Dan Craig.

After earning All-Rookie honors, the 6-foot-6, 222-pound Winslow’s most prolific season was his fourth: a career-high 12.6 points and 4.3 assists, plus 5.4 rebounds while making 37% of nearly four three-pointers per game.

He only played 11 games during the 2019-20 season because of back injuries and a concussion, and was traded to Memphis in February 2020. He couldn’t realize his vast potential with the Grizzlies either after he injured his hip in a practice during the lead-up to the league’s restart near Orlando, Fla.

Advertisement

He underwent hip replacement surgery and didn’t play in an NBA game again until February of last season, when he would appear in 26 games with the Grizzlies.

Winslow, 25, is anticipated to provide the Clippers more depth at wing once he officially joins. Teams were required to wait until Friday at 12:01 p.m. PDT before officially signing their free agents.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@NBA free agency was 4 days old when Kawhi Leonard decided Friday to re-sign with the Clippers, but his decision, confirmed by a person with knowledge of the superstar forward’s communication with the team, was two years in the making.

Since Leonard signed as a free agent in 2019, the clock began counting down toward his next opportunity to leave. The two guaranteed seasons the team had with the two-time NBA Finals most valuable player were viewed as both the start of a budding partnership while also a high-stakes audition to impress and ensure it would continue.

While the Clippers entered free agency long considered the favorite to retain their leading scorer because of the lengths taken to acquire and accommodate him, along with the proximity to his family in Southern California, their confidence in keeping Leonard didn’t waver after he became an unrestricted free agent Sunday. They believed he was in step with their two-fold offseason plan: Retain the veteran core that fueled so much of last season’s run to the franchise’s first conference finals appearance while surrounding them with younger talent to fill the roster’s gaps of speed and athleticism.

Earning Leonard’s commitment addressed the first need.

Advertisement

The terms of Leonard’s contract were still being discussed Friday afternoon, two people familiar with the negotiations said. He is eligible to sign for up to four years and $176 million now. A two-year contract with an option for the second season would afford Leonard both leverage again next offseason and the possibility of maximizing his money by adding a five-year extension worth around $230 million.

His decision came hours after point guard Reggie Jackson, a breakout star of the playoffs after making nearly 41% of his three-pointers, agreed to a two-year, $22-million deal, and that followed center Serge Ibaka’s decision to exercise his option for next season and forward Nicolas Batum’s agreement to return on a two-year deal, with a player option for 2022-23.

Clippers Reggie Jackson returning to Clippers on two-year deal The Clippers and guard Reggie Jackson, who had a standout postseason this spring, have agreed to a two-year deal worth $22 million.

Signing Justise Winslow, the 25-year-old former lottery pick, is a bet on achieving the second priority.

His two-year deal will utilize the team’s taxpayer mid-level exception, a person familiar with the terms said, and doesn’t include an option for the second season. The 10th overall pick in the 2015 draft, the 6-foot-6, 222-pound Winslow was evaluated as a fit in part because his age is along the same timeline as the Clippers’ younger contributors, including Ivica Zubac, Luke Kennard and Terance Mann, and his versatility to guard multiple positions was seen as another option to play the kind of aggressive, switch-everything defense that spurred postseason comebacks against Dallas and Utah.

Utilizing Winslow on the court will require him to be healthy and a factor offensively, too. Injuries, which included surgery in 2020 to replace a hip, limited him to just 37 games combined over the last two seasons, a span in which he made only 41% of his shots inside the arc and 19% of his three-pointers. The Clippers, however, believe his passing and end-to-end speed can create easier opportunities for an oft-plodding team that ranked 26th in fast-break points last season.

Leonard’s recovery after undergoing surgery July 13 to repair what the team called a partially torn anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee will “require a great deal of time,” team president Lawrence Frank said last week, perhaps undercuts their immediate title aspirations. Orthopedic surgeons say most ACL injuries typically carry a recovery time of nine months to one year. The Clippers hope that the example of Brooklyn’s Kevin Durant last season is proof that a 30-year-old superstar coming off a major injury can rebound to his previous form after recovery.

Leonard had averaged 30.4 points, 7.7 rebounds and 4.4 assists while shooting 57% from the field during the last postseason, including 39% on three-pointers, before injuring his knee in the fourth game of the second-round playoff series against Utah. He missed the Clippers’ final eight playoff games.

Advertisement

His recovery time also creates openings for others to earn more playing time, and while Winslow is expected to reap most of those extra repetitions as a big wing like Leonard, the additions of first-round pick and off-guard Keon Johnson, point guard Jason Preston and wing Brandon Boston represent more chances to develop another player like Mann — a young, raw talent who, with polish and time, could become a member of a future playoff rotation.

Clippers Jason Preston, other young Clippers ready for Summer League A few years ago Jason Preston was a longshot to make the NBA. Soon he’ll be with Clippers teammates showing their potential in summer league games.

For many reasons, next season’s most important progress could happen behind the scenes — a medical staff tasked with helping Leonard recover and a player development staff charged with sanding the rough edges of their young players’ games.

Paul George, Leonard’s fellow All-Star, celebrated with an Instagram post upon the midday news that Leonard and Jackson, one of his closest friends, had agreed to return.

Advertisement

The few teams with enough cap space to court Leonard and add the maximum-contract deal he would command — even while recovering from a knee injury that could cost him most of next season — operated as though he wasn’t realistically going anywhere, and spent their money quickly in recent days.

Leonard was always the team’s top priority. Their other roster decisions so far this summer have also highlighted the areas that the team felt it must improve in order to maximize that potential once he is again healthy.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Howdy, I’m your host, Houston Mitchell. Let’s get right to the news.

Sam Farmer on the NFL: It required more than two silver trophies for Tom Flores to get a gold jacket.

Newsletter Go beyond the scoreboard Get the latest on L.A.'s teams in the daily Sports Report newsletter. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

It took a (pirate) shipload of patience too.

Advertisement

Just wait, baby.

Flores, the soft-spoken Raiders coach who was at the helm for two of the club’s three Super Bowl victories, was inducted Sunday into the Pro Football Hall of Fame, a fitting capstone for a trailblazing career that began more than 60 years ago. He was a quarterback and one of 20 men to play all 10 years in the American Football League.

Tom Flores and Mark Davis unveil the bust during the induction ceremony at the Pro Football Hall of Fame. (Associated Press)

During his induction speech Sunday, someone in the crowd cheered at his mention of his Central California hometown of Sanger, just east of Fresno.

“Oh, people from Sanger here?” he said, sounding genuinely surprised. “Long way to come. You ever try to get here. Not an easy place to get to.”

Then, to laughs from the crowd, the 84-year-old coach quipped: “I’ve been trying a long time to get here.”

Although he was wheeled onto the stage in a chair, Flores stood at the lectern on his own strength. He was presented on video by Carol Davis, widow of longtime Raiders owner Al Davis. Their son, Raiders principal owner Mark Davis, presented the coach in person.

The son of Mexican immigrants, Flores was the NFL’s first Hispanic coach, first to win a Super Bowl, then — with the Seattle Seahawks — first to be a general manager and team president.

Advertisement

All met with … a shrug.

“It wasn’t a big thing when I first started,” said Flores, who was the first person to win Super Bowls as a player, assistant coach and head coach, a feat later matched by Hall of Famer Mike Ditka. “I never thought about it. I never thought I was hired because of my ethnic background. I was hired because of what I could do on the field as a player and as a coach. I still feel that way.”

————

Pro Football Hall of Fame class has something for everybody

Advertisement

Enjoying this newsletter? Consider subscribing to the Los Angeles Times Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Become a subscriber.

DODGERS-ANGELS

Jack Harris on the Dodgers-Angels game: It was a matchup between the Angels’ future and their past, the rookie pitcher they recently called up against the veteran slugger they unceremoniously released earlier this season.

Albert Pujols wasn’t in the Dodgers’ starting lineup against Angels left-hander Reid Detmers on Sunday. But after Justin Turner exited early with left groin discomfort, Pujols came to the plate and made his former club pay.

Pujols hit a two-run home run in the second inning of the weekend’s Freeway Series rubber match, putting a rubber stamp on the Dodgers’ 8-2 win with a 418-foot blast halfway up the left-field pavilion.

Advertisement

The Dodgers (67-45) had already scored three runs before that. Starting pitcher Walker Buehler was well on his way to a suffocating six-inning, one-run start against a shorthanded Angels lineup.

And Pujols, who was facing the Angels over the weekend for the first time since they cut him in early May, insisted going deep against his former club didn’t have any extra meaning.

“I didn’t put too much thought about it,” Pujols said. “It can look sweet since it’s against your former team, but I don’t look at it like that. I look at it like every time I’m out there, no matter who we’re facing, trying to help our ballclub win.”

GALAXY

Midfielder Kevin Cabral gave the Galaxy a first-half lead when he rolled in a right-footed shot but Vancouver matched the goal in the second half to earn a 1-1 draw on Sunday night in Carson.

Advertisement

Ranko Veselinovic, a 22-year-old defender, scored his first MLS goal in the 50th minute to salvage the tie for the Whitecaps.

Cabral gave L.A. (10-6-2) a 1-0 lead in the 32nd minute but it wasn’t enough to for the Galaxy to extend a three-game home winning streak.

LAFC

LAFC had no answers for the San Jose Earthquake’s Nathan and Javier López, who scored one goal apiece during a 2-1 home win Sunday night.

Coach Bob Bradley’s team is now winless during its past five matches.

Advertisement

“There’s no doubt we’re frustrated as a group,” Bradley said. “Too many results that we do not find a way to come out on the top.”

Nathan opened the scoring in the 11th minute and López doubled the advantage for the Earthquakes in the 28th.

An own goal in the 39th minute trimmed LAFC’s deficit to 2-1.

While Bradley said his side corrected some issues as the game continued, LAFC was not strong enough in transition to score the equalizer.

Advertisement

BOBBY BOWDEN

Bobby Bowden was an avuncular yarn-spinner who fused “fast-break” football and Southern charm to transform Florida State into a national college football powerhouse.

By the end of his career, he had more wins, 377, than any major college football coach.

Considered one of the greatest coaches and great characters in the game, Bowden died early Sunday morning at his northwest Florida home surrounded by his family after battling pancreatic cancer, his son Terry Bowden told reporters. He was 91 and had struggled with health issues since falling ill with COVID-19 in late 2020. In July 2021, Bowden told the Tallahassee Democrat he had been diagnosed with a terminal medical condition.

“I’m at peace,” he said.

Advertisement

1936 — Jesse Owens becomes the first American to win four Olympic gold medals as the United States sets a world record in the 4x100 relay at the Berlin Games. The record time of 39.8 seconds lasts for 20 years.

1950 — Lusty Song, driven by Delvin Miller, wins the Hambletonian Stakes in straight heats over Star’s Pride. Lusty Song wins by a length in the first race and by a neck in the second.

1981 — Larry Nelson beats Fuzzy Zoeller by three strokes to take the PGA Championship.

1984 — Britain’s Daley Thompson wins his second Olympic decathlon with a record 8,797 points and Valerie Brisco-Hooks sets her second Olympic record with a 21.81 time in the 200-meter run.

Advertisement

1987 — Larry Nelson sinks a 6-foot putt in the first hole of a playoff to beat Lanny Wadkins in the PGA Championship.

1992 — The Summer Olympics ends with the Unified Team holding a 112-108 lead in medals over the United States, the closest race since America won 90-86 in 1964 at Tokyo.

1995 — John Godina becomes the first American to win the shot put event at the World Championships with a toss of 70 feet, 5¼ inches.

2007 — Alexis Thompson becomes the youngest quarterfinalist in the 107-year history of the U.S. Women’s Amateur, beating fellow 12-year-old Pearl Jin 5 and 4 in the second round and Lizette Salas 5 and 4 in the third.

Advertisement

2007 — David Beckham makes his long-awaited Major League Soccer debut, entering in the 72nd minute of the Los Angeles Galaxy’s 1-0 loss to D.C. United.

2008 — Mariel Zagunis leads a U.S. sweep of the women’s saber fencing for the first American medals of the Beijing Games. Zagunis, the 2004 gold Olympic champion, beats Sada Jacobson 15-8 for the gold medal. Becca Ward takes the bronze.

2009 — Jennifer Song becomes the second woman to win two U.S. Golf Assn. championships in the same year, beating Jennifer Johnson 3 and 1 in the U.S. Women’s Amateur final at Old Warson. The 19-year-old Song, coming off her freshman year at Southern California, won the U.S. Women’s Amateur Public Links in June. Pearl Sinn is the only other woman to win two USGA titles in a year, taking the 1988 Amateur and Public Links.

2010 — No American player appears in the top 10 for the first time since the men’s tennis computer rankings began in 1973. Andy Roddick drops from No. 9 to No. 11 in the latest ATP rankings.

Advertisement

2012 — Usain Bolt wins the 200 meters in 19.32 seconds, making him the only man with two Olympic titles in that event. He adds it to the 100 gold he won Aug. 5, duplicating the 100-200 double he produced at the Beijing Games four years ago. This time, Bolt leads a Jamaican sweep, with his training partner and pal Yohan Blake getting the silver in 19.44, and Warren Weir taking the bronze in 19.84. The American men take the top two spots in the men’s decathlon (Ashton Eaton and Trey Hardee) and triple jump (Christian Taylor and Will Claye), raising the U.S. track and field total with three days to go to 24 medals.

2012 — The U.S. women’s soccer team wins the Olympic gold medal, avenging one of its most painful defeats with a 2-1 victory over Japan. Carli Lloyd scores in the eighth and 54th minutes for the Americans, who lost to the Japanese in penalty kicks at last year’s World Cup final.

2012 — Maggie Steffens scored five times and the U.S. women’s water polo team beat Spain 8-5 to take the Olympic tournament for the first time. U.S. middleweight Claressa Shields caps her swift rise to the top of women’s Olympic boxing with a 19-12 victory over Russia’s Nadezda Torlopova. The 17-year-old Shields dances and slugs her way past her 33-year-old opponent.

2014 — Nick Rimando breaks the MLS record with his 113th shutout in Real Salt Lake’s 3-0 victory over D.C. United. Rimando broke a tie with Kevin Hartman for the record.

Advertisement

2016 — Michael Phelps adds to his Olympic record medal haul twice. He avenges his London 2012 loss to South African rival Chad le Clos with a 200-meter butterfly victory and his 20th career gold. Then, he anchors the 4x200 freestyle relay team for his 21st gold.

And finally

Tom Flores’ Hall of Fame induction speech. Watch it here.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Accepting that his right leg had been amputated just below the knee after a car hit him and a friend while they rode the friend’s dirt bike was difficult enough for Trenten Merrill to process as he lay in his hospital bed. An active kid who surfed and played soccer, Merrill wasn’t prepared to also lose his sense of self.

“Growing up being an athlete and having that as my identity, it was something that I felt was immediately taken away from me,” said Merrill, who was then a freshman at JSerra High but later transferred to Capistrano Valley High.

“I didn’t know what future I had as an amputee. I was asking questions to anybody that was in the room, the doctors and everyone, about what I could and couldn’t do, and they weren’t sure.”

Advertisement

His life began to take new shape when he was invited to a running clinic staged by the Challenged Athletes Foundation and Ossur, an Iceland-based company that develops and manufactures orthopedic braces and prosthetics. While there, Merrill learned about the Paralympics through conversations with several Paralympians. He also met Brazilian runner Joaquim Cruz, who had turned to coaching Paralympic track and field athletes after a distinguished Olympic career highlighted by a gold-medal triumph in the 800-meter run at the 1984 Los Angeles Games and silver in the 800 in 1988.

Those encounters planted a seed in Merrill’s mind. The seed blossomed into a goal when Cruz asked him to try some Paralympic track and field events at the U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Training Center in Chula Vista, about an hour south of where he grew up in San Juan Capistrano. There had to be something that would suit his ability and deep passion.

“I always wanted to be a professional athlete and I thought, when I lost my foot at 14, my dreams were gone,” Merrill said. “When I got invited down to the Olympic Center by Coach Cruz I realized that my dreams hadn’t died, that they were still alive. It was just a different arena. And so that lit the fire I had, wondering and questioning and trying to figure out where my life direction would go. Right when I set foot on the Olympic Training Center I knew that this was where I was meant to be.”

“It has been motivating me to persevere through this long season and is giving me feelings of renewed energy and fire.” Trenten Merrill

Merrill initially focused on the 100-meter dash but also tried the 200, 400, 800, discus, shotput and javelin throw while at Saddleback College. He also spent two years at Azusa Pacific. After sampling so many disciplines he decided that the long jump fit him best.

“What really attracted me was you get three tries to make a final and then you get three more tries to win,” said the 31-year-old. “I really liked the multiple bouts and efforts. A lot of times when I raced I always had a feeling of, ‘I want to do it again. I know how I can do it a little bit better.’”

It didn’t take him long to become the American record holder for the T64 category with a leap of 25 feet, 5½ inches. He finished fourth at the 2016 Paralympic Games in Rio and is hoping for better at the Tokyo Paralympics, which are scheduled to take place Aug. 24-Sept. 5. The U.S. will send a 240-person team, including six guides for visually impaired athletes.

Advertisement

Merrill plans to arrive in Japan on Tuesday. He will bring his specially designed prosthetic jumping leg and a fresh infusion of inspiration from having closely followed the Tokyo Olympics.

“It has been motivating me to persevere through this long season and is giving me feelings of renewed energy and fire,” he said. “Watching the Olympics has given me an opportunity to visualize myself competing in the stadium and provided a sense of purpose to go compete for my country, friends and family. I’m very much excited to compete and give it my all.”

Living at the Chula Vista training center has helped Merrill minimize his expenses, and he has supported himself through personal investing and working as a model and a real estate manager. He’s also a spokesman for Ossur, which has been proactive in designing sport-specific prostheses for athletes.

“One of the cool parts of being an amputee in this game for such a long time is I’ve tried Ossur’s legs as they’ve changed and developed over the years,” Merrill said. “In the past, we used to try and modify the sprint blades to optimize long jump takeoffs. … It’s been really cool to be able to use these prosthetics and compete with them, and I’m excited that we get to showcase them in Tokyo.”

Advertisement

As in the Olympics, the Paralympians will compete before largely empty stands and without friends or family with them. “I’m definitely bummed about that because that does make a huge difference, having people cheer for you,” Merrill said. “I remember feeling in Rio and even in some of the international meets, like in London, when you have so many people in a stadium, when they all start roaring and cheering you can feel it in your body. But it’s one of those things that either way, it’s out of my control. I’ve got to focus on competing. I’m a man on a mission and it doesn’t matter who’s in the crowd. I want to perform.”

He does have another and equally important mission: to spread awareness of the Paralympics so others who are born with different abilities or whose lives are changed by injury or illness don’t feel as lost as he once did.

“To know that there is an arena that you can go compete in, I felt that would have really helped me,” Merrill said, “and I hope that it can help a lot of younger and older amputees, or just disabled persons.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Draymond Green is a world-class defender and part-time distributor, an occasional philosopher and full-time instigator.

The versatile forward played another role Saturday: Historian.

“Been a lot of great players to don this jersey,” Green said. “He’s No. 1.”

Green was talking about Kevin Durant, who spared the U.S. its most humiliating defeat in any sport at these Olympics on Saturday by scoring 29 points in an 87-82 victory over France in the gold medal game.

Advertisement

Did Green’s appraisal of Durant sound hyperbolic?

It wasn’t.

Durant is the best to ever do this, better than Bill Russell or Michael Jordan or LeBron James.

He’s the greatest Olympic men’s basketball player of all time.

He’s won three gold medals, matching Carmelo Anthony for the most ever. With 420 points in 22 games, he’s the U.S.’s all-time leading scorer at the Olympics.

There’s also his performance at these Games.

Since the U.S. started using NBA players at the Olympics, never has an American team been as dependent on one player as Gregg Popovich’s team was on Durant.

Advertisement

Jordan had Charles Barkley.

Kobe Bryant had James.

Kevin Durant celebrates while draped in the U.S. flag after Saturday’s gold-medal win. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

Durant had a version of Damian Lillard who made only 38% of his shots.

Advertisement

So, when Durant was limited to 20 minutes in the tournament opener by foul trouble and scored only 10 points, the U.S. lost to France.

A players-only meeting was called after the game.

“We were kind of at the bottom,” Durant said. “We worked our way up from there. Everybody just committed to doing what’s best for the group, no matter what.”

In the case of Durant, that meant taking over offensively.

Advertisement

Which he did. He scored 23 points in the final group-stage game, a win over the Czech Republic. He dropped 29 in the quarterfinals against Spain and 23 in the semifinals against Australia.

“It’s hard not to watch him,” Lillard said. “When you’re on the floor with him, it’s hard not to. Pop is like, ‘When KD is iso’ing, don’t stand around, cut, move.’ But when you see some of the stuff that he’s doing out there, it’s hard not to, like, literally watch it, you know?”

That was again the case in the rematch against France in the gold-medal game. The U.S. was behind early after making only two of its 11 shots.

Durant started demanding the ball.

Advertisement

Kevin Durant celebrates a three-pointer against France in the gold-medal game. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

He had a dozen points by the end of the first quarter and 21 by halftime, at which point the Americans were ahead, 44-39.

The difficulty of stopping Durant was illustrated on a play about midway through the third quarter. Bam Adebayo set a screen on Nicolas Batum, freeing Durant to dribble to his right. France center Rudy Gobert came out to challenge his shot but was too late.

“At 7 feet tall, what he’s doing?” Green said. “I mean, he’s two inches shorter than Rudy Gobert, doing what he’s doing. That’s a special, special man.”

Advertisement

Durant’s three-pointer extended the U.S. lead to 11, at 56-45. The Americans led by as many as 14.

France came back late in the fourth quarter, but the U.S. advantage never disappeared entirely, with Durant sinking a couple of free throws in the final eight seconds to seal the victory.

Walking with Green to the postgame news conference, Durant went live on his Instagram account.

Advertisement

“They had some power rankings out,” Durant said. “They had us fourth, behind Slovenia.”

“Like this isn’t our game,” Green interjected.

“Come on, man,” Durant continued. “Talking about [how] they’re catching up to us. Like, are you serious?

Advertisement

“This skill is unmatched.”

His performance was like those in his two previous gold-medal games, as he scored 30 points against Serbia in the finals of the 2016 Rio Games and also against Spain in the championship game of the 2012 London Games.

“He’s been special,” Green said. “When a guy comes out and he’s been playing great and doing something, [or] maybe even [soils] the bed, we always say, ‘You are exactly who we thought you were.’ Kevin Durant is exactly who we thought he was, one of the greatest players to ever play this game.”

Or, in the Olympics, not one of the greatest, but the greatest.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Allyson Felix dropped onto her back and looked up at the sky above Olympic Stadium, her breath depleted but her hope of winning a medal still filling her heart.

When she saw the scoreboard and realized she had finished third in the women’s 400-meter race Friday night, she thought not of having made history by winning her 10th Olympic medal and becoming the all-time leader in medals among female track and field athletes, or of tying Carl Lewis for the most Olympic track and field medals won by an American.

The Los Angeles native, who turned her recovery from an emergency caesarean section into a crusade for better medical treatment for Black women during pregnancy and equitable treatment for all female athletes, thought instead of having made a journey that has been like no other and produced a unique reward.

“It’s really hard for me, when I don’t win, to still have joy,” she said. “Tonight, I have joy.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Allyson Felix smiles and holds up an American flag after winning the bronze medal in the 400-meter race at the Tokyo Olympics. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

Felix, 35, defied age, doubts, and the obstacles thrown before her by the coronavirus pandemic to finish third in the last individual race of a singular career that spans five Olympics. When the track at UCLA closed, she trained for the one-year-delayed Tokyo Games by sprinting through the streets outside her Santa Clarita home. She and husband, former sprinter Kenneth Ferguson, packed up their 2-year-old daughter Camryn and went to Arizona for a while so Felix could train. She also returned to her old high school, L.A. Baptist, now called Heritage Christian School in North Hills, and ran on the track that had been named for her.

“It’s really hard for me, when I don’t win, to still have joy. Tonight, I have joy.” Allyson Felix said of winning bronze in the 400 meters, the 10th Olympic medal of her career.

She heard others downplay her chances of reaching Tokyo, much less reaching the final here, but she ignored the noise. On Friday, as always, she listened only to the voice inside her own head because it has always guided her so well.

“Just fight, fight,” she said of what she was thinking down the stretch. “I know that coming home, I was in Lane 9. Nobody thought I was going to be here. Nobody thought I was going to be in the final, probably besides Bobby [Kersee, her coach] and my family. I’m a fighter. The last couple years it’s what I’ve done. I knew I just needed a chance.”

Advertisement

Shaunae Miller-Uibo of the Bahamas, who had outleaned Felix at the finish line to win the 400 at the 2016 Rio Games, dominated on Friday and won in 48.36 seconds. Marileidy Paulino of the Dominican Republic set a national record with a runner-up finish in 49.20 seconds. Felix ran a season-best time of 49.46 seconds to add a bronze medal to her collection of six gold medals and three silvers. She can add another medal on Saturday, when she expects to be part of the U.S. women’s 1,600-meter relay squad.

“It was amazing to just see her come out and put it on the line in such a great race,” said Gabrielle Thomas, who ran the anchor leg on the U.S. women’s silver medal-winning 400-meter relay team on Friday. “I think her legacy is showing you can do anything. Just her grace and poise and commitment to excellence is such an inspiration to everyone.”

Allyson Felix races in a women’s 400-meter qualifying heat at the Tokyo Olympics Tuesday. (Martin Meissner / Associated Press)

Felix’s commitment was tested often but never wavered.

A wide-eyed teenager who won a silver medal in the 200 at the 2004 Athens Games, she became smoother and more confident with each Olympics. The 2012 London Games were her personal playground: she won gold in the 200 — her only individual Olympic gold medal — and in the two relays.

She grew from a spindly-legged kid into a woman, a preacher’s daughter who saw her talent on the track as a gift and developed the voice and assurance to repay those blessings to the world. Through the Women’s Sports Foundation and Athleta, the clothing company she signed with after Nike said it would cut her pay by 70% because her pregnancy had cut her competition schedule, she directed a $200,000 grant to pay for female professional athletes’ pay for childcare and other support services. She has spoken before Congress about the need to erase the racial disparities in maternal mortality rates and has worked with the March of Dimes.

“It’s definitely been a journey for me to get to the point where I guess I had the courage to do so,” she said of her advocacy. “I think that just comes with experience in life and I feel grateful to have this platform. Happy I was able to get to this place because there is so much that needs to be done.”

Allyson Felix crouches in the starting blocks as she prepares to start the women’s 400-meters semifinal race at the Tokyo Olympics Wednesday. (Matthias Schrader / Associated Press)

She doesn’t rank her 10 medals in order of which was most important to her, she said, but the bronze medal she won on Friday will hold special significance.

Advertisement

“This one, it’s just so different,” she said. “Like honestly, it’s my first bronze medal. Oh man, it’s hard to decide. Because I feel like all the other ones, I was really just so focused on the performance, and this one, it’s so much bigger than that. That’s all I can kind of explain it as, is that I was out there running but I felt like I was a representation for so much more than just trying to get down the track.

“It was just much bigger than running. It was much more than just whatever the clock showed. It was the fight to get back, it was proving to myself that I could get back. It was getting over all that adversity to get here. It just seems like the last couple years things have just come at me. I feel like I’ve evolved as an athlete and as a person and I’ve grown and this was just very special, to have it all come here.”

After the race, Felix was able to Facetime with Camryn, who will be 3 in November. “She kind of gets it now,” Felix said, smiling. “When I’m running, she’s always like, ‘Mama’s at work. Mama’s running.’ She’s kind of into it. She likes to cheer.”

Felix’s work on the track is nearly over. Her work in the larger world has just begun and she surely will be a champion at that too.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vanessa Bryant has settled a lawsuit filed against her by her mother, Sofia Urbieta Laine.

Laine filed a notice of unconditional settlement Wednesday in Orange County Superior Court, indicating that a request for dismissal would be filed within 45 days. Terms of the settlement were not released.

Laine accused Bryant of fraud in a lawsuit filed Dec. 15, alleging she had worked for years without pay as a “personal assistant and nanny” to her daughter’s family and that Bryant’s husband, Lakers legend Kobe Bryant, had promised to support Laine financially before he died in a helicopter crash Jan. 26, 2020.

“Unfortunately, Kobe Bryant’s promise did not see the light of day as he is now deceased and Vanessa Bryant took each and every step she could to void and cancel all of Kobe’s promises,” the lawsuit alleged.

Advertisement

Vanessa Bryant responded two days later, accusing her mother of attempting to “extort a financial windfall” following Kobe Bryant’s death. She has control of an estate that financial experts valued at as much as $600 million after he died.

“My husband never promised my mother anything, and he would be so disappointed in her behavior and lack of empathy,” Vanessa Bryant said in her statement.

Laine responded the following day with a statement of her own.

“All I wanted is what I worked for. Vanessa, despite everything that I have been promised and done for her and the family, has attempted to sever all ties and renege on all obligations and agreements,” she stated.

In June, Vanessa Bryant was part of a group that settled wrongful death lawsuits against the company that operated the helicopter involved in the crash that killed her husband and their daughter Gianna, as well as John Altobelli, his wife Keri and their daughter Alyssa; mother and daughter Sarah and Payton Chester; Christina Mauser; and pilot Ara Zobayan,
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@First in a series of stories profiling top high school players in the Southland by position.

To understand how influential and impactful senior receiver Tetairoa McMillan of Anaheim Servite has become, let’s have quarterback Noah Fifita set the stage from a game in 2019 against San Juan Capistrano JSerra.

It was second and goal from the two-yard line. McMillan lined up on the left side. Fifita was in shotgun formation. As the ball was snapped, McMillan was one on one against his defender. He was running a fade.

“When the ball came out of my hand, I thought I missed it,” Fifita said.

Advertisement

The ball was thrown toward McMillan’s right shoulder. He turned and made a one-handed catch for a touchdown.

“Part of me was in shock,” Fifita said. “Part of me was, ‘I’m used to it.’”

Said McMillan: “I felt I wasn’t in reach for a two-handed catch. I practice it all the time. It wasn’t really that astonishing to me, but everyone else in the crowd was excited about it.”

In his rookie season of varsity football, the 6-foot-4, 190-pound McMillan was so versatile that those around him became convinced he could do almost anything.

“It’s definitely a ‘wow’ moment,” coach Troy Thomas said. “It’s become routine for him. It’s part of his repertoire.”

Those wow moments happened again and again this past spring. In a game against Santa Ana Mater Dei, McMillan was such a marked man that he drew six pass-interference penalties, many against USC recruit Domani Jackson in a one-on-one duel that was one for the ages. McMillan ended up with six catches for 103 yards and one touchdown.

The man. The myth. The legend. WR Tetairoa McMillan of Servite. Bosco DBs better know what flavor gum he’s chewing. pic.twitter.com/aJDBPZQ0Ua — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) March 27, 2021

“He’s almost unguardable,” said private quarterback coach Steve Clarkson.

McMillan’s athleticism is well known. He plays football, basketball and volleyball. Thomas thinks he could play almost any position in football. He had a school-record 36 kills in a volleyball match against Huntington Beach.

“We haven’t found anything he can’t do,” Thomas said. “He definitely can pass. We had some trick plays and ran some Wildcat. He’s made more to play safety, but we moved him to cornerback to match up with big receivers. He can do it all, and I wouldn’t be surprised if he could punt.”

I’m sorry but this sophomore is the best I’ve seen this season and it’s not close. Servite’s Tetairoa McMillan. pic.twitter.com/Mwd1QGsQGP — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) October 18, 2019

The genuine excitement surrounding McMillan is because of his intelligence, physicality and work ethic. No one knows how good he might be as he continues to gain experience and strength.

“It’s a work in progress,” he said. “They always say practice makes perfect. I’m not at my peak. I have a lot more work to do. Every day you have to get better than the person you were yesterday.”

Advertisement

McMillan switched from quarterback to receiver in eighth grade when he joined Fifita on a youth football team that won a national championship.

“In the long run, I made a good decision playing receiver,” he said.

Said Thomas: “He has tremendous hand-eye coordination. He catches anything that touches his hand. Being tall and long armed helps him. He definitely has deceptive speed. He’s a strong kid. He naturally has real good strength and enjoys the physicalness of football, which is rare. Some good receivers are really into catching. As a punt returner, he’d catch it with people around him and try to run over people.”

Fifita thinks there’s another strength for McMillan.

Advertisement

“The most underrated thing about him is how smart he is,” he said. “He’s one of the smartest, and not just athletic but academics.”

McMillan, who has Hawaii family roots, said as much. While he loves football, his focus in the classroom won’t be forgotten.

“We all live beyond football,” he said. “It’s not going to be there my whole life. Maybe not half my life. I feel education will help in the long run.”

Meanwhile, he’ll keep practicing one-handed catches and perhaps deliver a couple more during games.

Advertisement

“Me making the one-hand catch, getting the crowd rowdy is going to do nothing but bring me energy,” he said.

Added Fifita: “When it comes to sports, that kid is special.”

Tuesday: A look at the top quarterbacks, including Long Beach Poly senior Shea Kuykendall.

RECEIVERS TO WATCH

Advertisement

Player, School, Ht., Wt., Yr. Comment

Eric Denham, Corona Centennial, 6-0, 195, Jr. Ready for breakthrough season.

Kevin Green, Bishop Alemany, 5-11, 165, Sr. USC commit is big-play weapon.

Chedon James, St. John Bosco, 5-9, 170, Sr. Averaged 19.2 yards per catch in spring.

Advertisement

Jacoby Kelly, Loyola, 6-3, 195, Sr. Has size, strength, quickness.

Makai Lemon, Los Alamitos, 5-11, 175, Jr. Had nine TD catches this spring.

Mikey Matthews, Mission Viejo, 5-10, 180, Jr. Acrobatic catches are his forte.

Tetairoa McMillan, Servite, 6-4, 185, Sr. Makes one-handed catches look easy.

Advertisement

Braden Pegan, San Juan Hills, 6-3, 195, Jr. UCLA commit uses athleticism, physicality.

Jason Thompson, Harvard-Westlake, 6-0, 175, Sr. 47-foot triple jumper with speed.

CJ Williams, Mater Dei, 6-2, 195, Sr. Hands are his strength.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If you just arrived from another planet and showed up Friday for the Trinity League football media day in Long Beach and just listened to the presentation of the six coaches, you’d think, “These people know what they are doing.”

Yes, talent matters, but Jason Negro (St. John Bosco), Bruce Rollinson (Mater Dei), Troy Thomas (Servite), Scott McKnight (JSerra), Anthony Rouzier (Santa Margarita) and Rod Sherman (Orange Lutheran) are exceptional at what they do. Their schools are paying them big bucks to produce big results while developing young men on and off the field, and they all seem to have embraced the pressure, expectations and competition to be the best.

Servite coach Troy Thomas offers ringing endorsement of WR Mikey Welsh. pic.twitter.com/Z20ws8LE4t — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 6, 2021

Rollinson, in his 33rd season, is having so much fun that he insisted he has no intention of retiring as long as he stays healthy. Negro is 121-21 in his 12th year at St. John Bosco with the toughest schedule in America. Thomas was so emotional talking about his son, Houston, receiver Mikey Welsh and an injured player, Maxx Silao, that you wonder why a “Hard Knocks” for high school football doesn’t feature the Friars.

Rouzier, in his first season, talked about playing chess with his All-American defensive tackle from Germany, Hero Kanu, and how his goal is to be invited to each players’ wedding. McKnight, in his first season, has a plan to keep JSerra competitive by hiring top assistants. Sherman is back for another stint, having helped coach Orange Lutheran to a Pac-5 title — then the Southern Section’s top division — in 2006 as an assistant. Except he knows things have changed dramatically, with Mater Dei and St. John Bosco in domination mode. He’s ready for the challenge, insisting playing or practicing “OK” is not good enough.

What is it like for WR CJ Williams and CB Domani Jackson to face off daily in practice at Mater Dei? "I'm practically going against an NFL guy who takes it as seriously as an NFL guy in high school," Williams said. pic.twitter.com/ZLg1I8qTfo — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 6, 2021

It sets the stage for another football season in which Trinity League teams and players should be prominent. Speaking of players. Imagine what is it like when receiver CJ Williams and cornerback Domani Jackson do battle daily in practices at Mater Dei?

Williams said it’s like going against an NFL player. Jackson said of Williams, “He’s a baller.”

Advertisement

As for news, Mater Dei has lost two games on its schedule because of COVID-19 restrictions. Corona Centennial had to cancel its Aug. 20 game against the Monarch after two players tested positive, making it unlikely the Huskies would have completed the required CIF number of practices to play. The Monarchs also were scheduled to play a team from Hawaii at St. John Bosco next month, but all sports competition in Hawaii has been halted until Sept. 24 because athletes need to be vaccinated.

6-5. 330 pounds. Best lineman in SoCal. Earnest Greene. St. John Bosco. pic.twitter.com/FiJxgONPYe — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 6, 2021

The biggest player on Friday was St. John Bosco offensive tackle Earnest Greene III, who checked in at 6 feet 5 and 330 pounds. He might be the Braves’ best lineman since Wyatt Davis, who went on to star at Ohio State and is in his first year as an NFL player.

Another great individual matchup will be when Greene is blocking against Santa Margarita’s Kanu, who is 6-4, 290 pounds. Kanu has played in just six football games in his life as a 16-year-old former soccer player from Germany, but one of them came against Greene during the spring.

“When he learns the game, it might be a scary sight,” Greene said.

Sherman has hired some impressive assistant coaches, including former Orange Lutheran quarterback Aaron Corp and former Mater Dei offensive lineman Chris Ward. McKnight has hired former UC Davis quarterback Randy Wright to be his offensive coordinator at JSerra.

Players were asked which school has the best cheering section, and it seems that Servite’s Asylum has everyone’s attention.

“They’re ridiculous doing bench presses,” Mater Dei cornerback Josh Hunter said.

“They’re hilarious,” Mater Dei linebacker David Bailey said.

St. John Bosco opens league play against Mater Dei on Oct. 1 and ends league play against Servite on Oct. 29.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Corona Centennial’s football program has become the latest to have its practices interrupted during a surge in COVID-19 cases in Southern California, and the school announced Thursday that it will not be able to play its season-opening game against Santa Ana Mater Dei on Aug. 20 because of practice limitations.

In a statement released by the Corona-Norco Unified School District, Centennial canceled the game out of an abundance of caution after two players tested positive for COVID-19. The team would not be able to fulfill the number of days for CIF practice requirements to play the game.

Corona Centennial pulls out of game against Mater Dei. https://t.co/VNd3aZxcY1 — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 6, 2021

Other schools are facing practice disruptions. Damien, Bishop Amat and L.A. Wilson all had to pause practices because of COVID-19 protocols. Lakewood had to move practices off campus following summer school issues. Shadow Hills canceled participation in a scrimmage.

With classes beginning this month and COVID-19 testing expected to increase, there could be more interruptions similar to last spring when there was a six-week season and there were many game postponements. There’s an 11-week regular season scheduled for this fall, followed by four weeks of playoffs and one week of bowl games.

Mater Dei will have to find another opponent for its zero week game or go into its Aug. 27 road trip to Texas to play Duncanville without playing a game.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kickers are frequently given the flake label because they say and do sometimes strange things. So what should we make of senior Zachary May from Sherman Oaks Notre Dame. He says he wants to be a journalist. How crazy is that?

OK, it’s a pretty good job if you work at it and May is just starting out. He missed two days of football practice to complete a two-week on line journalism course through Boston University. He has worked for Notre Dame’s internal television network.

He said he likes investigating and talking, so journalism will hopefully be in his future. The first thing he did was go on line and order reporter notebooks. Not just two or three but 50. That was a mistake, but he sees a positive.

“I guess I’ll have them through college,” he said.

Advertisement

He learned about interviewing, how to write leads and maintaining composure under deadline pressure.

He kept trying to interview a source for a story.

“I really need this interview,” he told the source’s assistant.

His subject kept putting off the interview. His deadline was approaching. Should he move on? Should he wait? Then, near the final day, he got 15 minutes to conduct the interview.

“I love pressure,” he said.

Spoken just like a kicker who wants the chance to make a game-winning field goal.

During the spring season, he had seven touchbacks out of 14 kickoffs. He had three field goals, with a long of 37 yards.

Advertisement

He was back at practice on Wednesday. He’ll be ready to offer good quotes if any sportswriters want to talk to him after a game. And he’ll certainly have an extra reporter’s notebook available if anyone needs a spare.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As if preparing his team for the 2021 football season isn’t enough of a challenge, Santa Ana Mater Dei coach Bruce Rollinson is also trying to do research on what his top players can and cannot do in regards to the new era of name, image and likeness deals for college athletes.

“I have had some players that have been approached by organizations that want to represent them when they move on to college,” Rollinson said earlier this week. “I’m assuming when they sign in December or early February, now they can foster opportunities for those kids, because their eligibility is done. But who knows? I don’t think anybody is going to get paid while they are in high school. Absolutely not. But I know they are being approached by representatives or businesses.”

Rollinson said he is seeking guidance from colleges on recommendations for his players that are in the upper echelon of prospects.

Advertisement

“It’s very hard to get information because the NCAA is basically nonexistent,” he said. “I am appealing to various universities to send me what their compliance has. I have not seen anything from the CIF, and I have confidence [Southern Section commissioner] Rob Wigod will get something out, but right now I’m talking to the parents and saying whatever you do, don’t sign anything.”

Mater Dei’s No. 1 player is cornerback Domani Jackson, a USC commit who is the fastest teenager in California after tying the state record in the 100 meters in June when he ran 10.25 seconds. He’s expected to be one of those elite players with NIL opportunities in college.

According to CIF Rule 212, players would be ineligible if they received an athletic award totaling more than $250. That doesn’t prevent an athlete from receiving money for being an actor, running a business or making music in high school.

As for college eligibility, Ron Nocetti, the executive director of the CIF, said it’s up to athletes to make sure anything they do doesn’t compromise their amateur status within their particular sport at the next level. In response to a Supreme Court ruling, as of July 1, NCAA rule changes and new state laws have given college athletes new opportunities to make money off their name, image and likeness.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Justin Herbert hit Keenan Allen for a touchdown, Derwin James had a highlight defensive play and the field goal kicking was unsteady.

Yeah, the Chargers played a football game Sunday and a lot of familiar things happened.

This one, though, was different, the team making its debut in front of spectators at SoFi Stadium.

The open practice was staged in the middle of training camp and billed as a festival for fans, complete with a concert featuring The Offspring.

Advertisement

Advertisement

“You get in here for pregame and there are people waiting for you,” coach Brandon Staley said. “That made it feel a lot different for our guys. I think that level of focus, that level of energy, it kind of got our guys going right away.

“I’m so glad that we did this because this is so much different than training camp. It was so different than last year, and I think that adjustment is real.”

The Chargers played all eight of their home games a year ago in an empty stadium because of the COVID-19 pandemic. They are scheduled to kick off the preseason at 7 p.m. Saturday against the Rams at SoFi.

Players enter SoFi Stadium during the Chargers Fan Fest and open practice on Sunday. (Jason Armond/Los Angeles Times)

The schedule Sunday simulated a game environment, the players going through an extended warmup and returning to the locker room before re-emerging with the traditional celebration of noise and smoke.

The team’s in-game entertainment crew even fired the cannon to mark touchdowns.

Advertisement

“It was just good to be back out there,” Herbert said. “Thank you to all the fans that showed up and supported us.”

Herbert connected with Jalen Guyton for a long gain early and later passed one yard to Allen for a touchdown during an 11-on-11 session.

The Herbert-to-Allen connection is expected to again be a staple for the Chargers. Last year Allen finished with 100 catches for 992 yards and eight touchdowns.

“He’s the best at what he does,” Herbert said. “He’s able to win just so many routes. His explosiveness, his IQ, his ability to kind of defeat the leverage of the defender … I think he knows it [all] as well as anyone.”

Fans enjoy a day at SoFi Stadium for the Chargers Fan Fest and open practice. (Jason Armond/Los Angeles Times)

The lowlight for the Chargers’ young quarterback came during the next 11-on-11 period when he was intercepted by James, the team’s dynamic safety and a 2018 All-Pro.

There was confusion before the snap, with the play clock running out. The offense was permitted to continue anyway, and Herbert’s attempt down the right sideline for Austin Ekeler ended up in James’ hands.

Herbert afterward said he believed he would have been sacked.

“I think I was considered down,” he said with a slight smile. “So I don’t know if it counted or not.”

Said Staley: “I think that I trust Justin Herbert. So what he says, I’m probably going to go with right now. The good news today is no matter what that result was, it was good for the Chargers.”

Advertisement

The afternoon ended up having just about everything a normal NFL Sunday features, including boos. Those were directed at Michael Badgley, the incumbent kicker who is competing to keep his job.

Chargers quarterback Justin Herbert throws a pass at SoFi Stadium during the Fan Fest and open practice on Sunday. (Jason Armond/Los Angeles Times)

Badgley missed three times — from 41, 49 and 51 yards — out of six attempts during his field-goal period, each errant try drawing more scorn from the fans. He struggled from distance last season, missing nine of 19 kicks from 40 yards and beyond.

Tristan Vizcaino missed twice — from 38 and 49 yards — during his first six attempts and also heard a few boos.

Badgley finished the day seven for 10 and Vizcaino 8 for 10. Both made 55-yarders. The Chargers also have a third kicker in camp, Alex Kessman, who made three of seven attempts.

“What we wanted to do today was make sure all three of them got an opportunity to compete and make sure that they had a consistent holder [and] consistent snapper, so we could evaluate them accordingly,” Staley said. “And so, you know, we’re at the beginning of that [competition].”

Etc.

Center Corey Linsley (foot) and linebacker Kenneth Murray Jr. (ankle) left practice early and did not return. Staley indicated both likely could have come back and played had this been a regular game.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@LAFC had no answers for the San Jose Earthquake’s Nathan and Javier López, who scored one goal apiece during a 2-1 home win Sunday night.

Coach Bob Bradley’s team is now winless during its past five matches.

“There’s no doubt we’re frustrated as a group,” Bradley said. “Too many results that we do not find a way to come out on the top.”

Advertisement

Cristian Espinoza had two assists for San Jose (5-7-6).

Nathan opened the scoring in the 11th minute and López doubled the advantage for the Earthquakes in the 28th.

An own goal in the 39th minute trimmed LAFC’s deficit to 2-1.

While Bradley said his side corrected some issues as the game continued, LAFC was not strong enough in transition to score the equalizer.

“On our terms, we have to be better. Early in the game that is where they had the advantages and as we pushed back into the game, I saw improvement, but we did not do enough to get to the second goal,” Bradley said.

The Earthquakes have won their past three matches against LAFC after losing each of the first five meetings.

LAFC’s Latif Blessing said the club is fighting to get back on track.

“Everyone is sad right now,” he said. “It’s been tough for the moment. We need to tell ourselves that it is not over. We have more games to go. We need to set up ourselves to play good and win game by game. That is the mentality we need to have and keep going.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Midfielder Kevin Cabral gave the Galaxy a first-half lead when he rolled in a right-footed shot but Vancouver matched the goal in the second half to earn a 1-1 draw on Sunday night in Carson.

Ranko Veselinovic, a 22-year-old defender, scored his first MLS goal in the 50th minute to salvage the tie for the Whitecaps.

Cabral gave L.A. (10-6-2) a 1-0 lead in the 32nd minute but it wasn’t enough to for the Galaxy to extend a three-game home winning streak.

Vancouver has won just one of its last 13 matches dating to mid-May.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Abraham Ancer of Mexico won the FedEx St. Jude Invitational on Sunday for his first PGA Tour title, beating Masters champion Hideki Matsuyama and Sam Burns with a 6-foot birdie putt on the second playoff hole of a playoff.

Ancer won the World Golf Championships event at TPC Southland in Memphis, Tenn., after Burns’ 5 1/2-foot putt — on the same line as Ancer — lipped out.

Ancer, the 30-year-old former University of Oklahoma player who was born in McAllen, Texas, closed with a 2-under 68 to match Matsuyama and Burns at 16-under 264. Matsuyama shot a 63, and Burns had a 64.

Harris English, the 2013 champion at TPC Southwind, was a stroke back after a 73 after leading after each of the first three days.

Advertisement

On the first extra hole, Ancer, Burns and Matsuyama, coming off a bronze-medal playoff loss in the Tokyo Olympics, made decent runs at birdies. Matsuyama had the shortest attempt — from 20 feet — and it nearly went in the cup before lipping out.

Bryson DeChambeau, two strokes behind English after a third-round 63, had a 74 to tie for eighth at 12 under. He missed the Olympics after testing positive for COVID-19.

PGA TOUR

Erik van Rooyen won the Barracuda Championship in Truckee, Calif., for his first PGA Tour title, finishing with 50 points in the modified Stableford scoring system.

Van Rooyen, the 31-year-old former University of Minnesota player from South Africa, eagled the par-4 eighth and closed with a birdie on the par-4 18th for a five-point victory over Andrew Putnam at Tahoe Mountain Club’s Old Greenwood Course.

Players receive eight points for an albatross, five for eagle, two for birdie and zero for par. A point is subtracted for a bogey, and three points are taken away for a double bogey or worse.

Van Rooyen had a 16-point final round, making the eagle, six birdies and a bogey.

Van Rooyen jumped from 139th to 78th in the FedEx Cup standings, with the top 125 after the Wyndham Championship next week earning spots in the playoff opener at Liberty National. He earned a spot in the PGA Championship next year but not the Masters because the event is being played opposite a World Golf Championship — the FedEx St. Jude Invitational in Memphis, Tennessee.

Advertisement

Putnam won the 2018 event for his lone PGA Tour title.

U.S. WOMEN’S AMATEUR

Kentucky junior Jensen Castle won the U.S. Women’s Amateur, beating Arizona junior Hou Yu-chiang of Taiwan 2 and 1 in the 36-hole final at Westchester Country Club in Harrison, N.Y.

Castle, from West Columbia, S.C., won after opening with a 7-over 79 on Monday in the first round of stroke play and surviving a 12-for-2 playoff late Tuesday to get into the 64-player field for match play. She’s the third No. 63 seed to win a USGA title, following Clay Ogden in the 2005 U.S. Amateur Public Links and Steven Fox in the 2012 U.S. Amateur.

Advertisement

After Hou won the 30th and 31st with birdies to pull within one, Castle took the par-4 33rd with a par, lost the par-3 34th to Hou’s birdie and finished off the match with a birdie on the par-4 35th.

Ranked 248th in the world amateur ranking, Castle wrapped up an automatic spot on the U.S. Curtis Cup team this month in Wales. She also earned spots in the Women’s British Open at Carnoustie in two weeks, and the 2022 ANA Inspiration, U.S. Women’s Open, Evian Championship and Augusta National Women’s Amateur.

EUROPEAN TOUR

Scotland’s Grant Forrest held off England’s James Morrison in the Hero Open at St. Andrews, Scotland, for his first European Tour title.

Advertisement

Forrest birdied the last two holes at Fairmont St Andrews for a 6-under 66 and 24-under 264 total. Morrison was a stroke back after a 63.

The 28-year-old Forrest is the first home winner in Scotland on the European Tour since Paul Lawrie in the 2012 Johnnie Walker Championship at Gleneagles.

Spain’s Santiago Tarrio was third at 21 under after a 68.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It was a matchup between the Angels’ future and their past, the rookie pitcher they recently called up against the veteran slugger they unceremoniously released earlier this season.

Albert Pujols wasn’t in the Dodgers’ starting lineup against Angels left-hander Reid Detmers on Sunday. But after Justin Turner exited early with left groin discomfort, Pujols came to the plate and made his former club pay.

Pujols hit a two-run home run in the second inning of the weekend’s Freeway Series rubber match, putting a rubber stamp on the Dodgers’ 8-2 win with a 418-foot blast halfway up the left-field pavilion.

The Dodgers (67-45) had already scored three runs before that. Starting pitcher Walker Buehler was well on his way to a suffocating six-inning, one-run start against a shorthanded Angels lineup.

Advertisement

And Pujols, who was facing the Angels over the weekend for the first time since they cut him in early May, insisted going deep against his former club didn’t have any extra meaning.

“I didn’t put too much thought about it,” Pujols said. “It can look sweet since it’s against your former team, but I don’t look at it like that. I look at it like every time I’m out there, no matter who we’re facing, trying to help our ballclub win.”

Still, as his home run sailed through the afternoon sunshine, a crowd of 46,982 at Dodger Stadium came to life. Though the future Hall of Famer might not have shown any animosity toward the Angels over the weekend — “I still have a great relationship with 95% of those guys over there, it’s great to say hello,” Pujols said — his 676th career home run still resonated a little deeper with his new team.

“It’s an interesting situation when you’ve got a guy of that stature that’s playing against his old team,” Buehler said. “It’s just a little bit different. I’m sure that felt good for him.”

After close games on Friday and Saturday, the series finale revealed the gulf separating the two Southland clubs — especially with the Angels (56-56) playing without Mike Trout (right calf strain), Jared Walsh (right intercostal strain) and Shohei Ohtani (whose designated hitter’s spot was unavailable in the National League series) in their batting order.

Detmers, making his second career start, gave up five runs in five innings. He flashed better feel for his breaking pitches than he did in his debut on Aug. 1, but also struggled with fastball command and got little help from his infield defense.

Buehler also didn’t have his best fastball command, which contributed to four walks, but cruised nonetheless. The right-hander struck out eight, gave up only four hits and lowered his ERA to 2.13, best among qualified National League pitchers.

Advertisement

“Was lucky to get out of there with the one run,” Buehler said. “And obviously, the offense put me in a pretty good position.”

Indeed it did.

The Dodgers tallied two runs in the first inning on RBIs from Max Muncy and Justin Turner, the latter aided by a bad throw home from shortstop José Igleisas. They added insurance late with an RBI single from AJ Pollock in the sixth and a two-run homer by Cody Bellinger in the seventh, his second home run in as many games as he tries to emerge from a season-long slump.

Dodgers slugger Cody Bellinger, right, celebrates at the plate with Chris Taylor after hitting a two-run home run during the seventh inning Sunday. (Alex Gallardo / Associated Press)

Advertisement

“Probably the best part of the day outside of winning a ballgame is him taking 95 [mph on a pitch] at the top of the zone and back-spinning it for a homer,” Dodgers manager Dave Roberts said of Bellinger’s home run. “That’s the most exciting thing for me.”

But it was in the second inning that the Dodgers broke open the game.

With two outs, speedy Trea Turner, who was running on the pitch, scored from first on a soft ground ball that snuck under second baseman David Fletcher’s glove.

And in the next at-bat, Pujols hit his third career pinch-hit home run — delivering a gut punch to his old team while once again exemplifying the value he’s providing to his new one.

Advertisement

“I didn’t have much preparation, but when my name was called I made sure I was ready to go,” said Pujols, who drew an intentional walk later in the game.

“I’m excited. It’s been another opportunity with a great organization. And I love these guys. I said it early and I’ll keep saying it all year long: I feel like I’ve been part of this team since Day 1.”

The feeling is mutual.

Advertisement

“He’s been a huge part of our team since he got here,” Buehler said. “We’re certainly glad to have him.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It required more than two silver trophies for Tom Flores to get a gold jacket.

It took a (pirate) shipload of patience too.

Just wait, baby.

Flores, the soft-spoken Raiders coach who was at the helm for two of the club’s three Super Bowl victories, was inducted Sunday into the Pro Football Hall of Fame, a fitting capstone for a trailblazing career that began more than 60 years ago. He was a quarterback and one of 20 men to play all 10 years in the American Football League.

Advertisement

Advertisement

During his induction speech Sunday, someone in the crowd cheered at his mention of his Central California hometown of Sanger, just east of Fresno.

“Oh, people from Sanger here?” he said, sounding genuinely surprised. “Long way to come. You ever try to get here. Not an easy place to get to.”

Sports Pro Football Hall of Fame class has something for everybody Former Rams star wide receiver Isaac Bruce was among the players who entered the Hall of Fame on Saturday, a year late because of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Then, to laughs from the crowd, the 84-year-old coach quipped: “I’ve been trying a long time to get here.”

Although he was wheeled onto the stage in a chair, Flores stood at the lectern on his own strength. He was presented on video by Carol Davis, widow of longtime Raiders owner Al Davis. Their son, Raiders principal owner Mark Davis, presented the coach in person.

The son of Mexican immigrants, Flores was the NFL’s first Latino coach to win a Super Bowl, then — with the Seattle Seahawks — first to be a general manager and team president.

Advertisement

All met with … a shrug.

“It wasn’t a big thing when I first started,” said Flores, who was the first person to win Super Bowls as a player, assistant coach and head coach, a feat later matched by Hall of Famer Mike Ditka. “I never thought about it. I never thought I was hired because of my ethnic background. I was hired because of what I could do on the field as a player and as a coach. I still feel that way.”

Whereas fellow Class of 2021 inductees Peyton Manning, Calvin Johnson and Charles Woodson got in on the first ballot, Flores had a far more circuitous path, narrowly missing multiple times before finally getting in on his third go-round as a coaches candidate, which requires being out of the league for at least 25 years.

Some people have a direct path to greatness. The Flores route was as meandering as Marcus Allen’s back-and-forth Super Bowl run against Washington.

Coach Tom Flores celebrates with Raiders players after winning Super Bowl XVIII on Jan. 23, 1984. (Associated Press)

His pro career began as one of 11 quarterbacks at training camp in Santa Cruz for the inaugural season of the Oakland Raiders.

“We were just a bunch of guys who didn’t have a home stadium,” he said. “Most of the guys in training camp had no idea where Oakland was. I had to tell them. We were playing in San Francisco. That new league gave us all an opportunity to play football and continue.”

Flores was a junior high teacher, but he found the kids too crazy — imagine that, too crazy for a future coach of the Raiders.

He sold fireworks, got his real estate license, even worked as a sportswriter when tuberculosis sidelined him for the entire 1962 season. He was 25 at the time, with no insurance and year-old twins at home.

“I actually wrote an article once a week for the Oakland Tribune,” he said. “I went to the home games and wrote what I saw, and they published it. I couldn’t get any pay for it because I was in disability. The sports editor paid me off in store credit, so I was able to have a Christmas and buy toys for the kids.”

Advertisement

Sure, he didn’t have much. But that was no different from the way he grew up in Sanger, where his parents insisted Tom and his younger brother, Bob, speak English at home.

Tom Flores watches his Raiders play during a game in 1983. (Associated Press)

“I did as many things as I could in high school,” Flores said. “I played football, basketball, baseball. I was in the band, the orchestra and the choir. My voice was good enough. Played the trombone in the marching band. In a little town you could do all that because the competition is thin. You go to a big school, by the time you join the one thing there’s 200 kids ahead of you.”

Now, he’s in rarefied air.

“My mother cried when I told her I was going to play professionally instead of coming home to be a teacher as I had studied for in college,” he said with a slight catch in his voice. “But in the end, she was the proudest of all, because I followed my passion.”

Not surprisingly, Flores reserved part of his 10-minute speech to thank his family, and in particular his wife.

“Barbara and I dated for five years,” he said. “It took me five years to convince her that I was the guy. Now we’ve been married for 60 years. Barbara, I’m so grateful for you every day. You know me, good parts and bad parts. You put up with the bad parts, you’re my biggest fan and my best friend.”

Flores played a role in bringing Al Davis to the Raiders. When the franchise needed a new coach in 1963, owner Wayne Valley asked Flores what he knew about Davis, who at the time was an assistant coach with the San Diego Chargers.

“I remember hearing about Al when I was at College of the Pacific and he was at USC,” Flores said. “Some of the things I heard were not very good. When Wayne Valley asked me about him, I said, `What I’ve heard is he’s a different guy, a tough guy.’ I think Wayne liked that. That was the kind of guy he wanted, I guess.”

Davis would not only coach the Raiders, but would maneuver his way into becoming their controlling owner.

Advertisement

Flores, who was a backup quarterback for the Kansas City Chiefs in the Super Bowl, coached wide receivers for the Raiders from 1972-78, winning a Super Bowl as part of John Madden’s staff in 1976, and taking over as head coach three years later.

Coaching the Raiders first in Oakland then in Los Angeles, Flores led his teams to Super Bowl victories at the end of the 1980 and ’83 seasons. He is the only coach to win Lombardi Trophies for the same franchise representing two different cities.

“Today on this stage we’re all on one team,” he said, referring to the Hall of Famers surrounding him. “One team of gold jackets. This is a very emotional day for me. I’ve been blessed with a great life, doing work that I love, with people I love and adore.

“I was always happy in the world of football, and now because of this honor, I’ll be part of it forever.”

There was another big NFL development when the Hall of Fame festivities were happening. Firebaugh’s Josh Allen, who grew an hour’s drive west of Sanger, signed a deal with the Buffalo Bills for an average of $43 million per season.

Must be the Central Valley’s second-happiest quarterback.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Newsletter Go beyond the scoreboard

Get the latest on L.A.'s teams in the daily Sports Report newsletter.

Enter email address Sign Me Up

You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Newsletter Go beyond the scoreboard

Get the latest on L.A.'s teams in the daily Sports Report newsletter.

Enter email address Sign Me Up

You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A tropical storm swept into the city before dawn, gusts of wind bringing heavy clouds and drenching rain, as if the Tokyo Olympics didn’t have enough problems.

The COVID-19 pandemic had forced a year’s postponement and, with much of Japan still in a state of emergency, cancellation remained possible to the last moment. Even as the massive sporting event lurched ahead, spectators were banned, leaving athletes to compete in eerily quiet stadiums and arenas.

“Some were already speaking of a ghost Games,” International Olympic Committee President Thomas Bach said.

On Sunday, with inclement weather threatening to ruin the closing ceremony, the sky lifted and brightened by late afternoon. After 17 rocky days, these Summer Games had once again found a way to get by.

Advertisement

As 100-meter champion Lamont Marcell Jacobs of Italy said: “Finally we’ve managed to do it, so that’s a positive way to look at it.”

For their goodbye show, local organizers transformed Olympic Stadium into one of Tokyo’s well-known city parks, covering the field with swaths of real grass and pathways. Kids skateboarded, people did yoga, bicycle riders whizzed past.

If the scene attempted to evoke a sense of normalcy, it also reinforced the extraordinary and often contradictory nature of the Tokyo Games.

A hint of sadness marked the last three weeks, with no crowds buzzing outside stadiums, no fans gathering in central plazas, nothing to make it feel special. The Olympic cauldron, displayed on a popular esplanade, was surrounded by blue-shirted volunteers who — because of coronavirus restrictions on crowding — barked over loudspeakers, telling people not to stop, to keep walking.

Thomas Bach, president of the International Olympic Committee, waves the Olympic flag during the closing ceremony Sunday. (Robert Gauthier / Los Angeles Times)

The competition sometimes felt just as sterile, like sports in a laboratory. Reverse somersaults, double layouts and three-point shots were greeted with silence or, worse, the echoed clapping of a half-dozen teammates.

“I’m not going to lie,” said Lilly King, a U.S. swimmer who won silver and bronze. “It’s a little strange.”

Advertisement

Making all of this work required masks, daily saliva tests and, in some instances, quarantines. Winners had to pick up their own medal to put around their neck.

Yet athletes continually expressed both gratitude for the chance to compete and a willingness to adapt. “I never surrender to the circumstances,” Russian fencer Larisa Korobeynikova said. “I always believed that the Olympics would take place and that is what exactly happened and [it was] fantastic.”

U.S. women’s basketball players A’Ja Wilson, left, and Brittney Griner celebrate with their gold medals following their win over Japan at the Tokyo Olympics on Sunday. (Robert Gauthier / Los Angeles Times)

For the Americans, swimmer Caeleb Dressel excelled, as did gymnast Suni Lee and the men’s and women’s basketball teams.

Advertisement

“This one feels good because we went through a lot,” NBA star Kevin Durant said. “COVID, the kind of bubble we were in, no fans, no one expecting us to lose.”

Even Simone Biles, who missed most of the gymnastics competition with a case of the “twisties,” succeeded in raising awareness about mental health. And Tokyo provided one of the greatest races in track history when Norway’s Karsten Warholm dueled American Rai Benjamin in the 400-meter hurdles. Benjamin broke the world record but Warholm ran even faster, shattering the event’s 46-second barrier.

“The last 20 meters, I couldn’t even feel my legs,” Warholm said. “I just ran for my life.”

Karsten Warholm of Norway leads U.S. runner Rai Benjamin in the 400-meter hurdles at the Tokyo Olympics. Warholm won the gold medal with a record-shattering time. (Francisco Seco / Associated Press)

Advertisement

Sunday night, the stadium where they raced sparkled with fireworks and lighting that turned the field into a checkerboard of red, blue and yellow. A musical theater troupe dressed in formal kimono and hakama sang, followed by a brass band playing a ska version of “Sukiyaki.” Unlike the willy-nilly rush at the 1964 Tokyo Games, athletes entered calmly and somewhat distanced, at least until they clumped together on the lawn.

By then, the Americans had won the medals table, an unofficial scoreboard that makes some purists cringe. After a rough first week, they rallied to finish with 39 golds and a total of 113 medals, not as good as in Rio de Janeiro five years ago, but ahead of second-place China.

Third-place Japan fell short of its original goal of 30 golds but managed 58 medals in all. Success on the playing field may have helped soothe a conflicted populace.

Concerns over COVID-19 had prompted demonstrations amid the crowd that surrounded Olympic Stadium at the opening ceremony; on Sunday, barricades kept onlookers farther away.

Advertisement

Fans watch fireworks outside Olympic Stadium during the closing ceremony Sunday. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

But over the course of the Games, residents also gathered for a very different reason on hills and bridges near the sport climbing wall, BMX racing track and other venues — they wanted to get a look.

“I think sport right now, in the world we are living in, is not only important, but necessary,” tennis gold medalist Alexander Zverev of Germany said. “I think it’s necessary for people to have something to watch, something to cheer for.”

Each day, organizers released detailed statistics on COVID-19 cases among 42,000 athletes, coaches, journalists and workers inside the bubble. There were 26 cases on Sunday, bringing the total to 436.

Advertisement

The IOC boasted that, with more than 600,000 tests administered, the positivity rate remained below 0.08%. No major events had to be canceled and no big names were yanked from play because of positive results.

“I think it’s fair to say that the Olympic community here in Tokyo has been the best-tested community anywhere in the world during the last few weeks,” Bach said.

But, surrounding the bubble, the pandemic accelerated through a city of 14 million. New cases in Tokyo started at 1,359 on the day of the opening ceremony and exceeded 5,000 a day by the Games’ final week.

Advertisement

There was concern that people getting together to watch the Games, especially in bars and restaurants, might be to blame. A member of the Japanese government’s coronavirus panel pointed at several factors.

“The rapid surge in cases can be attributed to an increased movement of people due to a four-day holiday weekend, the Olympics and Paralympics, and summer vacations,” Toho University professor Kazuhiro Tateda told the NHK news service.

Though the closing ceremony was mostly light and breezy, officials had no choice but to address the subject. Seiko Hashimoto, president of the Tokyo 2020 organizing committee, told the assembled athletes they had “accepted what seemed unimaginable, understood what had to be done and, through hard work and perseverance, overcome unbelievable challenges.”

“Yes,” Bach said, “these were an unprecedented Olympic Games.”

Advertisement

Nothing in the event’s modern era can compare to what happened in Tokyo. At least, not until the Beijing Winter Olympics in February.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Olympics create moments and memories, some that last for a lifetime, others that fade with time. The Times sent a mix of veteran Olympic reporters, editors, photographers and newcomers to Tokyo for the Summer Games. Here are some of their impressions.

Nathan Fenno

Each humidity-drenched morning in Tokyo, I passed bored police officers stationed outside my hotel and a small park filled with screeching cicadas during the seven-minute walk to the transport hub at the Main Press Center.

This is as close as we came to experiencing life outside the Summer Olympics bubble during the first two weeks in Japan.

Advertisement

Among the slew of pandemic-related restrictions journalists faced at the Games was a soft quarantine for those 14 days. We were permitted to travel between our hotel, the Main Press Center and competition venues eerily devoid of spectators, all detailed in an activity plan submitted to organizers before we arrived. No restaurants. No public transportation. No shopping. No jogs or walks for exercise. Just the same path, day after day, each step near the hotel watched by police and security guards.

The exception was the 15 minutes we were allotted each day to visit a convenience store. That was key to the slog through long days, tight deadlines and an Olympics that often felt sterile and joyless. At the 7-Eleven across from our hotel, at least, you can try an astonishing variety of products — sandwiches filled with whipped cream and fruit, onigiri, beef croquets, takoyaki, pork curry, rice bowls, green tea pudding, cream puffs, coffee-flavored potato chips, canned whiskey highballs.

The trips to 7-Eleven were breaks because each day seemed like the one before. The walk to the transport hub, the quick bus to a bigger transport hub by Tokyo Bay for a 40-minute bus ride to the Tokyo Aquatics Centre, have your temperature taken (this is in addition to the daily health questionnaire, including temperature, we fill out on a phone app and a second contact-tracing app we’re required to keep active at all times), scan your face, go through security, cover that morning’s finals at a building where only coaches, swimmers, officials and media are allowed inside, slam out a story in time for the print newspaper deadline in Los Angeles.

Covering the Olympics is a coveted assignment, and an opportunity I’m deeply thankful to have, but these Games were … strange. It was tough to shake that feeling as the COVID-19 case counts in Tokyo broke record after record, the region remained under a state of emergency and polls showed the population opposed to hosting the sports extravaganza with some 42,000 foreign visitors in the midst of the crisis.

And without spectators, there was little buzz, little energy, little sense this was the biggest sporting event in the world.

Though every volunteer and staffer I encountered radiated kindness, this endeavor felt like inviting yourself over to someone’s home when they’ve made it clear they don’t want you visiting. There’s a tension that’s tough to shake.

Advertisement

Sure, there are moments when the strangeness vanished in the midst of a remarkable performance, like 17-year-old Lydia Jacoby’s gold medal-winning swim or Katie Ledecky cruising to victory in the first-ever women’s 1,500-meter freestyle at the Olympics. But those moments were fleeting. There wasn’t a roar of celebration or loved ones in the stands to cheer them or adventures in Tokyo after the competition ended. Everyone seemed to be trying to get through this as best they can.

After 14 days, we were allowed, to some extent, to venture where we pleased. That freedom was welcome. But the strangeness from these Games remained.

These were the third Olympic Games for Nathan Fenno.

Helene Elliott

Advertisement

Uganda’s Oscar Chelimo runs in the men’s 5,000 meters at the Tokyo Olympics. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

These Olympics were like no other. No fans, no families, and no relief from the oppressive humidity that made every journey feel like a cross-country ski race performed while a wet wool blanket was draped over your head.

The volunteers and staffers were kind and polite. I wish I could have seen their smiles, but the required masks gave everyone similarly blank expressions.

I missed the spine-tinging hush that customarily falls over a packed stadium when the men’s 100-meter dash final goes off; without fans, the hush was normal at these Games. International Olympic Committee President Thomas Bach insisted that based on his experiences at the Olympic village and competition sites, the atmosphere “has been more intense than ever before.” With that, he created a new Olympic sport: word spinning. He won the gold medal.

Advertisement

When I remember these Games, I will remember Los Angeles native Allyson Felix winning a bronze medal that carried the value of gold in the women’s 400-meter race. With that medal she became the most decorated female track and field athlete in Olympic history, with 10. I feel like I watched her grow up to become a determined, principled woman whose advocacy for improved maternal care — especially for Black women — could become a legacy greater than her formidable accomplishments on the track.

Telling athletes’ stories is exhilarating, but long hours and logistics that require a journey from Point A to Point B take detours through Points J, K, Q and Z sap the body and soul. I still don’t get the point of club throwing and ribbon swirling of rhythmic gymnastics, and I may never get rock climbing. But I saw glimpses of the vitality of the Olympic spirit and ideals even if the execution of these Games was muted by the lack of fans and families.

These were the 17th Olympic Games for Helene Elliott.

Advertisement

David Wharton

Standing outside Makuhari Messe Hall during a break in the fencing competition one afternoon, I was struck by the underlying sadness of these Games. My favorite Olympic moments have always involved crowds milling around some plaza, or the buzz you feel from fans walking into a venue before a big game or match. It makes you feel like you’re someplace special.

At the Olympic flame, always a public gathering place, volunteers with signs and bullhorns did their best to keep people moving past. There were no bursts of cheering at the venues, no long, appreciative rounds of applause for the host country. For months, media reports had focused on how the lack of fans might affect competitors — did reporters ever stop to think how it might affect them? Not that it makes a difference, but the adrenaline rush of the crowd’s roar is part of our job too.

Advertisement

I’ve been telling people that Tokyo has felt like the Olympics in a laboratory, sterile, lacking in surprises or spontaneity. I know the athletes really wanted the chance to compete and, under the circumstances, this was probably the only way it could have been done. There were some great performances, some world records and come-from-behind victories. Still, on a warm day outside the fencing arena, it struck me that these Games felt a bit empty.

These were the seventh Olympics for David Wharton.

Kevin Baxter

Tokyo was my fourth Olympics. I’ve also been fortunate enough to cover five World Cups. None of those comes close to matching these Games for the enormity of the challenge organizers faced in trying to pull off a major global event in the middle of a raging pandemic.

Advertisement

“Faster, Higher, Stronger” gave way to face masks, disinfectant and social distancing. Patience became more than a virtue, it became a way of life for three weeks.

We can debate whether that was a good idea, but the fact is the Games went forward and the Japanese deserve multiple gold medals for pulling this off. There was good and bad to that. The good was the Olympics couldn’t be stopped; athletes who are trained to overcome adversity overcame the greatest adversity most of them will ever face.

But there was bad, too, because these COVID Games, held in silent, empty stadiums, felt empty.

Advertisement

We’ve grown used to games being played before vacant seats but it felt strange at an Olympics. There were no cheers of “USA! “USA!” No hugs between surprise medalists and their equally surprised family members. I feel sorry for the athletes who had to share their special moments over Zoom or WhatsApp. For journalists, the Games felt very businesslike. With no traffic and no spectators to navigate, it was get it, get interviews and get out, then move on to the next sport.

The next World Cup will kick off in Qatar in 15 months. Let’s hope those games don’t resemble these Games.

These were the fourth Olympic Games for Kevin Baxter.

Dan Woike

Advertisement

As a reporter at my first ever Olympics, a couple of things have struck me — the top being just how helpful and patient the volunteers have been at the venues. They’re seriously the backbone of this thing and they made life a lot easier for me even if they couldn’t understand me through a mask 90% of the time.

I think the other big takeaway, honestly, is that we’re just tiny pieces of a global community, something I think I definitely lost sight of after being mostly stuck inside my home for huge chunks of time since March 2020.

I remember walking through the airport when I first arrived in Tokyo, coming here on a flight with nearly as many passengers as flight attendants. Walking through the airport toward customs, I saw athletes from all over the world pass by wearing track suits with their country’s name and their country’s colors. I know this event carries all kinds of baggage, but being in that terminal with people who dedicated their lives to competition, that’s what I’ll remember the most.

And all the ramen I ate.

Advertisement

These were the first Olympic Games for Dan Woike.

John Cherwa

By now, you’re probably tired of hearing how different these Olympics were, and I can’t dispute that premise. You never truly appreciate how important a crowd is to an event until you don’t have one. And, no doubt, the underdogs that are normally spurred on by a boisterous crowd didn’t perform as well in these Games.

My job as on-site editor is that of a cat herder, with very talented cats. In a regular Games, I am pinballing reporters and photographers from event to event to make sure we are where the story is happening. But coronavirus restrictions required us to make event registrations a day in advance without the ability to change. Losing that flexibility to audible was critical. But we didn’t miss much.

Advertisement

My daily calls with Chris Stone and Iliana Limón Romero, my bosses and the editors in charge stateside, contained a nightly comedy routine of questions such as, “Is that Thursday your time or my time?” Or, “What time will that end in Los Angeles?” We didn’t always figure it out.

I did learn that the best egg salad sandwiches in the world are bought in convenience stores in Japan. Luckily I can’t read Japanese so I have no idea how much sugar is being added to the product. And that Tokyo is hotter and more humid than my home near Orlando, Fla. But it was a welcome change to actually have hotel staff change your bed and clean your room every day, something U.S. hotels stopped under the guise of COVID-19 but we know it’s really about cost savings.

So, what is my overriding sentiment? Bring on Beijing. We’re ready.

Advertisement

These were the 10th Olympic Games for John Cherwa.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For the record: This article incorrectly states, and earlier version of the headline incorrectly said, that Bobby Bowden had the most wins among major college football coaches. Penn State coach Joe Paterno had 111 wins reinstated by the NCAA in 2015, making him the career major football wins leader.

Bobby Bowden was an avuncular yarn-spinner who fused “fast-break” football and Southern charm to transform Florida State into a national college football powerhouse.

By the end of his career, he had more wins, 377, than any major college football coach.

Considered one of the greatest coaches and great characters in the game, Bowden died early Sunday morning at his northwest Florida home surrounded by his family after battling pancreatic cancer, his son Terry Bowden told reporters. He was 91 and had struggled with health issues since falling ill with COVID-19 in late 2020. In July 2021, Bowden told the Tallahassee Democrat he had been diagnosed with a terminal medical condition.

“I’m at peace,” he said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

As with most things involving Bowden, there’s a story that goes with his rise to the top.

Bobby Bowden is carried on the shoulders of Florida State’s Willie Jones and Ron Simmons in Gainesville, Fla., on Dec. 3, 1977, after the Seminoles ran over Gators 37-9. (Associated Press)

He and his good friend Joe Paterno were once in a fast-track race to become the first major-division coach to reach 400 victories. The two stubborn icons battled it out into their 80s.

Paterno, Penn State’s longtime legend, won the race and finished with a Division 1-A record of 409 before his death in 2012.

Bowden ended with 389 wins, but 12 of those were vacated by the NCAA as part of academic fraud penalties levied on Florida State’s athletic department, leaving him with 377.

More than two years after his forced resignation in 2009, however, Bowden moved back to No. 1 as a result of the Jerry Sandusky sexual abuse scandal at Penn State.

Advertisement

Crippling NCAA sanctions handed down against Penn State included stripping Paterno of 111 wins, putting Bowden back on top.

“I wasn’t expecting it like this and didn’t want it to happen like this,” Bowden told the Gainesville Sun in 2012.

Bowden’s head-coaching arc spanned 44 years at three schools, and his accomplishments, primarily at Florida State, earned him a place in a pantheon alongside Paterno, Paul “Bear” Bryant, Knute Rockne and Pop Warner.

COLLEGE FOOTBALL ’91 : Football for Sale : At Florida State, Bowden Has a Product Some Believe Is the Best in the Country Florida State Coach Bobby Bowden sits in the vast leather chair behind the great wooden desk in his plush wood-paneled office and considers his 38-year career.

He was inducted into college football’s Hall of Fame in 2006. He insisted for years that Paterno should be remembered as the best, but a reassessment was required after the Sandusky story broke in November 2011.

Bowden thought the scandal involving an assistant Penn State coach who was convicted of molesting boys “put a taint” on Paterno’s legacy, and he reluctantly advocated for the removal of Paterno’s statue outside the Nittany Lions’ football stadium.

“I hate what happened at Penn State,” Bowden said, “but I hate more what happened to those young men.”

Bowden, like Paterno, was essentially fired at the end of a stellar tenure — albeit under extraordinarily different circumstances. Paterno couldn’t survive his connection to Sandusky, while Bowden’s ending was tied strictly to wins and losses.

Penn State coach Joe Paterno, left, and Florida State’s Bobby Bowden share a laugh on Dec. 6, 1990, in Fort Lauderdale at a news conference introducing the Blockbuster Bowl coaches. (Kathy Willens / Associated Press)

After resurrecting Florida State over three decades from an also-ran to a national power, Bowden was forced out at age 80 after a 6-6 regular season in 2009. T.K. Wetherell, the school’s president, gave Bowden the option of returning for one last year as a figurehead coach, something Bowden would not accept.

Advertisement

Bowden finished with an overall record of 377-129-4, winning 304 games in 34 seasons at Florida State. He coached in 32 bowl games, but he never made a Rose Bowl appearance.

His last game, a 33-21 victory over West Virginia in the 2010 Gator Bowl, secured Bowden’s 33rd straight winning season.

“I wanted one more [year] and couldn’t have it,” he said after his final game. “They wouldn’t let me have it. But I can’t complain about nothing, y’all.”

FSU officials later worked to repair their relationship with Bowden, who was named an ambassador for the program, spoke at booster events and publicly supported his successors — Jimbo Fisher, Willie Taggart and Mike Norvell — through wins and losses. He was cheered again at Doak Campbell Stadium as he planted the traditional spear into the turf pregame in October 2013 and visited practices at the invitation of coaches. Bowden also regularly spoke to regional football clubs and at high school coaching clinics, staying connected to the game he loved until the COVID-19 pandemic forced him to shut down his public activities.

Florida State had won a total of four games in three seasons before his arrival in 1976. Four seasons later, Bowden led an 11-0 team to the Orange Bowl before losing to Oklahoma.

Bowden’s Mark on Game Is Downright Laughable The day Bobby Bowden retires as Florida State coach will go down as one of the darkest days in the history of . . . sports journalism.

Bowden injected competitiveness, levity and foot speed into a step-slow program. His infectious personality and recruiting trail tenacity allowed him to attract some of the nation’s finest and fastest players to sunny Tallahassee.

He won two national titles (in 1993 and 1999), coached two Heisman Trophy-winning quarterbacks in Charlie Ward and Chris Weinke, and ushered in a fleet of talented players that included Deion Sanders, Warrick Dunn, Terrell Buckley, Marvin Jones, Corey Simon and Derrick Brooks.

Bowden was a Southern Baptist who didn’t drink or curse. He spoke in a colloquial cadence, punctuated with “dad-gummits,” that sometimes tempered the off-field controversies that periodically visited his program.

He was minister, motivator and historian, steeped in the study of World War II generals. Bowden related to modern players as he pined for days when criminal matters involving athletes were discreetly settled between, as he put it, “the coach and the chief of police.”

Advertisement

Bobby Bowden, left, congratulates Florida coach Steve Spurrier after the Gators won 52-20 in the Sugar Bowl at the Superdome in New Orleans on Jan. 2, 1997. (Dave Martin / Associated Press)

Criticized in 1999 for reinstating Peter Warrick after the star receiver was charged with receiving department store merchandise at a reduced cost, Bowden playfully wondered where a head coach might find that kind of discount.

Bowden had his limits.

“If I had a player commit murder, well now, I would just have to let him go,” he said before the 2000 Sugar Bowl.

Bowden’s game plan for putting Florida State on the football map included taking on the toughest competition. In 1981, the Seminoles played, in consecutive road games, at Nebraska, Ohio State, Notre Dame, Pittsburgh and Louisiana State — all national powers — and won three of five.

Bowden correctly calculated that once his teams started beating top programs, Florida State would quickly ascend in the polls.

In 1987, Florida State began an unprecedented string of success, compiling 14 straight 10-win seasons and 14 consecutive years with a final top-five Associated Press ranking.

Bowden’s teams won 11 straight bowl games in one stretch, and Florida State posted the best record in the 1990s — 109-13-1.

Former Florida State coach Bobby Bowden, holding hands with his wife Ann, gives a thumbs up before the Seminoles played Syracuse on Nov. 16, 2013, in Tallahassee, Fla. The FSU 1993 national championship team was honored before the game, including Forrest Conoly, back left, Richard Coes, between the Bowdens, and Clay Shiver, right. (Phil Sears / Associated Press)

He also presided as unofficial patriarch of college football’s first family. He was married 71 years to Ann, his childhood sweetheart. Two of Bobby’s four sons, Terry and Tommy, became head coaches at Auburn and Tulane, respectively, among other schools. He is also survived by two other sons, Steve and Jeff; daughters Robyn and Ginger; and numerous grandchildren.

Advertisement

Bowden finally achieved perfection in 1999, leading 12-0 Florida State to its second national title. The Seminoles became the first team to go “wire-to-wire” as the No. 1 team in the Associated Press poll, from the beginning of the season until the end.

Florida State’s biggest scare that year was a road game that pitted Bobby against son Tommy, then the coach at Clemson.

Ann Bowden nervously watched, wearing a stitched-together jersey of both schools, although if push came to shove she was rooting for her husband.

Florida State’s hard-fought 17-14 win that night earned Bowden his 300th career victory.

Robert Cleckler Bowden was born Nov. 8, 1929, in Birmingham, Ala., in the belly of football country. Sometimes he and his father, Bob, a bank teller, would climb on the roof of the family’s home to watch football practices at nearby Woodlawn High, where Bobby would later star.

A Florida State fan holds up a sign in support of former Seminoles coach Bobby Bowden during a game against North Carolina State on Oct. 26, 2013, in Tallahassee, Fla. (Phil Sears / Associated Press)

War and football were Bowden’s childhood companions.

At 13, he was stricken with rheumatic fever and spent his days monitoring radio accounts of World War II.

While bedridden for months, he became fascinated with the military giants — Erwin Rommel, George Patton, Douglas MacArthur — who plotted strategies and led soldiers in battle.

Bowden’s office bookcase at Florida State was filled with military biographies. He admired MacArthur’s cunning power and Patton’s fearlessness. Bowden kept figurines of Rommel and Patton in a cabinet behind his office desk.

Advertisement

In 2006, after Florida State finished 6-6 and was resigned to playing UCLA in a lower-tiered bowl in San Francisco, Bowden told The Times that even Napoleon had his Waterloo.

“He played in the Emerald Bowl, too,” Bowden quipped.

He recovered from his childhood disease to become a four-sport star in high school. A good enough quarterback to earn a scholarship offer at the University of Alabama, Bowden lasted only one semester in Tuscaloosa as lovesickness drove him back to Birmingham to marry Ann Estock. He was 19, she 16, when the couple eloped to Georgia in 1949.

Florida State’s Bobby Bowden, right, congratulates Florida coach Urban Meyer after the Gators defeated the Seminoles 37-10 on Nov., 28, 2009, in Gainesville, Fla. (Phil Sandlin / Associated Press)

Alabama didn’t allow married players on scholarship, so Bowden enrolled at Howard College (renamed Samford University in 1965) in Birmingham and earned honors at quarterback. He also earned a bachelor’s degree in education and, later, a master’s, also in education, from George Peabody College in Nashville.

He returned to Howard as head coach in 1959 and began making Tuscaloosa treks to cull wisdom from his idol, Alabama’s Bryant, who had become the Crimson Tide coach a year earlier.

Bowden left Howard in 1963 for an assistant’s position at Florida State and later served four years as West Virginia’s offensive coordinator before taking over as head coach in 1970.

Bowden had a 42-26 record in six years at West Virginia, but they weren’t all happy times. After his 1974 team finished 4-7, disgruntled fans staked “For Sale” signs in Bowden’s front lawn.

After a 9-3 rebound season and a Peach Bowl bid in 1975, Bowden accepted the challenge at Florida State. The school had gone 4-29 in the three seasons before Bowden’s arrival. He joked that the bumper stickers on West Virginia cars read “Beat Pitt,” the ones at Alabama read “Beat Auburn” and ones at Florida State read “Beat Anybody.”

Bowden went 5-6 his first year but never again suffered a losing season.

Advertisement

FSU coach Bobby Bowden encourages his team during the Jan. 1, 1994, Orange Bowl in Miami. (Hans Deryk / Associated Press)

He turned Florida State football around quickly and would post nine 10-win seasons before finally earning his first national championship in 1993.

Many saw Florida State as a stepping-stone for Bowden. It made sense that he might some day return to Alabama to coach where the legendary Bryant coached, and there were opportunities that didn’t pan out.

But Bryant continued as a guiding influence.

Bowden worshipped Bryant but had his own style. He ushered in the era of the head coach as CEO. His strengths were procuring talent and delegating responsibility.

Bowden might have garnered more national titles if not for nemesis Miami.

Bobby Bowden poses with the Paul “Bear” Bryant College Coach of the Year Award on Jan. 18, 2011. (David J. Phillip / Associated Press)

Four times Miami handed Bowden teams their only defeat of the season. And Bowden’s 1991 team was 10-0 when it suffered a 17-16 loss at home in Tallahassee after kicker Gerry Thomas’ 34-yard field goal attempt skirted right of the upright.

Florida State lost its next game to Florida and finished 11-2.

A year later, in what became known as Wide Right II, Florida State kicker Dan Mowrey missed another late field goal that could have tied Miami. And, in 2000, Bowden endured Wide Right III, when Mike Munyon missed a late field goal in a three-point loss.

Advertisement

Bowden, years before his death, crafted the epitaph for his tombstone.

“But he played Miami,” he said.

Dufresne is a former Times staff writer who died in 2020.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Entering his third season, Slovis stands at his own crossroads. He lost confidence in his arm as a sophomore and wasn’t nearly as sharp, even as he led USC to five straight wins and was named to the All-Pac-12 first team. Slovis’ trajectory is more of a question mark now than it was one year ago, when some thought he might emerge as the top quarterback in his class.

Advertisement

Advertisement

He still may. Slovis worked in the offseason with renowned throwing coach Tom House to tighten up his mechanics and improve his footwork. He assures his confidence has returned. “I feel like I’m in a really good place right now,” he said at Pac-12 media day last month.

He’ll need to stay there if USC hopes to find itself in place to win the Pac-12.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When the Coliseum reopens to USC fans this fall, they’ll be able to toast their long-awaited return with an adult beverage.

The university’s athletic department announced Thursday it will expand beer and wine sales to all fans this season for the first time since 2004, when USC followed up a national championship season with a ban on the sale of alcoholic beverages in an attempt to curtail bad behavior in the stands.

An end to that 17-year prohibition had been in the works since before the outset of the pandemic, as USC searched for ways to improve the game-day experience at the Coliseum. A season of empty stands — and losses in revenue — only increased that urgency.

USC Sports 10 USC football players to watch entering training camp Kedon Slovis, Courtland Ford and Tahj Washington are among the USC players who will be watched closely as the Trojans open preseason football workouts Friday.

Advertisement

Seven other Pac-12 schools were already set to sell beer and wine in their football stadiums this season, including UCLA, which announced its alcohol sale plans last week. USC has in recent years sold alcohol to donors in the Coliseum’s Scholarship Tower and throughout its club seating, while the Rams sold alcohol to all fans during the four seasons the team spent at the Coliseum.

USC will also sell beer and wine at the Galen Center when basketball season tips off in November.

“As we planned for the return of fans to the Coliseum in 2021, it was a priority to create an even greater game-day experience than before the pandemic,” USC athletic director Mike Bohn said. “We are excited about these enhancements, which ensure that attending a USC game at the Coliseum is a safe and enjoyable experience that matches our spectators’ expectations in the Los Angeles marketplace.”

Beer and wine sales won’t be the only change this fall at the Coliseum.

Tailgating will also be noticeably different. A state-wide ban on tailgating out of cars in state-owned lots like those outside of the Coliseum means tailgating will be significantly more limited during the upcoming season — and perhaps beyond. USC fans must enter a lottery to purchase tailgating passes ahead of the season for $496 and will be required to secure reservations when attending on-campus tailgates, which won’t open on game days until six hours before kickoff.

USC expects to take a financial loss due to the new changes to its parking and tailgating access, a person familiar with the decision told the Los Angeles Times. But the addition of alcohol sales offers a means to recover some of that lost revenue.

When USC first banned alcohol sales in 2004, it was one of the last in the then-Pacific 10 Conference to do so. Steven Sample, the university’s president, wrote in a letter to USC supporters at the time that the ban was in response to “an escalation in the rude behavior of fans, rudeness that is almost always exacerbated by alcohol consumption.” He hoped to make the Coliseum more “family friendly.”

Advertisement

“People were coming to make this a beer party rather than drinking some beer while watching the game,” Sample said in 2005.

In a release announcing its reversal, USC’s athletic department cited data that in-stadium alcohol sales, along with proper safety and security measures, “increase the probability of responsible drinking and fan behavior by cutting back on dangerous levels of alcohol consumption at pre-game tailgating.”

Inside the stadium, fans will be limited to two alcoholic beverages per transaction, while beer and wine sales will conclude at the end of the third quarter.

For now, there’s no cap on how many fans will be allowed to attend games this fall. USC announced in June the Coliseum will return to full capacity. But that was before the spike in COVID-19 cases across Southern California.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@USC receiver Bru McCoy was arrested last month on suspicion of felony intimate partner violence with injury and has been “temporarily removed from team activities” ahead of the Trojans’ preseason training camp this week, The Times has learned.

“USC does not condone violence of any kind,” the university’s athletic department said in a statement. “We are aware of the situation, and USC’s Office for Equity, Equal Opportunity, and Title IX is reviewing it. Because of federal student privacy laws, we are unable to share additional information at this time.”

A Los Angeles Police Department spokesperson confirmed McCoy was arrested on July 24 at 5:30 p.m. on suspicion of intimate partner violence with injury. The violation, listed under California Penal Code section 273.5(a), pertains to a person who “willfully inflicts corporal injury resulting in a traumatic condition” upon a spouse, former spouse, cohabitant or dating partner.

Advertisement

McCoy was released that same night on $50,000 bail. He is scheduled to appear in court on Nov. 24.

No further details about the incident were immediately available.

After a tumultuous start to his college career that included a back-and-forth transfer saga and a mysterious illness, McCoy was expected to finally emerge this season as one of the top options in a high-octane USC passing game. Last season, he caught 21 passes for 236 yards and two touchdowns, positioning himself for a breakout season in 2021.

McCoy now faces pending felony charges, just a few days ahead of the start of USC’s training camp.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Reggie Bush isn’t likely to see his 2005 Heisman Trophy returned anytime soon.

The NCAA provided the latest stiff-arm in the former USC running back’s effort to reclaim the coveted trophy, declaring Wednesday that it would not reconsider past NCAA penalties, even in the wake of landmark changes to name, image and likeness (NIL) rules across college sports.

“Although college athletes can now receive benefits from their names, images and likenesses through activities like endorsements and appearances, NCAA rules still do not permit pay-for-play type arrangements,” an NCAA spokesperson said. “The NCAA infractions process exists to promote fairness in college sports. The rules that govern fair play are voted on, agreed to and expected to be upheld by all NCAA member schools.”

The NCAA’s denial of Bush came soon after the Heisman Trust opened the door for the trophy’s return. Days after new NIL rules went into effect, and amid public pressure from Bush, the organization in charge of college football’s most prestigious award said it would gladly welcome back the Trojan legend, “should the NCAA reinstate Bush’s 2005 status.”

Advertisement

“Bush’s 2005 season records remain vacated by the NCAA and, as a result, under the rule set forth by the Heisman Trust and stated on the Heisman Ballot, he is not eligible to be awarded the 2005 Heisman Memorial Trophy,” the trust’s statement read.

Any hope of that eligibility being altered by the NCAA likely dissolved Wednesday. However, the Heisman Trust, which administers the trophy, could still decide to reverse course and return it in spite of NCAA rules deeming Bush ineligible.

Bush, at least, seemed to retain some hope.

“Stay tuned,” Bush wrote on Twitter, shortly after the NCAA decision was announced.

Sports Commentary: Hand back Reggie Bush his Heisman, you NCAA scoundrels On a day when college athletes were permitted to seek financial gain, former USC running back Reggie Bush reminded us what the NCAA unnecessarily took away.

Bush did not immediately respond to messages from The Times. His attorney, Alex Spiro, issued a statement critical of the NCAA that quoted from Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh’s scathing opinion in the recent NCAA v. Alston case.

“Today, in the face of those words, the NCAA doubles down on its decade-plus draconian penalty of a teenage kid who had his award taken based upon a sham investigation,” Spiro said in a statement. “You have to wonder if profiting from kids for this long has clouded the NCAA’s judgment as to why we have student athletics in the first place.”

Earlier this month, just as the floodgates opened on NIL, Bush issued a statement calling for his NCAA records to be reinstated and his trophy returned.

Advertisement

“It is my strong belief that I won the Heisman trophy ‘solely’ due to my hard work and dedication on the football field and it is also my firm belief that my records should be reinstated,” Bush said in a statement.

Bush returned his Heisman Trophy following a four-year NCAA investigation that found Bush to be retroactively ineligible for his trophy-winning 2005 season because he and his family accepted impermissible benefits that included cash, travel expenses and a rent-free San Diego-area home.

In June 2010, the NCAA issued harsh sanctions to USC, which was forced to vacate the 2004 national title, relinquish 30 scholarships and permanently disassociate from Bush, whose presence was erased from USC and the NCAA record books.

That disassociation ban was finally lifted in June 2020 after 10 years. Earlier this week, the last vestige of the landmark infractions case was decided out of court, as former USC running backs coach Todd McNair settled a defamation suit he had filed against the NCAA for an undisclosed sum, more than a decade after he was handed a show-cause penalty by the NCAA.

Advertisement

Just two days after that settlement was announced, the NCAA decided it would continue to take a hard line with Bush.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Days after losing center back Eddie Segura to season-ending knee surgery, LAFC took a big step toward plugging that hole by acquiring Nigerian American defender Sebastien Ibeagha from New York City FC for $150,000 in general allocation money.

New York will get an additional $50,000 in allocation money for LAFC if certain incentives are met.

Ibeagha, 29, was the USL defender of the year for San Antonio in 2017, then spent the last 3½ seasons in New York, playing in 64 games. Ibeagha, who was born in Nigeria and moved to the U.S. when he was 9, has also played in Denmark and Iceland and made seven appearances for the U.S. U-20 team.

Advertisement

A solid defender who rarely makes mistakes, Ibeagha played in the Houston Dynamos youth academy and trained with the first team before going to play college soccer at Duke. At 6-foot-2, he gives the LAFC back line both depth and a big body, which it lacks. Tristan Blackmon, at 6-foot-1, is currently the tallest outfield starter on the team.

The team recently acquired $1.75 million in general allocation money from trades that sent Mark-Anthony Kaye to Colorado and Corey Baird to Houston. Ibeagha will make $177,125 this season, according to figures provided by the MLS Players Assn.

“Seb has been a really valuable member of our squad since joining in 2018 and he played a vital role both on and off the pitch for our organization and he will be sincerely missed,” NYCFC sporting director David Lee said in a statement. “He’s been a dependable presence in our defense and his influence in the locker room and throughout the community embodied the values we want our players to have. We wish him all the best at LAFC and throughout the rest of his career.”

Ibeagha does not require an international roster spot. He is expected to be available for selection this weekend when LAFC (6-6-5), winless in its last four games, plays at San Jose on Sunday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Galaxy’s spree of European acquisitions continued Friday when the team picked up defender Niko Hamalainen on a five-month loan from Queens Park Rangers of the second-tier English Championship.

The move was preceded by a trade in which the Galaxy sent $50,000 in general allocation money to the Chicago Fire to acquire the No. 1 spot in the MLS waiver order, giving the team the right to claim Hamalainen.

A Miami native, the versatile Hamalainen, 24, can play either outside back position or in the midfield. He made 23 appearances across all competitions for Queens Park Rangers last season. He played on loan for Kilmarnock FC in the Scottish Premiership in the 2019-20 season, appearing in 28 matches, and played in three games for LAFC in 2019.

Internationally, he made seven appearances — including four starts — for Finland.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi‘s time at Barcelona appears to be over.

Barcelona announced Thursday that Messi will not stay with the club, saying that the Spanish league’s financial regulations made it impossible to sign the Argentina star to a new contract.

He is leaving after 17 successful seasons in which he propelled the Catalan club to glory, helping it win numerous domestic and international titles since debuting as a teenager.

Barcelona said in a statement that a deal for a new contract had been reached but financial “obstacles” made it impossible for the player to remain with the club.

Advertisement

“Despite club and player reaching an agreement and their clear intention to sign a new contract today, this cannot happen because of financial and structural obstacles,” the club said.

It blamed “Spanish league regulations” for not allowing the club to sign a new contract with Messi. His previous one had ended on June 30.

“As a result of this situation, Messi shall not be staying on at FC Barcelona,” it said. “Both parties deeply regret that the wishes of the player and the club will ultimately not be fulfilled.

“FC Barcelona wholeheartedly expresses its gratitude to the player for his contribution to the aggrandizement of the club and wishes him all the very best for the future in his personal and professional life,” the statement said.

Messi had asked to leave Barcelona for free at the end of last season but had his request denied by then-president Josep Bartomeu. Joan Laporta took over the presidency and appeared to have convinced Messi to stay. But Laporta had said recently that the club was struggling to fit the player’s salary — even with hefty reductions accepted by the player — into the league-controlled salary cap.

In Messi’s previous contract, signed in 2017, he reportedly earned $163 million per season.

Newsletter All about the beautiful game Go inside the L.A. pro soccer scene and beyond in Kevin Baxter's weekly newsletter. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Advertisement

The league announced Wednesday that it secured $3.2 billion in private equity funding to help the clubs, which appeared to pave the way for Barcelona to re-sign the Argentina star. But the deal with Messi fell through after club officials met with the player’s representatives in Barcelona on Thursday. Some local reports said it was Messi who had changed his mind about staying, while others said it was the club that got upset with new demands made by his side.

Messi made no immediate public statement. Laporta was going to address the media Friday.

Barcelona removed Messi from its squad list on the club’s website shortly after the announcement and posted a video on its Twitter accounts thanking the player.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dejan Joveljić admits he didn’t know much about MLS when the Galaxy asked him to come here and play. But he knew some people who did.

So the Serbian striker reached out to Marko Mitrovic, his former coach in the Red Star Belgrade youth system who spent three years as an assistant with the Chicago Fire, and to fellow Serb Ranko Veselinović, who plays with the Vancouver Whitecaps. Their reviews apparently were good enough for Joveljić, who agreed to a 4½-year contract with the Galaxy. He could make his MLS debut as early as next week.

“I had several offers. When I got an offer from L.A. I said this must be a good decision,” said Joveljić, who arrived in Los Angeles on Monday. “I have here all the necessary conditions for my progress. And the people from L.A. were really concrete. They really let me know they wanted me here so it was not a tough decision.”

Advertisement

Joveljić, acquired on transfer from Eintracht Frankfurt of the German Bundesliga, must complete a COVID-19 protocol and receive visa authorization before he can play. When he does he’ll become the eighth European to join the team this season under first-year coach Greg Vanney.

Details of the contract and the transfer fee were not released, but the deal was done under Major League Soccer’s U-22 initiative, which allows teams to pay unlimited transfer fees for players aged 22 and under. However, that rule also requires the Galaxy to keep Joveljić’s salary below the maximum budget charge of $612,500.

Teams are allowed just three U-22 players, and the Galaxy are at that limit, having used the rule twice earlier this summer to extend the contracts of defender Julian Araujo and midfielder Efraín Álvarez.

Joveljić, who will turn 22 this weekend, scored 19 times in 40 games in all competition with Austria’s Wolfsberger AC, where he played on loan last season. Those numbers mark career highs in both categories for Joveljić, who made his professional debut with Belgrade Red Star in Serbia as a 17-year-old.

Joveljić, who is most comfortable playing as a center forward, can pair with Javier “Chicharito” Hernández up front, but he also gives the Galaxy cover when the injury-prone Hernández, who has missed 16 of the Galaxy’s 38 games in his two seasons, is unavailable. Joveljić is adept with both legs and, at 5-foot-9, is good in the air.

Soccer Chicharito, Carlos Vela headline MLS All-Star game roster LAFC and the Galaxy will have six players on the MLS roster facing Liga MX stars during the MLS All-Star game Aug. 25 at Banc of California Stadium.

“I hope that I’m going to play with him,” Joveljić said of Chicharito. “He’s an inspiration. I watched him as a kid. The opportunity to play with him, it’s unbelievable.”

The Galaxy, 10-6-1 and third in the Western Conference after Wednesday’s win over Real Salt Lake, have been working on Joveljić’s signing for weeks but couldn’t put the final pieces together until they loaned defender Giancarlo González to Alajuelense of the Costa Rican first division, opening an international roster slot and clearing some room under the league salary cap. González, who didn’t play a minute for the Galaxy this season, is guaranteed more than $918,500 in 2021, according to figures provided by the MLS players association.

Advertisement

Joveljić said he will be joined soon in Southern California by his parents and his sister. And unlike other young Europeans who have looked at MLS as a finishing school ahead of a return to the continent, Joveljić said he’s not planning that far ahead.

“I’m not thinking about Europe now. I’m here,” he said. “The first impressions are great. It’s my pleasure to be here.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Matthew Stafford’s first two deep balls to DeSean Jackson during Saturday afternoon’s scrimmage against the Dallas Cowboys in Oxnard just missed, keeping the Rams’ high-profile veteran acquisitions searching for a connection before day’s end.

Other than that, Stafford had checked all the boxes in his first action against an opponent as a Ram. He promptly completed his first four throws in seven-on-seven drills, including a slant to Van Jefferson that went for a touchdown. He peppered Cooper Kupp and Tyler Higbee on short and intermediate routes, showing no ill effects of the thumb injury on his right hand sustained earlier in training camp. On a third down deep in the red zone, with Cowboys safety Damontae Kazee imploring his defense to get off the field, Stafford found Robert Woods for a touchdown over the middle.

But there was still something missing — until late in the hourlong session when Jackson sped past Donovan Wilson and Trevon Diggs and Stafford dropped the ball into his hands in stride for a long touchdown.

“It was good to see, an unbelievable throw across his body,” Rams coach Sean McVay said. “Those are things that you have seen consistently [in practice]. We want to continue to build off that. But it’s a good balance. We want to be efficient and explosive, and I thought that was an example of creating explosives, and it was a big-time throw across the grain there.”

Advertisement

Rams quarterback Matthew Stafford scrambles away from Cowboys defensive end Randy Gregory at Saturday’s scrimmage. (John McCoy / Associated Press)

Sure, Saturday was only a scrimmage, staged more than a month before the season opener. But, because McVay will not play Stafford in the Rams’ three exhibition games to protect him from injury, this scrimmage took on more importance than it normally would.

Stafford played significantly more snaps against the Cowboys defense than quarterbacks Devlin Hodges and Bryce Perkins, who are battling for the third-string position (backup John Wolford was out after having his appendix removed Friday).

And, naturally, it wasn’t all positive as Stafford gets acclimated to life as a Ram after 12 seasons as the Detroit Lions’ franchise quarterback. His first pass of the day in 11 on 11 was a bootleg that Stafford threw right into the hands of Cowboys cornerback Maurice Canady. The rest of his day would erase that memory, though.

Sports Pro Football Hall of Fame class has something for everybody Former Rams star wide receiver Isaac Bruce was among the players who entered the Hall of Fame on Saturday, a year late because of the COVID-19 pandemic.

“When it’s not against our own defense, having him see the new looks and the ball still getting out when it’s supposed to and going to the right people, he’s doing a great job,” Kupp said.

“He’s got a great demeanor. For a guy that’s coming in and having to learn all the terminology in what I think is a pretty intricate offense to be clear and articulate and command the huddle is a pretty impressive thing.”

Dallas Cowboys cornerback Anthony Brown grabs hold of Rams wide receiver Cooper Kupp. (John McCoy / Associated Press)

Advertisement

Kupp was happy to see Stafford and Jackson’s big play too — an indication that the Rams’ passing game may have an extra gear in 2021.

“It’s just going to continue to grow,” Kupp said. “You can see the feel they have for each other and just the ability for DeSean to track the ball like he can and Matthew getting the ball up there and letting guys run underneath it. We love having DeSean out there, what he does to the top shelf of the defense.”

Aaron Donald gets in a scuffle

Saturday’s practice was divided into two scrimmages, with the Cowboys offense going against the Rams defense on one field and the Rams offense taking on the Cowboys defense on the other.

Advertisement

Those whose focus was fixed on Stafford (Cowboys quarterback Dak Prescott did not play as he continues his recovery from a broken ankle) missed out on a scuffle between Rams star defensive tackle Aaron Donald and Cowboys guard Connor Williams, which led to both units mixing it up for about 30 seconds.

Williams and Donald appeared to get tangled up, and Williams pulled Donald to the turf, which Donald did not appreciate.

Rams safety Taylor Rapp, left, looks on as cornerback Darious Williams (11) closes in on Cowboys running back Ezekiel Elliott. (John McCoy / Associated Press)

Tutu Atwell takes a tumble

Rams rookie wide receiver Tutu Atwell caught a pass along the sideline from Perkins and was unable to control his momentum as he ran headfirst into a camera platform that fortunately was padded. Atwell had to be tended to by Rams medical staff but soon returned to practice.

Advertisement

“His pop-up game was nice there,” McVay said. “It didn’t sound good, but he said he was OK to me.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Seemingly out of nowhere Friday morning, Rams backup quarterback John Wolford woke with pain in his abdominal area. He was diagnosed with appendicitis and later had his appendix removed, a procedure that will likely will keep him out of practice for 10 to 14 days, according to a team spokesman.

The Rams thought highly enough of Wolford that they started him in the first round of the playoffs last season even though Jared Goff was active coming off thumb surgery. Because of his encouraging performance in 2020, there was little debate entering training camp about the backup spot behind Matthew Stafford — only the third-string quarterback battle between Devlin Hodges and Bryce Perkins.

Now Hodges and Perkins will get to alternate with the No. 2 offense and show what they can do — starting with Saturday afternoon’s scrimmage against the Dallas Cowboys in Oxnard.

“It will give Bryce and Duck [Hodges] a great opportunity just like they had today on short notice,” Rams offensive coordinator Kevin O’Connell said. “If that position is where we want, we feel like offensively the other 10 guys in the huddle can do their jobs and we can roll. But it starts with the quarterback position, making sure procedurally we’re good, calling the play right in the huddle, being right with their cadence, sending motions at the right time … there’s little things before the ball ever hits their hands that we need to make sure they do well.”

Advertisement

O’Connell expressed confidence in the physical tools that Hodges and Perkins bring to the table once the play is in motion.

In his first year with the Rams, Hodges especially is working overtime mentally as he learns the offense. In 2019, Hodges started six games with the Pittsburgh Steelers, leading them to a 3-3 record and completing 62.5 percent of his passes.

“Things are still new to him, but I keep telling ‘Duck,’ I can tell the game makes sense to him when the ball is in his hands,” O’Connell said of Hodges. “He’s got some experience, was put in some tough spots where he led his team to some really good football in Pittsburgh.”

The Rams signed Perkins as an undrafted free agent out of Virginia in 2020. Although he hasn’t played an NFL snap, he has the advantage over Hodges of having spent a year learning the Rams’ system.

Perkins brings another dimension as a runner, having rushed for 1,692 yards and 20 touchdowns in two years as the starter for the Cavaliers.

“From a mental standpoint, even today I felt a lot of confidence in the way he stepped into the huddle calling plays,” O’Connell said. “Now for Bryce it’s about finding the balance between executing the offense and trying to read through progressions but never limiting his ability to impact the game from an athletic standpoint. He’s really grown as a passer since he first got here fundamentally. Now it’s a matter of can he apply that in rhythm with a live pass rush.”

Advertisement

It’s possible given Wolford’s timeline for recovery that Hodges and Perkins will get to play a ton of football in the Rams’ three preseason games, the first coming Aug. 14 against the Chargers at SoFi Stadium.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Statistically, it was only a blip.

During his rookie NFL season, Isaac Bruce caught 21 passes for the Los Angeles Rams.

Bruce would go on to catch more than 1,000 passes during a 16-year career mainly spent starring for the Rams in St. Louis. But the city of Los Angeles played a pivotal role in Bruce’s development into one of the league’s top receivers and an offense known as “The Greatest Show on Turf.”

Bruce, a Florida native, played football at two Southern California community colleges, which prepared him to star at Memphis. A few years later, the Rams selected him in the second round of the 1994 draft.

Advertisement

Bruce still carries a special place in his heart for the city and the fans who were part of a journey that continues this weekend in Canton, Ohio with his enshrinement in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.

Bruce, 48, is part of the Hall of Fame class of 2020. Because the COVID-19 pandemic forced the postponement of last year’s enshrinement ceremony, the 2020 class will be enshrined Saturday, the 2021 class Sunday.

Bruce said it has been worth the wait.

“It’s easy to generate that thrill again because once I get around friends and family and that atmosphere, I think all of those emotions will come out to the very forefront again,” Bruce said.

Bruce starred for Rams teams that completed the 1999 season by winning Super Bowl XXXIV, and reached the Super Bowl again in 2001. Bruce is the fourth player from those teams to be voted to the Hall of Fame, joining running back Marshall Faulk, offensive tackle Orlando Pace and quarterback Kurt Warner.

“He just made my job so easy as the best route runner that I was ever around,” Warner said. “His ability to create separation, the speed at which he was able to run his routes was unlike anything I’ve ever seen.”

Bruce caught 1,024 passes for 15,208 yards and 91 touchdowns. He produced eight 1,000-yard seasons and was voted to the Pro Bowl four times.

Advertisement

“He had the ability to change direction and not break stride like I’d never seen anybody do,” said Mike Martz, the Rams’ offensive coordinator in 1999 and head coach from 2000 to 2005.

Bruce also was “the heart and soul” of the Rams’ great teams of that era, Martz said.

His effort and performance during games was exceeded by his work in practices.

Pro Football Hall of Fame Class of 2020, from left, Troy Polamalu, Edgerrin James, Steve Hutchinson, Isaac Bruce, Steve Atwater, Paul Tagliabue, Donnie Shell, Jimmy Johnson, Cliff Harris, Bill Cowher, Jimbo Covert, and Harold Carmichael. Because of the pandemic, they didn’t have a ceremony last year. (Mark Humphrey / Associated Press)

Advertisement

“I remember watching the practice film and all of a sudden it was kind of a like a blur,” Warner said. “And I remember telling whoever was running the meeting at time, I’m like: ‘Hey, you got it on fast forward. Slow it down.’ And he goes, ‘No, I don’t have it on fast forward.’

“And I glanced back up at the screen and it was Isaac, and the way that he practiced. ... He showed the rest of us kind of what it meant to be a pro.”

Bruce started to play football while growing up in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. By the end of his high school career, he had a scholarship offer to Purdue, but did not qualify under NCAA academic rules at the time.

A coach suggested he attend West Los Angeles College.

Advertisement

“I left South Florida as a 17-year-old with two bags, and I landed right in Inglewood,” he said. “L.A. was very similar to what I was used to — a melting pot. It didn’t disappoint me at all.”

After a year at West L.A. he transferred to Santa Monica City College, which featured a more pass-oriented style.

“One of the best moves I felt like I ever made in my life,” he said.

Advertisement

Bruce parlayed his performance into a scholarship to Memphis, where he played two seasons before the Rams selected him with the 33rd overall pick.

“So now I’m not a broke college student in Los Angeles,” he said. “I’m back in Los Angeles with a contract and an opportunity to pursue my dream.”

Bruce made a smooth transition off the field — “I could drive around the 91, the 405 and 5,” he said — and with the help of players such as Jessie Hester and Flipper Anderson he said he learned to become a pro.

After the 1994 season, however, the Rams moved to St. Louis.

Advertisement

“I didn’t want to leave,” he said.

But Bruce blossomed in St. Louis. In 1995, ranking among the league leaders in receptions, coaches targeted him in the season finale to ensure he would finish on top. But Martz said that Bruce did not want to pad his stats in a game the Rams were trailing by two or three touchdowns.

“He just said, ‘Look at the scoreboard. This doesn’t mean anything to me if we’re not winning the game,’ ” Martz said.

Bruce said he borrowed from many of his contemporaries.

Advertisement

“I saw the way the great wide receivers of the era prepared,” he said. “I felt like the preparation part of was most important, the catalyst of what they were able to do on the football field.

“I kind of really just mimicked what I saw other guys do and made them my mentors. Some of them I didn’t have a chance to meet and shake hands with until years later. But I knew that in order to be at the level I wanted to be at, I knew I had to think differently.”

Torry Holt said Bruce mentored him on and off the field from the time he was a rookie. One day Bruce drove Holt and other rookies back to the hotel where they were staying. Holt or another player spilled something in his Range Rover.

Rookie Receiver Bruce Is Making a Good First Impression : Rams: With three of his 12 receptions going for touchdowns, opponents are beginning to pay more attention to him. Just an impressionable rookie, Ram receiver Isaac Bruce watched, listened and learned as San Francisco cornerback Deion Sanders critiqued his pass routes.

Advertisement

“He was like, ‘Don’t worry about,’ ” Holt said. “He didn’t make a big fuss about that. What he cared about the most was making sure we got back to the hotel safe, and that we were ready to roll for the next day at practice.”

Bruce said he would be thinking about his teammates, coaches and fans during his weekend in Canton.

A football mentality requires players to quickly move on from bad or good plays. But Bruce said his impending enshrinement into the Hall of Fame has allowed him to reflect.

“The journey was hard, it was easy, it was fun, it was at times miserable, it was glorious,” he said. “A lot of people ask if I would do it all over again.

Advertisement

“I would do it all over again in a heartbeat.”

Staff writer Sam Farmer contributed to this report.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The X-rays on Matthew Stafford’s surgically repaired right thumb were negative, an existential quarterback crisis mercifully averted, but Rams coach Sean McVay still wanted to play it safe with his newly acquired signal caller.

Stafford had slammed his thumb hard enough into a helmet on Monday to sustain a contusion, and it stood to reason he should get at least a day off for the soreness to abate.

That was the team’s plan, at least. But when the Rams opened practice on Tuesday, Stafford emerged in full pads and red quarterback jersey, with no intention of sitting out a single snap. The Rams, trusting their new veteran, obliged, allowing him to practice without limitation.

“He felt good about it,” McVay said. “I think he’s earned the right to give us feedback, to know how his body feels. If he felt like that was the best approach, we’d do that.”

Advertisement

Stafford admitted after the practice that he wasn’t 100 percent, but said he refused to miss the first day in pads.

“Whether I’m 100 percent or not, every opportunity I get to call a play and run it against our defense and with our guys is an opportunity I need to get,” Stafford said. “I don’t want to waste them. If it was good enough to go, then I’m going to be out there to go.”

Stafford said his thumb went immediately numb upon impact Monday. He spent the rest of practice on the sideline before being examined Monday night by team physician Neal ElAttrache, who cleared him after testing the strength in his thumb. X-rays revealed a small contusion, but no fractures, sprains or torn ligaments.

The prognosis proved a major sigh of relief for the Rams, many of whom were collectively holding their breath.

“I was worried,” defensive tackle Aaron Donald said. “When we was doing the walk-through earlier, I said, ‘Let me see your finger’, and he was good, so I was like, ‘We cool.’ ”

It’s not the first time Stafford has played through pain in the thumb in his throwing hand. With the Lions last season, he suffered a torn ligament in a mid-November victory over Washington, then proceeded to play seven more games to close the season. He had surgery in March to repair the damage to his thumb.

Advertisement

“I’d imagine any human being, when you hit your thumb that hard coming down over the top of someone’s helmet, it’s going to be irritated and a little frustrating, but he would never say anything,” McVay said.

Although he was able to gut out practice Tuesday, Stafford didn’t look nearly as sharp as he had over the previous week. He missed a few open receivers and sailed a few passes, but in light of the positive prognosis, didn’t seem too concerned.

“Never fun to have something as vital as a throwing thumb not feel 100 percent, but at the same time, I’m sure happy it wasn’t anything bad,” Stafford said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There’s still life in his throwing arm. Even at 39, his legs feel good. He also could have made millions as a TV analyst. But that’s not the focus of Philip Rivers.

The longtime Chargers quarterback, who spent his final season with the Indianapolis Colts, has relocated his wife and nine children to this quaint community on the eastern shoreline of Mobile Bay. He’s the head football coach at St. Michael Catholic High, which opened in 2016 and has ambitious plans for a sprawling sports complex that includes a football stadium, a baseball diamond and a track surrounding a practice field.

Rivers has big plans too. He and wife, Tiffany, want to continue raising their kids here — they range from toddlers to a college sophomore — with Philip following in the footsteps of his dad, Steve, who was a high school football coach in Decatur, Ala., a five-hour drive north.

Steve Rivers never won a state championship, but he has a drawer filled with “trophies,” letters and thank-you notes from former players grateful for his impact on their lives. Philip wants the same.

Advertisement

“I told the principal, ‘Do I believe and think we’ll win a state championship here? Yeah, I hope and think we will, and I’ve told these boys that,’ ” Philip said this week, standing on the sideline during a break between two-a-day practices.

“But definitely, without a doubt, that’s the reason I’m in this level, because of those trophies in the desk drawer. … Not in a prideful way, but just in a way that you hope you can positively impact these young men to be better people in the community. Better in their faith, better in, shoot, as a businessman, better as a husband, better as a father.”

This is not glamorous stuff. Rivers and his coaching staff — most of them teachers who were already at the school — oversaw a two-day training camp at a waterfront retreat, beginning the days with a Catholic Mass, and then cooking breakfast for the players.

The offensive line coach was flipping pancakes. The defensive coordinator was scrambling eggs. Rivers, a five-time Pro Bowl selection who is fifth all-time in NFL passing yardage, has done everything from sorting laundry to painting the lines on the field. Two of his daughters attend the high school and, as typical teenagers, they’re sometimes embarrassed to bump into him in the hallways. He is as regular as they come.

Even in this football-crazy region, which produced NFL stars such as Ken Stabler and Julio Jones, he doesn’t cause much of a stir. After all, college football is king here, and Rivers played at North Carolina State, not Alabama or Auburn.

Retired Chargers and Colts quarterback Philip Rivers now coaches high school football at St. Michael’s Catholic in Fairhope, Ala. (Sam Farmer / Los Angeles Times)

“In the South in general, there’s so much college football that even here — not that I feel like I’m a big deal anywhere — but it’s not as big of a deal,” he said. “It’s cool. Like, ‘Yeah, you played in the NFL for a long time, but … how’s LSU gonna be?’ Or, ‘Hey, Roll Tide!’ or, ‘War Eagle!’ That’s really what it is here.

Advertisement

“So early on, I would get recognized and I’d hear this: ‘Hey, coach!’ I’d be a little confused, like, ‘You’re talking to me?’ Then they’d welcome me to town.”

And that’s just what Rivers wants. Despite his boyish exuberance on the field, an energy that could grate on opposing fans, he is disarmingly unassuming in person, friendly to everyone, thoroughly unimpressed with himself.

“We realize he’s just one of us, a regular guy,” said Walt Dupre, who coaches the offensive line and teaches biology. “But a lot of the young kids are kind of flocking to him when we were out at the spring game. It’s sort of worn off for us already.”

Rivers brings that same daggum energy in practice that he unleashed in his G-rated trash-talking tirades. Only now he uses it to pump up his players, lining up at defensive back — he doubled as a hard-hitting safety in high school — and dispensing his wisdom about proper drop-backs, how to slide in the pocket, how to run through a full 10 yards before making your cut. ...

Advertisement

He’s tireless, and his 9-year-old son, Pete, is in the middle of it all, tossing simulated shotgun snaps.

It’s all pretty heady stuff for Josh Murphy, a rising junior at St. Michael and a good athlete who can throw a tight spiral and has moved from backup to starting quarterback this season. He was a Drew Brees and Matt Ryan fan who didn’t pay a lot of attention to Rivers until last season, when word spread he was headed to the school as soon as he retired. Imagine that — an NFL star.

“Couple years ago there started to be the chatter, then I got to meet him at a football camp when he came down,” Murphy said. “From there, I started to watch his games. It was weird. You’re rooting for him, but at the same time you’re wanting him to come be your coach.”

When Rivers arrived, Murphy was a bit intimidated, but those star-struck feelings soon evaporated into the sweltering summer air.

Advertisement

“We’ve gotten to know him,” Murphy said. “He’s not some celebrity. He’s this great guy that we’ve all gotten to know as our coach. Other teams, when they see him, they all want to shake his hand after a game. People ask for pictures after games and stuff like that.

“But when we first started practicing in the spring, I’d get nervous before practice. I’m going to be throwing footballs in front of Philip Rivers. But over time, it’s just gotten to be more natural. You still have those times where you’re like, ‘Wow, I’m in this position to be coached by him.’ But at the same time, he’s just coach.”

Retired NFL quarterback Philip Rivers and younger brother Stephen are coaches at St. Michael Catholic High in Fairhope, Ala. (Sam Farmer / Los Angeles Times)

“Let’s not rule it out. Who knows?” Philip Rivers, on returning to NFL this season

Advertisement

Rivers had a case of butterflies recently, but for a different reason. He’s played football his whole life and spent 17 years in the NFL. So it’s not surprising he felt that old muscle memory in late July when pro players started reporting to camps.

Does Rivers think about returning to play? You bet your bolo tie. Tom Brady just won his seventh ring at 43 and turned 44 this week. Rivers has fuel left in the tank.

“I really felt in concrete in January,” he said of his retirement. “The time was right, and I still feel that way. But then as the spring went and the summer started, I kind of said there’s no reason to go rush to retire a Charger, because that’s what at first I was thinking to do.

“Then I thought, just coach and maybe it will motivate you to stay in shape. I was getting a little heavy because I didn’t have that clock to say, ‘Hey, it’s time to get ready to go.’”

Advertisement

He’s committed to coaching the St. Michael team, and the school has games until late October, and might play a few more weeks if the team makes the playoffs. That leaves plenty of time for the back half of the NFL season, and Rivers is leaving open the door if there’s a team that wants him and the situation feels right. (He has given no indication he’d be willing to return to Indianapolis to replace the injured Carson Wentz, whose foot surgery is expected to keep him out from five to 12 weeks. Rivers is dedicated to the task at hand.)

“It’s funny, some of my children are still asking, ‘So, Dad, are you playing in December? You gonna play this year late if somebody wants you?’ I go, ‘I don’t know. Let’s not rule it out. Who knows?’ ”

Rivers was more definitive when it came to working in TV. He talked to networks and informed people in that world who say he has Tony Romo-like qualities when it comes to energy and the ability to explain the game.

Advertisement

“I do think I’d have fun doing it, and I do think I’d do it pretty well,” Rivers said. “I love the game and I like to talk about it. But for our family right now, you go from having eight or nine road games a year to having 17 weekends when I’m gone.

“Even some of the early conversations with [agent] Jim Denton were, ‘Hey, I think you can still coach.’ I was thinking, ‘I’m going to coach here while I’m preparing for an NFL game during the week? And our game? And then fly?’”

There are St. Michael quarterbacks in the pipeline. Gunner Rivers is learning the position as a seventh-grader, and Pete is right behind him.

Retired NFL quarterback Philip Rivers is the head football coach at St. Michael Catholic High in Fairhope, Ala. (Sam Farmer / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

What’s more, Rivers is getting to work with his brother, Stephen, who is 11 years his junior and coaching the St. Michael receivers. The whole family is invested.

“When we were growing up, I was the water boy and I just thought he was the coolest thing,” said the 6-foot-7 Stephen, who played quarterback at three colleges — Louisiana State, Vanderbilt and Northwestern (La.) State — and is now a packaging salesman.

“We shared a room. He was in the full bed, I was in the twin bed. We had a Peyton Manning poster, Dan Marino poster, Steve Young poster. We thought that was cool. And all of a sudden, here he goes. He’s one of those guys who was on the wall. It was crazy.

“I never thought he was going to retire. In my mind it’s like, it’s never going to end. So when he did, it hit me. This is our chance to live close to each other, so I asked my work what they thought about me transferring down here. They let me. So I’ve got four kids, Philip’s got nine, and a lot of them are close in age. They spent the last month playing more than they have their whole lives together.”

Advertisement

The Rivers families are home. Well, sort of.

“I had lost a little bit of my Southern accent,” Philip said. “But for my children, being in California forever and then one year in Indy and now back here, when they’re immersed in it completely, not just on a summer trip, they couldn’t get over it. They were enamored with it. Like, ‘Oh, my goodness. The accents here. Everybody.’

“The young ones, this is all they’re going to know. They’re going to be like I was growing up, my ones who are 2, 5 and 7, all of them.”

Advertisement

Rivers still has traces of Southern California in him. His assistant coaches tease him when he says “soda” instead of “Coke,” and that the family dog has a very San Diego name: Dude.

“It was really cool one practice back in the spring,” he said. “Dad was down here, Stephen was coaching, Gunner was helping, Pete was helping. And I looked around and thought, ‘Wow. Here we are.’ ”

Clear out a desk drawer for the letters.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Philip Rivers is having a blast as the first-year head football coach at St. Michael Catholic High School, but the retired quarterback told the Los Angeles Times on Tuesday that he hasn’t shut the door on returning to the NFL for a stint late in the season.

That revelation is particularly interesting in light of the Indianapolis Colts, for whom he played last year, losing quarterback Carson Wentz to a foot injury for five to 12 weeks.

Rivers retired in January after 17 seasons in the league, the first 16 with the Chargers. He finished his career ranked fifth all time with 63,440 yards passing and 421 touchdown passes.

But did he really finish his career? Well, although he still looks to be in good shape, he said he would have some work to do if he were to return.

Advertisement

“I’m not quite there,” said Rivers, 39. “I’m getting back there. I wouldn’t have made weight if I had to report last week, that’s for sure. But I am getting back into the lifting and running, and shoot, I occasionally throw a ball around out here in this heat. It’s not too hard to get a good lather going.

“I’m just going to stay ready. I want to make sure I’m very clear: I’m not predicting I will play in December or January, for that matter. One, you’ve got to have somebody who wants you, and two, it’s got to be right.

“But I have not completely ruled that out.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Justin Herbert touched Chargers fans plenty during 2020 with his stellar, offensive rookie of the year performance.

He touched them again Wednesday on the opening day of training camp, running along a fence post-practice to share high-fives and fist bumps.

During these COVID-19 times, the NFL is encouraging players to socially distance from fans.

Herbert apparently simply got caught up in the moment following his first NFL practice that included spectators.

Advertisement

“I just wanted to say ‘thank you’ for them coming out,” he explained, before adding he’d make sure to wash his hands.

A positive, welcoming sense surrounded the Chargers as they returned to the field in Costa Mesa in front of a bleacher full of supporters. Last year, NFL camps were closed to spectators because of the pandemic.

Brandon Staley conducted his first in-season practice as a head coach and afterward called the crisp, 75-minute workout “kind of surgical” and “very well organized.”

“I felt like it was a huge practice,” he said, “for the first time out.”

Staley is installing a new offense and a new defense, making this camp and the Chargers’ three preseason games more significant as learning opportunities.

Also important is keeping the players healthy and fresh, a notion that was obvious on Day 1.

The Chargers opened practice with a 15-minute “activation period” that included slowly warming their muscles with moves similar to those found in yoga. They then transitioned into more traditional stretching.

Advertisement

Staley said he hoped the activation period — it will be part of their daily routine — would be “kind of a winning edge for us.” He also said the shorter workout was by design.

“I wanted our guys to kind of get to the end of practice and say, ‘Hey, I could have gone longer than that,’ ” Staley said. “We’re trying to phase this in properly.”

The 2021 Chargers also won’t practice more than four days in a row. The NFL’s collective bargaining agreement permits teams to string workouts for longer stretches than that.

“That’s not what we feel like is best for a player,” Staley said. “We want to create the same rhythm that they’ll have during the season.”

Advertisement

After practicing the next three days, Staley will give his players Sunday off and then return for the first padded practice Monday. After that, they won’t work on the field for more than three consecutive days, a pattern similar to the regular season.

Chargers running back Austin Ekeler (30) runs in a drill on the first day of camp while wearing a new protective practice helmet. (Alex Gallardo / Associated Press)

As part of the NFL’s safety initiatives, players also have the option of wearing an extra layer of padding on the outside of their helmets during practice. Running backs Austin Ekeler and Joshua Kelley both tried out the devices Wednesday.

As with many NFL teams, the Chargers have experienced plenty of significant training camp injuries. In the previous three Augusts, edge rusher Joey Bosa, safety Derwin James and wide receiver Mike Williams were among those who got hurt.

Advertisement

James missed all of last season after hurting his right knee two weeks before the opener. This was after he suffered a fracture in his right foot in August 2019.

On Wednesday, James returned to the same field on which both injuries occurred but dismissed the notion of being leery of getting hurt again.

“The injuries could have happened with me walking down the stairs,” he said. “I’m just trying to put them behind me. We’re healthy now, and I feel good.”

The general health of the Chargers has received a boost in recent weeks as the team is approaching having 90% of its players vaccinated or in the process of becoming vaccinated.

Advertisement

Rams Masked men will reveal the unvaccinated as NFL training camps open Unvaccinated NFL players will be revealed quickly as training camps open. Whoever is not vaccinated will have to wear a mask at practice and keep their distance from others.

About six weeks ago, at the conclusion of OTAs, the Chargers’ numbers were lagging.

“We’re encouraged, really encouraged,” Staley said. “Where we were in June at minicamp and where we are now are two different places. I’m really proud of our organization, the leadership of our team. … As our guys have learned more, they’ve acted quite accordingly and properly. Proud of where we’re at. … I like where we’re headed.”

The Chargers do have one player on the COVID-19 reserve list, running back Justin Jackson. Staley said Jackson should rejoin the team by the end of the week.

Advertisement

“A lot of information is being spread, positive information,” Herbert said of the Chargers’ improving vaccination rate. “Guys are getting informed and making the decision that’s best for them. … As long as you’re making the best decision for yourself, for your family and for those around you, I think we’re able to celebrate that.”

Herbert met with reporters Wednesday for the first time since Kansas City quarterback Patrick Mahomes took a playful shot at him during a golf tournament in Lake Tahoe this month.

When a fan at the event told Mahomes to watch out for Herbert this season, Mahomes responded, “I’ll see it when I believe it.”

Advertisement

He later told USA Today Sports that the comment was taken out of context.

“I was talking some trash to all those Raiders and Broncos and Chargers fans out there,” Mahomes said. “I have a ton of respect for him as a player.”

Said Herbert, smiling: “I think it’s pretty cool that Patrick Mahomes knows who I am. … I’ve got such a great respect for what he’s been able to do. I’ve watched him so much.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He went from No. 2 on his team to No. 1 in his league, collecting numerous franchise and NFL records during a wholly unexpected offensive rookie of the year season.

Stunning as it was, fast-tracking is nothing new to Justin Herbert, who arrived as the sixth-string quarterback at Oregon and bolted into the starting lineup only six games into his freshman year.

To appreciate how meteoric the rise of the Chargers quarterback has been, consider that it was in August of 2016 that then-Ducks wide receiver Darren Carrington called him this:

“Justin, the freshman from Eugene. I forget his last name.”

Advertisement

Just five years ago — Five! — even one of his teammates didn’t know it was Justin “Herbert.” This week — as the Chargers gather in Costa Mesa for the opening of training camp — all of football knows him ... and well.

Last season, Herbert produced more passing touchdowns (31), total touchdowns (36) and 300-yard games (eight) than any NFL rookie in history.

He finished with more yards than Aaron Rodgers, better accuracy than Patrick Mahomes and a higher rating than Philip Rivers.

He was at his best under pressure, on third down and in prime time.

So, entering Year 2, Herbert is expected to be, ah, better?

“There are no guarantees in this league,” said John Beck, Herbert’s personal coach. “There are a lot of guys on the other side of the ball getting paid a lot of money to stop you. And, as a quarterback, you need your teammates too. But, in terms of what Justin can control, he has a great chance to be an amazing quarterback in this league for a long time.”

The Chargers have a new coach in Brandon Staley and a new offense that is more nuanced and places additional responsibility on the quarterback. Herbert has admitted he has a lot to learn, even as a former straight-A student.

Advertisement

Beck, who works with Herbert at 3DQB in Huntington Beach, predicted any stalling in 2021 will be the result of the transition to a new scheme rather than the development of the orchestrator of that scheme.

“Justin’s going to be an improved football player, no doubt,” Beck said. “He’s certainly going to be a better quarterback. If there are circumstances where the road becomes bumpy, I would believe it would be him getting accustomed to the new offense and he and his teammates building chemistry in a new system.”

Herbert, 23, faced few expectations last July. Yes, he was the No. 6 overall pick, but the Chargers already had veteran Tyrod Taylor and the full intention of starting Taylor for the foreseeable future.

Things changed in Week 2 when Taylor was sidelined by a pregame medical accident minutes before kickoff. Herbert started and performed convincingly enough that he missed just four offensive snaps the rest of the season.

Advertisement

Chargers quarterback Justin Herbert (10) huddles with teammates during a practice in May.

(Marcio Jose Sanchez / Associated Press)

Today, everyone is forecasting greater things as he prepares to operate behind a rebuilt offensive line projected to make Herbert’s life easier.

He suggested that muting the outside chatter won’t be a problem. Herbert insisted he’ll listen only to those whose opinions matter — family, teammates, coaches — just as he always has.

This is a player who grew up grounded in leafy, tree-lined Eugene, who has experienced broken bones and busted seasons, who had only one personal coach before joining up with Beck last year.

Advertisement

When he was in school, Herbert worked with one guy for one hour and, $100 later, told his father Mark that the money could be better spent elsewhere.

“The way you manage expectations is the outside expectations will never, ever, ever, ever approach your own,” Staley said. “We just focus on him being as good as he can be, on him being himself, not trying to be somebody [else].”

Herbert, according to those who know him well, never has been anything but himself, even in the aftermath of his glorious 15-game NFL debut.

Advertisement

He returned to Oregon this summer and hosted a charity golf tournament that benefited KidSports, a local nonprofit that provides athletic opportunities for children and is the place where Herbert first experienced organized football.

His tournament sold out so fast that the field had to be expanded. More than $150,000 was raised by Herbert and his fellow “celebrities,” a group that included star wide receiver Keenan Allen along with several other Chargers.

“I was as proud watching him give back through the golf tournament as I was watching him play last season,” Mark said. “There are just some bigger things in life. I think he’s on the right path to seeing that.”

Herbert’s father never expected his middle son to be an NFL star. The family lives practically within the shadow of Autzen Stadium, home of the Ducks and Herbert’s stated ultimate destination growing up.

Advertisement

The NFL? That’s a five-hour drive away in Seattle. Until traveling to Denver to watch the Chargers in Week 8 last year, Mark hadn’t been to an NFL game since the late 1980s. He often has pondered how and why so much good has happened to his son so quickly.

He said he considered the professional fate of other notable Pac-12 quarterbacks — think Josh Rosen and Sam Darnold — and wondered, “Why him? Just dumb luck?”

“This is all new to us,” Mark said. “We’re just grateful and gracious that the path he’s on seems like the right one. We’re just parents happy that he’s succeeding. Whatever it is, we’re grateful for it and I think Justin is too.”

It is an adjustment, your unassuming son suddenly sought for television commercials and gaining fame for things such as his latest haircut or ability to barbecue brisket.

Advertisement

A couple of days before the show this month, Herbert turned to Mark and said, “Dad, did I tell you I’m going to the ESPYs?” Mark went online to find out his son had been nominated for an award.

“That’s the way he is about a lot of things,” Mark said. “It’s like, you don’t need to tell anyone how good you are. If you’re really any good, people are going to know.”

For a player who seems to have everything and more, Herbert has experienced empty moments. He broke his leg in high school and missed most of his junior season. He fractured his collarbone as a sophomore at Oregon. His first Ducks team finished 4-8.

There were times in college when Herbert questioned whether he belonged on a Power Five football field. At the 2020 draft combine, he said he didn’t know if was ready to be a starter in the pros because he’d never played in the NFL.

Advertisement

That admission generated outside doubt, former linebacker and current television analyst Emmanuel Acho saying Herbert “could potentially be one of the biggest mistakes of the draft.”

Beck was instrumental in cultivating Herbert’s belief in himself, along with his talent. The two bonded quickly, Beck explaining that they are “both thinkers” and learned in humbled environments rather than at elite camps.

“You just simply played ball,” said Beck, 39, a former NFL quarterback. “That’s how you came up. We both came from a place where nobody’s telling you how great you are. You’re just self-motivated.”

Advertisement

In June, about 16 months after Herbert admitted he didn’t know if he could play in this league, Staley said the most impressive thing about the young quarterback was his presence. He called Herbert “a commander in the offense” and pointed out how comfortable he looks going into and coming out of the huddle and making calls at the line of scrimmage.

All of this adds to the growing notion that this should be a second NFL season more special than the record-setting first.

“Justin has all the tools that you would want,” Beck said. “He’s a smart kid. He’s very determined. It means a lot to him to play well. He’s fully invested. ... He’s exactly what you want when you pick a franchise quarterback.”

At football’s highest level, Herbert is on his way to establishing his game, just five years after someone in his huddle didn’t know his name.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They already have two alpha males in LeBron James and Anthony Davis and now the Lakers have added another in the uber-talented Russell Westbrook.

How the three of them make it fit will determine the fate of the Lakers as they chase the franchise’s 18th NBA championship.

Westbrook, who was acquired from the Washington Wizards for Kyle Kuzma, Kentavious Caldwell-Pope, Montrezl Harrell and the No. 22 pick in the first round of the NBA draft, seems determined to make the marriage work.

Advertisement

“I’ve been blessed to able to go on my 14th season and each year I try to find ways, like I mentioned, to be able to uplift and make my teammates better around me,” Westbrook said Tuesday at his Lakers introductory news conference at Staples Center. “And AD and Bron are friends of mine first, and me being a teammate, my job is to come in and uplift it and they’ll do the same with me, vice versa.

“And as the season prolongs, we will figure it out. There will be ups and there will be downs. That’s normal, that’s OK, but we’re gonna figure out how to play the best way that we want to play to be able to win a championship.”

Westbrook will be the starting point guard for the Lakers, and he has been at his best with the basketball in his hands.

James is at his best with the basketball in his hands, a leading role he has dominated during his career and in the last three seasons with the Lakers.

Westbrook led the league in assists last season, averaging 11.7 per game. He also averaged a triple-double, adding 22.2 points and 11.5 rebounds to go with the assists. And, he has averaged a triple-double in four of his past five seasons.

“As you know, Bron is one of the best players to play this game and his ability to be able to kind of do everything on the floor allows me to be able to just figure it out,” Westbrook said. “I’m coming to a championship-caliber team and my job is to make sure that I’m able to make his game easier for him and I’ll find ways to do that throughout the game. As it pertains to ball-handling and all that, it really doesn’t matter. There’s may different ways you can impact the game without having the ball in your hands and I’ve been able to do that for many years and we’ll figure it out.”

Lakers coach Frank Vogel explained one way Westbrook, James and Davis can thrive.

Advertisement

“I think any time you have three great players like this, there is an element of sacrifice required,” Vogel said. “And we’ve all talked about that and are all in on that. But these three guys can do it all and what I love about our group — Bron, AD and Russ — is they’re all make-the-right-play players, you know what I mean? It’s not just about scoring or being a one-dimensional player. They can all do it all. So, I’m most excited about seeing what the three of them on the court at the same time looks like.”

Lakers Carmelo Anthony ready to write new narrative with Lakers Carmelo Anthony let the media know in no uncertain terms that the advanced age of many Lakers veterans is not the storyline he cares about.

Westbrook, 32, is a local talent who went to UCLA and Lawndale Leuzinger High.

His wife, kids and family live here. He grew up a Lakers fan, admiring Kobe Bryant, who became a friend and mentor for Westbrook.

Advertisement

So, yeah, Westbrook wants this to work so he can win a championship in his hometown.

“It’s surreal. I think it still hasn’t hit me yet, being from L.A., growing up not too far from here and being able to watch the parades, try to go to them try to miss school to try to go to them,” Westbrook said of playing for the Lakers. “Being a Laker fan and being from L.A., but now everything coming full circle for me, it’s a blessing. It’s a blessing. A lot of things I can’t put into actual words because some of these dreams don’t come true for people like myself and I’m truly blessed and thankful for this opportunity.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kyle Kuzma was nervous.

Since joining the Lakers in June 2017, the NBA rookie had waited all summer for the chance to sit down with Kobe Bryant, relentlessly hitting up general manager and Bryant’s former agent Rob Pelinka for such an opportunity.

But when he learned the Lakers legend was about to arrive for their first meeting, Kuzma started sweating. And it didn’t get any better once Bryant got there.

“All of a sudden Kobe walks in, and it’s literally like Moses spreading the ocean,” Kuzma wrote in “The Players’ Tribune.” “Everybody in the restaurant is just looking at him. And he comes to the table, and he’s like, ‘Kuz, what up man?’ Just completely chill. But I’m like, Oh sh—, Kobe knows my name.”

Advertisement

Sports Vanessa Bryant settles lawsuit filed against her by her mother Sofia Urbieta Laine sued Vanessa Bryant, alleging she was due back pay as a nanny and that Kobe Bryant had promised to support her financially.

But Kuzma was quickly put at ease by the future Hall of Famer, who had retired a year earlier after 20 seasons with the Lakers.

“We’re just talking about life, basketball, how I grew up, how he grew up,” Kuzma wrote about his two-hour initial encounter with Bryant, who died in a helicopter crash on Jan. 26, 2020. “The ups and downs of his career. We talked about his business life. Things that really influenced him.

“The cool thing with Kobe — he was always trying to get smart. He was always trying to gain knowledge, and he’d find that from anything. So he’s not just sitting there answering questions. He’s asking me all this stuff, too. Man, just like, ‘How has your upbringing shaped you? How do you think it’s helping you in your pro career right now?’ ” Things like that. And he didn’t have to do those things, but he did.

“That was a really cool night for me. It’s a memory that just gets more important and more special to me as time goes by.”

Lakers’ LeBron James, left, and Kyle Kuzma, wear No. 24 jerseys in remembrance of Kobe Bryant prior to the team’s game against the Portland Trail Blazers on Jan. 31, 2020, five days after Bryant’s death. (Ringo H.W. Chiu / Associated Press)

Kuzma recounted the story as part of an open letter to Los Angeles, less than two weeks after being traded to the Washington Wizards as part of the deal that brought Russell Westbrook to Lakers. He wrote about the thrill it was to be part of a Lakers championship last year.

“Thanks for letting me be my own small part of this great legacy,” Kuzma wrote.

Advertisement

He also discusses some of the all-time greats he’s had as mentors during his four seasons in purple and gold — players like Magic Johnson, James Worthy, Robert Horry and LeBron James.

And, of course, Kobe.

Kuzma related another Mamba story from about a year after their first meeting, when Bryant texted him out of the blue for what Kuzma said ended up being “the hardest workout I’ve ever had in my life.”

Advertisement

“Kobe’s telling me, ‘Alright, we’re going to do this move, do that move. We got 25 reps of each movement,’ ” Kuzma wrote. “Usually you’re in a gym and it’s like make 10, make 12, whatever. We’re doing 25 of each thing, man.

“I get done with this workout, I’m completely, completely dead tired. And I thought it was the worst workout of my life because I’m missing shots and stuff. But you know, we finish strong, shake hands and leave.

“I run into Rob the next day, and he says, ‘Aw man, Kobe said that y’all had a great workout. He said that you were in really good shape.’ And I was like, No f—ing way he said that.”

Kuzma added: “I’ll be telling my grandkids about the time Kobe said I was in shape. You keep stuff like that with you.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As Shohei Ohtani climbed the dugout steps, some 50,000 spectators rose to their feet.

In Saturday night’s game between the Angels and Dodgers, just the sight of the two-way star was enough to cause a stir.

Though Ohtani didn’t start any of the three games, with his designated hitter spot unavailable in the National League Freeway Series and his turn in the rotation not due up, he pinch-hit each day. And when he walked to the plate Saturday, a tied game hung the balance. Chavez Ravine came to life.

Part of the crowd broke out in cheers. Others desperately booed. Some began chanting “M-V-P!” But all admired, either in fear or anticipation or simple awe at a player who, even four months into an historic season, continues to perform in a way the sport has never seen.

Advertisement

“I know there’s other guys having good years, but you have to stop and really analyze and think about what’s going on here,” Angels manager Joe Maddon said recently, when asked to evaluate Ohtani’s chances of winning the American League most valuable player award. “There’s nobody who even comes close to what he’s doing.”

Sports Angels’ future: promising young arms and Corey Seager at shortstop? The Angels may finally have found a solution to their pitching issues, which means they need to pursue a big-time bat. Corey Seager could be the solution.

While Ohtani hasn’t been in top form at the plate lately — he is batting just .138 in his last 11 games with no home runs, his longest drought all season — he is still being treated like one of the most dynamic forces in the game.

Saturday was the latest example, from the stir of the crowd to the decisions Dodgers manager Dave Roberts was forced to weigh in the dugout. Even with runners on first and second and two out, Roberts said he considered intentionally walking Ohtani to load the bases.

Instead, he rolled the dice and had reliever Brusdar Graterol “pitch him carefully.”

The gamble worked. Ohtani struck out against a 101.5-mph fastball to end the inning. And the Dodgers went on to win.

But for a moment, Ohtani had produced more late-game theatrics. Once again, he was center stage. In this Season of Shohei, such scenes have become routine. And though the Angels’ hopes of making the playoffs might be fading, with the club eight games out of a wild-card spot, Ohtani’s star remains as bright as ever.

“It’s not even close,” Maddon said. “What he’s doing is so unique, it’s so different. To compare him to anybody else right now, you just can’t.”

Advertisement

Toronto Blue Jays first baseman Vladimir Guerrero Jr., whose team opens a four-game series in Anaheim on Tuesday, presents the most compelling case.

The 22-year-old son of the Angels’ Hall of Fame legend, Guerrero entered this week leading all batters in wins above replacement, according to Fangraphs. With a .318 average (fourth in the AL), 35 home runs (second) and 87 RBI (first), he has an outside shot at winning the triple crown.

Vladmir Guerrero Jr. of the Toronto Blue Jays is probably the only real competition Shohei Ohtani has for the AL MVP award. (Mary Altaffer / Associated Press)

And yet, with less than two months to play, it seems like Ohtani already has one hand on the plaque.

Advertisement

No other player has a combined Wins Above Replacement — hitting plus pitching — that comes close to topping Ohtani’s 6.5. Ohtani also leads the majors in home runs (37), extra-base hits (65) and slugging percentage (.653), as well as ranking in the top 10 among AL starters with at least 80 innings pitched in earned-run average (2.93) and strikeouts per nine innings (11.09)

Ohtani is a massive MVP favorite in the betting markets, with minus-750 odds to win the award, according to BetMGM.

The National League race is setting up to have the more intriguing finish, especially with Fernando Tatis Jr. of the San Diego Padres targeting a return from injury while Bryce Harper of the Philadelphia Phillies continues a midseason surge.

And most pundits aren’t even wielding the Angels’ mediocre 56-56 record — the 21st time this season they’ve been exactly .500 — against Ohtani the way they traditionally do with Mike Trout and other past winners on similar teams.

Advertisement

“If he continues along this path and stays well,” Maddon said, “it’s hard to argue against him.”

Instead, fans have grown ever-more enamored with the 27-year-old All-Star as the season has gone along, his popularity transcending the field like few others in the sport.

Every time the Angels have Ohtani-themed giveaways at home games — including shirts, bobbleheads and even a pillow — online auction sites immediately have the products listed for sale, sometimes for more than $100.

Last month, two Ohtani jerseys auctioned off on MLB.com for charity received record-breaking bids for the site of more than $100,000.

Advertisement

And a week after Ohtani shined in a two-way performance at the All-Star game, he signed a multiyear partnership with global merchandise brand Fanatics — which to that point in July had seen Ohtani become its top-selling athlete, doing more sales across its network of sites than any player in any sport.

“The last few years, we’ve had a couple of real breakouts that have had a significant influence on the memorabilia business: Aaron Judge, Pete Alonso, Tatis and others,” said Victor Shaffer, executive vice president of Fanatics Authentic, the company’s memorabilia and collectibles division.

“[Ohtani] is up with them, if not beyond. … There’s a pretty significant enthusiasm, and not only among the Angels fanbase. It spans to all baseball fans at this point, because what he’s doing is so extraordinary.”

Advertisement

It’s all setting up for a coronation over the final stretch of the season.

Ohtani already has overcome the doubts that accompanied him entering this campaign. He’s instilled disbelief with the continued excellence of his two-way play. Now, he has a couple months left to cement what might be one of the most celebrated individual seasons of all time.

“This guy is doing something that nobody’s ever done,” Maddon said. “You’re gonna see incredible offensive numbers, then incredible pitching numbers. And how could you walk away from that? That’s different. That’s the most valuable player in baseball, pretty much.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Newly acquired speedster Trea Turner was in the leadoff spot. Max Muncy hit second, and Mookie Betts hit third. Corey Seager, who missed 10 weeks because of a right hand fracture, batted cleanup. Justin Turner, Will Smith, Chris Taylor and Cody Bellinger hit fifth through eighth, respectively.

Dodgers manager Dave Roberts should have saved the lineup card from Saturday night’s game against the Angels, because it might be a while before gets all of his superstars on the field at the same time again.

Betts was scratched from Tuesday night’s series opener against the Philadelphia Phillies because of a sore right hip, and Roberts said another stint on the 10-day injury list for the right fielder is “very probable.”

Betts was sidelined by the same injury for the final two weeks of July. He hit .381 (eight for 21) with three homers and four RBIs in five games since being activated on Aug. 1.

Advertisement

“He came in achy, sore … basically he can’t play,” Roberts said. “I’m frustrated for Mookie because he wants to be out there, and he can’t physically do it. We had one day together on Saturday, when we had everyone [in the lineup] how we envisioned.”

The Dodgers hoped to “manage” the hip injury by playing Betts periodically at second base and giving him regular days off, but “it almost seems like it’s worse coming off the off day,” Roberts said.

Betts received a cortisone injection in July, and he could take another shot. Roberts said Betts has not sustained a “labrum tear” in the hip, but he also didn’t rule out the possibility of Betts undergoing postseason surgery.

“I think everything is on the table right now,” Roberts said. “We’re running tests, having conversations. … As we get through the season, I’m sure [postseason surgery] will be discussed. I’m not sure we know what surgery would be required, but right now, that’s not on the table.”

Roster moves

Reliever Corey Knebel, out since April 24 because of a right lat strain, was activated for Tuesday night’s game after a five-game rehabilitation stint in which he gave up one earned run and four hits, struck out 11 and walked one in 5 1/3 innings for triple-A Oklahoma City.

Roberts said before the game that he would feel comfortable throwing the hard-throwing right-hander, who went 1-0 with a 4.50 ERA in eight games for the Dodgers, into high-leverage situations.

Reliever Joe Kelly, who is 2-0 with a 3.34 ERA in 31 games, was placed on the injured list because of undisclosed reasons. The Dodgers added right-hander Conner Greene, a Santa Monica High graduate, to the active roster and optioned outfielder Zach Reks to triple-A.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hello and welcome to the L.A. Times soccer newsletter. I’m Kevin Baxter, the Times’ soccer writer, and as you read this, I should be 36,000 feet over the Pacific and winging my way back from the Tokyo Olympics.

The COVID Games were my fourth Olympics and the first I covered in which there were no fans. Face masks were ubiquitous, everyone was required to use hand sanitizer in copious quantities before entering a building, there was regular coronavirus testing and social distancing was strictly enforced at most venues.

The players felt the differences too.

“This whole tournament has been about adapting,” USWNT veteran Carli Lloyd said. “No fans. Can’t leave the hotel. Stand 10 feet from [the media]. Everybody’s in the same boat.”

Advertisement

The tournament almost certainly marked the last competitive international event for Lloyd. She and Megan Rapinoe dropped hints multiple times that more than a decade and half of sweat and sacrifice was enough. And with the next Women’s World Cup two years away, Lloyd is anxious to start spending time with her husband and family, with whom she recently reconciled after years of estrangement.

“It’s always kind of been in the back of my mind,” she said of retirement. “But I’ve always wanted to be the one to dictate that, not media and not coaches.”

Newsletter All about the beautiful game Go inside the L.A. pro soccer scene and beyond in Kevin Baxter's weekly newsletter. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

A better coda for a spectacular career would have included a gold medal, but if Tokyo proves to be the end for Lloyd, her exit was pretty good just the same. She scored twice in the bronze-medal game and her final goal was classic Lloyd, with the veteran forward racing Australian defender Alanna Kennedy — 13 years her junior — to a Christen Press through-ball, then beating former UCLA keeper Teagan Micah with a clinical finish.

Here’s another reason it was a classic Lloyd goal: In three of the four Olympic Games she played in, she scored the last U.S. goal to win her team a medal — two of them gold and the last one bronze. It also was the 128th goal of her career, tying Germany’s Birgit Prinz for fifth all time, and her 10th in Olympic play, most by an American.

Fun fact: @CarliLloyd has played in three Olympic medal matches. She’s scored in all of them (including two braces 🔥🔥)



🎥 @TelemundoSports pic.twitter.com/5xshcIRVwU — U.S. Soccer WNT (@USWNT) August 5, 2021

“Obviously we were striving for gold,” said Lloyd, whose 312th international appearance gave her sole possession of second place on the all-time list. “When you get third place in a World Cup, you get a little chintzy medal from FIFA. This [bronze] isn’t chintzy. It’s just a different color. Not everybody gets them and it’s truly special and we had to dig really deep to get it.”

Lloyd and Rapinoe are not the only ones for whom the bronze medal likely will be a parting gift. The U.S. roster in Tokyo included 17 players off the victorious 2019 World Cup team, and if the Games had been played on time a year ago, the Americans might have become the first team to win world and Olympic titles in the same cycle.

Advertisement

But the Games were delayed by COVID-19 and by the time the U.S. got to Japan, its team averaged more than 30 years of age, making it the oldest one the Americans ever fielded. It looked every bit its age, shut out three times in its first five games.

The U.S. had gone 44 matches and more than 2½ years without a loss when it left for Tokyo. It then lost twice in 12 days after it got there, marking the end of a spectacular run.

The team will need an extensive remake ahead of the 2023 World Cup. Lloyd turned 39 in Japan and Rapinoe, who also scored twice in the bronze-medal game, turned 36 last month, the same age as captain Becky Sauerbrunn. Alyssa Naeher, Kelley O’Hara and Tobin Heath are 33, Alex Morgan and Press are 32.

That’s eight starters who are older than anyone on the rosters for Japanese, Chinese and Zambians — combined. Tokyo clearly marked the end of one era and the start of another one for the U.S. women’s team. For Lloyd, a two-time world player of the year, it feels like the right time to hand off the baton.

Advertisement

“Not to put this in a bad way, but when you win a lot it’s like how do you keep finding that next gear and that next push to keep getting better and better?” she said. “That’s why winning the World Cup and then turning around and winning an Olympics is challenging. We lost our way a little bit. I don’t think it was one particular thing, but I think that we maybe needed this tournament to go the way that it did for everybody to realize how important that culture is.

“On paper yeah, we look like the best team in the world. But talent doesn’t get you medals. Every medal that I’ve won, every World Cup that I’ve won, we haven’t necessarily been the best team, but we’ve had the best mentality and the best fight.”

It’s time to let others continue that fight.

Is Mexico about to experience a continental shift?

Speaking of Tokyo, it was a little surprising to hear Jaime Lozano, coach of Mexico’s Olympic team, talk about the importance of young players going to Europe near the end of his team’s run to a bronze medal.

Advertisement

But he’s not wrong.

After Mexico’s semifinal loss to Brazil in a penalty-kick shootout — El Tri followed that with a dominant performance in a 3-1 win over Japan in the third-place game — Lozano was asked if the players on his team would be able to use the Olympic experience as a springboard to a permanent spot on the senior team, as players on the 2012 gold medal-winning team did.

Lozano used his answer to say he hoped to see “the majority of our players, the overwhelming majority, make it to Europe to play in good clubs to play at the elite level.”

That’s a formula the U.S. has used to great success lately — and the contrast with Mexico is striking. In last June’s Nations League final, the U.S. fielded a roster that included 19 players from European clubs while 15 players on Mexico’s team played in either the domestic Liga MX or MLS.

Advertisement

Changing that would appear to be at odds with the strategy new Liga MX president Mikel Arriola has adopted to strengthen the league. Arriola frequently touts statistics to buttress whatever points he is trying to make, and one of his favorite figures lately has been the explosive growth in value of Liga MX players over the last dozen years.

That has been aided, in part, by the decision of many Mexicans — among them Luis Rodríguez, Henry Martín and Orbelín Pineda — to stay home and the return of others — Carlos Salcido, Memo Ochoa, Uriel Antuna and Héctor Moreno, for example — who had gone to Europe.

That may be changing. In July, JJ Macías joined Spain’s Getafe on a season-long loan, while Pineda reportedly will join El Tri teammate Néstor Araujo at Celta Vigo in December. Jorge Sánchez, the right back on the Olympic team, has been tied to Tottenham and Everton. Other players soon could enter similar conversations.

I don’t buy the argument those moves will hurt Mexican soccer. It certainly didn’t hurt the U.S. Not only did the national team get stronger when young players such as Zack Steffen, DeAndre Yedlin, Reggie Cannon, Weston McKennie and Chris Richards left for Europe, but MLS never has been stronger — or more popular — as well.

Advertisement

Having national team players compete and succeed in the biggest leagues in the world creates excitement and makes players better. But just as important, it also opens spots on domestic rosters and creates opportunities for young players to develop.

And there’s a market for young Mexican players, which should interest their clubs. América got more than $15 million when it let Raúl Jiménez, a star of the 2012 U-23 team, go to Atlético Madrid.

“The Mexican player has to understand that leaving will generate a football maturity and in the long run an interesting economic return,” said Carlos Hermosillo, who played 13 years for the national team but just five games in Europe.

“The clubs have to understand that in order to grow our football, we have to generate young players.”

Advertisement

LAFC forward Carlos Vela (10) reacts to a call during a match against the Vancouver Whitecaps July 24. (Ringo H.W. Chiu / Associated Press)

LAFC ties franchise record for futility

LAFC’s tailspin may now be a death spiral with Sunday’s 2-1 loss to San Jose extending its winless streak to five games, tying the franchise record. It’s not just the fact that LAFC is losing but, rather, how it’s losing that is most troublesome.

Two years ago LAFC broke the league record for points in a season and tied the MLS mark for goals with 85. It has the last two Golden Boot winners in Carlos Vela and Diego Rossi. But it’s not the same team.

LAFC (6-7-5) hasn’t scored more than two goals in a game this year and got just one on its own in its last two games, with Sunday’s lone score in San Jose coming on an own goal.

Advertisement

“There’s no doubt we are frustrated as a group,” said coach Bob Bradley, whose team has a negative goal differential and just a two-point edge over Real Salt Lake, FC Dallas and San Jose in the battle for the Western Conference’s final playoff berth. “Too many results where we don’t find a way to come out on top.”

Bradley, who was unwavering in his commitment to a pressing, ball-control, 4-3-3 formation in his first three seasons, has tried a number of combinations this season in an effort to shake his team out of its funk. But the players don’t seem to be reacting to Bradley’s machinations the way they did over the last three seasons, when no team in MLS scored more goals, won more games or earned more points.

The uniforms are the same and some of the players are the same but the results certainly aren’t. And things seem to be getting worse, not better. LAFC, which already made two huge trades and two acquisitions in the last couple of weeks, may need to make even more substantial changes soon if it hopes to salvage this season.

Sunday the slumping Rossi was held out of the starting 11, with Bradley using Brian Rodríguez and the recently acquired Cristian Arango up top. And while Arango went 68 minutes in his MLS debut, helping LAFC take 16 shots, six on target, it didn’t get a goal on its own.

Advertisement

“Everyone is sad right now,” midfielder Latif Blessing added. “It’s been tough. We need to tell ourselves that it is not over. We have more games to go. We need to set up ourselves to play good and win game by game. That is the mentality we need to have and keep going.”

That could be tough given that LAFC’s next game involves its longest trip of the season, to Atlanta for its only Eastern Conference away game. Atlanta United has lost just two of seven games at home this year.

Galaxy forward Kévin Cabral (9) heads the ball against Portland Timbers defender Bill Tuiloma (25) and defender Josecarlos van Rankin in Carson, Calif., on July 30. (Alex Gallardo / Associated Press)

The Galaxy, meanwhile, are steaking the other way with Sunday’s 1-1 draw with Vancouver extending its unbeaten streak to a season-best three games. But the team, needing a win to gain a share of first place in the conference table, played poorly, dropping points at home for the third time in 10 games.

Advertisement

The goal came from Kévin Cabral, who has known mostly hard luck early in his MLS career with just two of his 26 shots going in through 14 games.

“Game after game I’m adapting. There’s a lot of physicality in this league,” Cabral said through a translator. “As a striker the confidence comes with goals. But the draw is frustrating.”

The Galaxy led in just about every statistical category, from possession and shots to passes and passing accuracy. But the Whitecaps battled them to a tie on the most important stat, goals.

“I know the group is disappointed because you have an opportunity today, at home, to go out and jump into first place and we let it slide,” coach Greg Vanney said. “But the message is maybe we weren’t ready to take it today. We need to be ready to take it the next time we get it and we need to keep getting better and keep improving playing over 90 minutes.”

Advertisement

Lionel Messi cries at the start of a press conference at the Camp Nou stadium in Barcelona Sunday. (Joan Monfort / Associated Press)

And finally there’s this …

Lionel Messi bid adieu to Barcelona after 21 years and a record 682 goals in a tearful press conference Sunday as thousands of fans, many wearing Messi’s No. 10 jersey, gathered outside Camp Nou, the only home stadium he’s known during his club career. The 34-year-old has been at Barcelona for 21 years and became its all-time top scorer with 672 goals in 778 appearances in all competition. The six-time Ballon d’Or winner led Barcelona to 35 trophies and had agreed to a five-year extension with the club that included a 50% pay cut, but La Liga would not approve the contract because, even with the reduction, it would have put the club over the league’s spending cap. Messi joined former Barcelona teammate Neymar and Kylian Mbappe at Paris Saint-Germain. … Speaking of Barcelona, for the first time in its more than 40 years, Barcelona has opened its famed La Masia training academy to female residents. Nine Barça B women will be combining sport and study while living at the Centre de Formació Oriol Tort. Among the male players who lived and trained there are Messi, Pep Guardiola, Andrés Iniesta and Gerard Piqué.

Quotebook

“These recent days, I’ve been giving lots of thought about what I could say, and the truth is that I can’t think of anything. This is really difficult for me after so many years, being here my entire life. I’m not ready for this and honestly last year with all the nonsense, I was convinced I knew what I wanted to say. But this year is not the same.”

Lionel Messi in his good-bye press conference after 21 years at Barcelona

Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lionel Messi signed a contract with Paris Saint-Germain on Tuesday to end his career-long association with Barcelona and start a new era for PSG.

The French club said in a statement that the 34-year-old Argentina star signed a two-year deal with the option for a third season.

“I am excited to begin a new chapter of my career at Paris Saint-Germain,“ Messi said. “Everything about the club matches my football ambitions. I know how talented the squad and the coaching staff are here. I am determined to help build something special for the club and the fans, and I am looking forward to stepping out onto the pitch at the Parc des Princes.”

No salary details were given, but a person with knowledge of the negotiations earlier told the Associated Press that Messi is set to earn around $41 million net annually. The person spoke on condition of anonymity before the contract was signed.

Advertisement

“I am delighted that Lionel Messi has chosen to join Paris Saint-Germain and we are proud to welcome him and his family to Paris,“ PSG chairman Nasser Al-Khelaifi said. “He has made no secret of his desire to continue competing at the very highest level and winning trophies, and naturally our ambition as a club is to do the same.”

It is symbolic that Messi will wear the No. 30 jersey — the same number he wore in his first two seasons with Barcelona before switching to No. 19 and then the prized No. 10, which Neymar gets to keep at PSG.

PSG fans gathered at Le Bourget Airport in Paris to welcome Messi, who was wearing a T-shirt featuring “Ici c’est Paris” — “Here is Paris.”

The words are a long-familiar refrain from a favored fan chant at Parc des Princes stadium, where Messi is to be presented to them before kickoff of Saturday night’s game against Strasbourg.

Such was the fervor of his arrival that police had to push back to stop metal barriers from toppling over at the airport as fans surged forward to get a better view. He then traveled into Paris with a police escort that included several officers on motorbikes and clad in black at the back of it.

As disbelief at landing one of soccer’s all-time greats turned to sheer enthusiasm, many gathered for a glimpse of Messi at the stadium. They got their wish as the smiling superstar briefly waved to them before he underwent a medical check.

Earlier, Messi’s father and agent, Jorge, had also confirmed his son was moving to PSG in a brief exchange with reporters at Josep Tarradellas Barcelona-El Prat Airport before he took his flight in the early afternoon.

Messi arrived with his wife and three children and boarded a private jet.

Advertisement

“With it all, toward a new adventure. The five together,” Antonela Roccuzzo said on Instagram alongside a photo with her husband on the plane.

PSG supporters have seen their club transformed over the last decade since the influx of Qatari sovereign wealth investment linked to the emir. Once Messi’s Barcelona contract expired — and the Catalan club was unable to afford to keep him — PSG was one of the few clubs that could finance a deal to sign the six-time world player of the year.

Newsletter All about the beautiful game Go inside the L.A. pro soccer scene and beyond in Kevin Baxter's weekly newsletter. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Messi’s arrival gives PSG formidable attacking options as he links up with France World Cup winner Kylian Mbappe and Brazil forward Neymar.

Advertisement

While PSG had to pay $261 million to sign Neymar from Barcelona in 2017, there was no transfer fee for Messi.

Messi became the most desired free agent in soccer history after his attempts to stay at Barcelona were rejected last week by the Spanish league because the salary would not comply with financial regulations, with the Catalan club burdened by debts of more than $1.4 billion.

PSG coach Mauricio Pochettino quickly made contact with his fellow Argentine after Barcelona announced last Thursday that Messi would be leaving the club he joined as a 13-year-old.

Messi won every major honor with Barcelona and was granted a tearful exit news conference on Sunday to signal the end of an era. Only Cristiano Ronaldo in the current era challenges Messi’s status as an all-time great.

Advertisement

PSG will be hoping not only that Messi helps the team regain the French title it lost to Lille last season, but finally win the Champions League.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s not panic time for high school football, but the number of teams pulling out of season openers Aug. 19 and 20 because of COVID-19 protocols continues to grow.

Santa Ana Mater Dei, Servite and Loyola are all looking for replacement opening games after Corona Centennial, Bishop Amat and Muir had to cancel because they would not have enough required practices completed in time to play games. Servite and Bishop Amat will delay playing each other until week three.

The City Section is in worse shape. Belmont has pulled out of its game with Marshall. Marquez, Bell, L.A. Wilson, Dorsey and Chavez had to pause practices. Carson has been struggling to get enough players cleared to begin practices. Schools are also trying to build up depleted rosters to make it through a 10-game schedule.

It appears it’s going to be touch and go next week to see which teams can play, forcing schools and coaches to bring back the strategy of last spring, when they had to rapidly find replacement games and hope their administration agrees to last-minute replacements.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Howdy, I’m your host, Houston Mitchell. Let’s get right to the news.

Jack Harris on the Angels: As Shohei Ohtani climbed the dugout steps, some 50,000 spectators rose to their feet.

Newsletter Go beyond the scoreboard Get the latest on L.A.'s teams in the daily Sports Report newsletter. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

In Saturday night’s game between the Angels and Dodgers, just the sight of the two-way star was enough to cause a stir.

Advertisement

Though Ohtani didn’t start any of the three games, with his designated hitter spot unavailable in the Dodgers-hosted Freeway Series and his turn in the rotation not due up, he pinch-hit each day. And when he walked to the plate Saturday, a tied score hung the balance. Chavez Ravine came to life.

Part of the crowd broke out in cheers. Others desperately booed. Some began chanting “M-V-P!” But all admired, either in fear or anticipation or simple awe at a player who, even four months into an historic season, continues to perform in a way the sport has never seen.

“I know there’s other guys having good years, but you have to stop and really analyze and think about what’s going on here,” Angels manager Joe Maddon said recently, when asked to evaluate Ohtani’s chances of winning the American League most valuable player award. “There’s nobody who even comes close to what he’s doing.”

Toronto Blue Jays first baseman Vladimir Guerrero Jr., whose team opens a four-game series in Anaheim on Tuesday, presents the most compelling case.

The 22-year-old son of the Angels’ Hall of Fame legend, Guerrero entered this week leading all batters in wins above replacement, according to Fangraphs. With a .318 average (fourth in the AL), 35 home runs (second) and 87 RBI (first), he has an outside shot at winning the triple crown.

And yet, with less than two months to play, it seems like Ohtani already has one hand on the plaque.

————

Angels’ future: promising young arms and Corey Seager at shortstop?

Advertisement

Enjoying this newsletter? Consider subscribing to the Los Angeles Times Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Become a subscriber.

DODGERS

Bill Shaikin on the Dodgers: When the Dodgers acquired Danny Duffy from the Kansas City Royals last month, they traded for a pitcher on the injured list. They hoped to activate him for the final weeks of the season.

The final two weeks, as it turns out.

The Dodgers put Duffy and Clayton Kershaw on the 60-day injured list Monday, creating 40-man roster spots for catcher Anthony Bemboom and pitcher Conner Greene, each of whom they claimed off waivers. For Kershaw, who already has missed a month because of what the team says is elbow inflammation, the move amounts to paperwork: Manager Dave Roberts said Thursday that Kershaw would not return until “sometime in September.”

Advertisement

Duffy, who has not pitched since July 16 because of a strained left flexor muscle, said last week he had been advised he could return anywhere from late August to early September. The move to the 60-day IL means he can return no sooner than Sept. 15. At that point, the Dodgers would have 16 games left in the regular season.

Thun Nhi Nguyen on the Bruins: Chip Kelly’s first recruiting class signaled the beginning of a new era for UCLA football. The 2018 group headlined by quarterback Dorian Thompson-Robinson signed with immense promise and high expectations but carried a large warning label.

Some assembly required.

Three years of program building later, the Bruins have grown into one of the most experienced teams in the Pac-12 with Kelly’s first recruiting class entering its senior year. The table is set for what should be their long-awaited breakout season.

Advertisement

“We’re all old now,” senior offensive lineman Jon Gaines II said. “It’s on us to have the standard that we hold ourselves to. … The time is now.”

UCLA lost just two starters on offense and defense combined — the fewest of any team in the Pac-12 — and is tied with California for the third-highest percentage of upperclassmen in the conference, trailing just Stanford and USC.

LAKERS

Broderick Turner on the Lakers: Carmelo Anthony is 37, was how the question began, and LeBron James turns 37 on Dec. 30 …

“We don’t care,” Anthony answered before the question was finished.

Advertisement

Dwight Howard is 35, Trevor Ariza is 36, Marc Gasol is 36 ….

“We … don’t … care …” Anthony said, smiling. “We make our own narrative.”

The story line is that the Lakers are old by NBA standards or they are a very experienced team, depending on your view.

The truth is that eight of the 12 players on the Lakers’ current roster are 30 or older, six of them joining the team this summer.

Advertisement

With the 20-something players of Anthony Davis (28), Talen Horton-Tucker (20), Malik Monk (23) and Kendrick Nunn (26), the Lakers’ average age is 31.2 years.

Anthony in his first news conference with the Los Angeles media on Monday since joining the Lakers on a veteran minimum deal talked about how players of his generation have taken care of their bodies and that has allowed them to extend their careers.

“I think just the concept and the seriousness behind taking care of yourself, like, we really understand what that means from a holistic standpoint — the mind, body and soul,” Anthony said. “We are there at that point of our career where we understand the importance of what it means to take care of your body. What it means to take care of your mind. And in this situation, experience comes into play.”

CLIPPERS

Andrew Greif on the Clippers: For the first time in five weeks, the Clippers are playing basketball again. At least one version of them, anyway.

Advertisement

The roster coached by assistant Jeremy Castleberry during NBA Summer League in Las Vegas is hardly the same that will begin training camp in late September under the guidance of coach Tyronn Lue, of course. That doesn’t mean that everything that happens over the course of the next week-plus in Las Vegas will stay inside Nevada Las Vegas’ Thomas & Mack Center and Cox Pavilion. The Clippers are hoping that the development shown there carries into the fall and winter.

With the Clippers playing five games during their stay — a schedule that begins Monday night against Milwaukee — here are five reasons to watch their action closely.

Click here for the list.

SPARKS

Thuc Nhi Nguyen on the Sparks: When Nneka Ogwumike had every reason to shrink away from the spotlight, the Sparks forward kept a brave face front and center.

Advertisement

Nursing a knee injury last month, she was still cheering and coaching her teammates during a six-game losing streak. She did media events as a star in “Space Jam: A New Legacy” and spoke to kids about her experience in the movie. She never let on that she was dealing with the personal and professional disappointment of a third consecutive Olympic snub and the longest injury absence of her career.

On Monday, it became too much to bear.

“I just want to play basketball,” Ogwumike said through tears while discussing the last two months that have been among the most trying of her illustrious career.

First there was a Grade 2 knee sprain that sidelined the star forward for more than a month. Then came USA Basketball’s controversial decision to keep Ogwumike off the Olympic roster despite earning most valuable player of the 2019 qualifying tournament. When she tried to make lemonade out of the sour situation by looking for an opportunity to play for Nigeria, FIBA denied her waiver request. She is still the only WNBA MVP to not be named to an Olympic roster.

Advertisement

1900 — The first Davis Cup is held with the United States beating Britain, 3-0.

1949 — Ezzard Charles knocks out Gus Lesnovich in the eighth round at Yankee Stadium in his first world heavyweight title defense.

1975 — Jack Nicklaus wins the PGA Championship for the fourth time with a two-stroke victory over Bruce Crampton and Tom Weiskopf.

1980 — Jack Nicklaus wins his fifth PGA Championship with a record score of 274, seven strokes ahead of Andy Bean.

Advertisement

1984 — The much anticipated matchup between American world champion Mary Decker and South African Zola Budd in the women’s 3000-meter race at the Los Angeles Olympics ends in controversy. Just past the midpoint of the race, Decker steps on Budd’s heel, causing Budd to stumble and Decker to trip over Budd. Budd gets back into the race and Decker goes down with an injured thigh. Romania’s Maricica Puica, who had set the fastest time in 1984, wins the race and Budd finishes seventh.

1995 — Michael Bradley, a third-year pro without a tour victory, shoots a record-tying 63 in his first PGA round to lead the PGA Championship.

1996 — Cigar’s bid for a 17th straight victory ends when longshot Dare and Go passes the super horse in the upper stretch and pulls away to win the Pacific Classic at Del Mar. Cigar, 3 1-2 lengths behind Dare and Go, fails to break a tie with Citation for the record winning streak by a North American-based horse this century.

2008 — In Beijing, Michael Phelps begins his long march toward eight gold medals by winning the 400-meter individual medley in 4:03.84 — smashing his own world record. The U.S. women’s 400-meter freestyle relay team, anchored by 41-year-old Dara Torres, takes the silver behind the Netherlands’ Olympic record effort. It’s the 10th medal of Torres’ career.

Advertisement

2008 — Ireland’s Padraig Harrington rallies from three shots behind to win the PGA Championship, closing with a 4-under 66 at Oakland Hills to become the fourth player to win the British Open and PGA in the same year. Harrington, the first European to win consecutive majors, closes out Sergio Garcia with a 15-foot par on the 18th for a two-shot victory.

2012 — The United States wins the women’s 4x100-meter track relay in a world-record time of 40.82 seconds to give the Americans their first Olympic victory in the event since 1996. Tianna Madison, Allyson Felix, Bianca Knight and Carmelita Jeter combine for a perfect trip around the track that ends a string of disappointments for the U.S. in the marquee relay.

2012 — Maurice Purify catches a record seven touchdown passes and the Arizona Rattlers win the Arena Bowl with a 72-54 win over the Philadelphia Soul.

2014 — Rory McIlroy wins his second straight major championship and fourth of his young career, rallying on the back nine in the PGA Championship. The tournament finishes in near-darkness at Valhalla Golf Club, with the final two groups essentially morphing into a foursome as they race to beat nightfall. McIlroy rallies from a three-shot deficit at the turn, to shoot a 3-under 68 to beat Phil Mickelson by one stroke. McIlroy finishes at 16-under 268.

Advertisement

2016 — Daryl Homer becomes the first American to win an Olympic silver medal in men’s individual sabre in 112 years.

2016 — Kristin Armstrong wins the road cycling individual time trial, finishing with a time of 44:26.42 for her third consecutive gold in the Olympic event.

And finally

Zola Budd and Mary Decker Slaney discuss their famous race. Watch it here.

Until next time... That concludes today’s newsletter. If you have any feedback, ideas for improvement or things you’d like to see, email me at houston.mitchell@latimes.com, and follow me on Twitter at @latimeshouston . To get this newsletter in your inbox, click here .
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Second in a series of stories profiling top high school football players in the Southland by position.

It’s easy to be excited about the impressive skills developed by a rising group of young quarterback prospects in Southern California.

Junior Malachi Nelson of Los Alamitos, an Oklahoma commit, might be the best at any age. He has competition from junior Nicholaus Iamaleava of Downey Warren, sophomore Elijah Brown of Santa Ana Mater Dei, junior Pierce Clarkson of Bellflower St. John Bosco, junior Jaxon Potter of Santa Margarita, junior Kadin Semonza of Mission Viejo, junior Jack Jacobs of La Canada St. Francis, sophomore Bryan Wilson of Chino Hills Ayala and junior Javance Tupouata-Johnson of Sherman Oaks Notre Dame. All had moments of success and showed potential during the six-week spring season.

Freshman Alonzo Esparza of Culver City is set to start at quarterback after impressive performances in summer competitions.

Advertisement

It means the seniors this fall must step up their game, and they appear ready for the challenge based on college options. Katin Hauser of St. John Bosco is committed to Michigan State. Noah Fifita of Anaheim Servite is headed to Arizona. Brandon Rose of Murrieta Valley has committed to Utah. Other talented seniors include Simi Valley’s Travis Throckmorton (who committed to Oregon State), Gardena Serra’s Maalik Murphy (Texas), Inglewood’s Justyn Martin (California), Valencia’s Tyler Voss (San Jose State) and Apple Valley’s Jayden Denegal (Michigan).

No position generates greater scrutiny than quarterback, and the way college quarterbacks are switching schools with the help of the transfer portal is a reminder that it is also happening at the high school level, where coaches appreciate having four-year quarterbacks but also know it’s becoming a rarity.

“There’s not many around,” Simi Valley coach Jim Benkert said of a talented quarterback playing four years at one high school.

“You see it in the college game. They don’t wait their turn anymore. I think there’s 125 quarterbacks in the portal. I think it’s the way of life now. Only one can play. They look behind them and don’t compete anymore. It’s what’s happening in high school. There’s very little home-grown kids that stay where they are. Maybe it’s good. Maybe it’s not. It’s the way it is.”

Long Beach Poly has one of those vanishing breeds in senior Shea Kuykendall, a straight-A student who told coach Stephen Barbee when he arrived as a freshman, “I’m going to be your guy for four years — no doubt.”

After playing on the freshman-sophomore team his first season, Kuykendall split time with a transfer student as a sophomore. During the past pandemic-delayed spring season, he guided the Jackrabbits to a 5-0 record. Now he faces competition from another transfer student, sophomore Darius Curry, who left Playa del Rey St. Bernard.

Kuykendall said he welcomes Curry’s arrival.

“Actually I’m really glad Darius transferred in,” Kuykendall said. “I get to teach a young guy and coach him up and he’s going to have the next two years at Poly.”

Advertisement

In recent years, coaches have tried to keep quarterbacks happy by alternating series. Corona Centennial won a Division 1 championship that way in 2014. St. John Bosco did it last season. But it doesn’t work unless the individuals embrace the idea of sharing time and helping each other, and it also helps that the parents buy in, too.

People should be rooting for Kuykendall’s success because he’s old school — focuses on academics, works hard, embraces competition, wants to help his school’s legacy, a team leader, does whatever the coach asks. He’s always trying to get better.

“Shea has been a consummate leader for all four years in this program, in the classroom and on the field,” Barbee said. “He is one of the top quarterbacks in Southern California and there isn’t a throw that he can’t make. “

Added Kuykendall: “There’s a lot of stress that comes with being a quarterback. There’s a lot of eyes staring down at you on the field. The most important thing is you have to have ice in your veins and focus on what you’re doing on the field.”

Advertisement

Wednesday: Jakob Galloway, Wilmington Banning running back

QUARTERBACKS TO WATCH

Player, School, Ht., Wt., Yr. Comment

Elijah Brown, Santa Ana Mater Dei, 6-2, 180, So. Guided team to 5-0 record as freshman.

Advertisement

Pierce Clarkson, St. John Bosco, 6-0, 205, Jr. A leader who can run and pass.

Noah Fifita, Servite, 5-10, 170, Sr. Arizona commit is exciting, prolific player.

Katin Houser, St. John Bosco, 6-3, 200, Sr. Michigan State commit is precision passer.

Nicholaus Iamaleava, Warren, 6-6, 210, Jr. Passed for 17 touchdowns in five games this spring.

Advertisement

Shea Kuykendall, Long Beach Poly, 6-1, 202, Sr. Poised for his best season yet.

Maalik Murphy, Gardena Serra, 6-4, 225, Sr. Texas commit has big-time talent.

Malachi Nelson, Los Alamitos, 6-3, 180, Jr. Oklahoma commit with powerful arm.

Brandon Rose, Murrieta Valley, 6-2, 195, Sr. Utah commit had 11 touchdowns, 1 interception in spring.

Advertisement

Travis Throckmorton, Simi Valley, 6-3, 205, Sr. Oregon State commit is rising prospect.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hi, and welcome to another edition of Dodgers Dugout. My name is Houston Mitchell, and a couple of quick thoughts before we get to the main topic.

Newsletter Are you a true-blue fan? Get our Dodgers Dugout newsletter for insights, news and much more. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

—Trea Turner obviously has the ability to tap into the Speed Force.

—An idiot fan ran onto the field during Sunday’s game and eluded security until he was finally tackled by the ball girl. That was outstanding.

Advertisement

—There has been a recent rise in the number of fans running onto the field. Don’t do it. You just look like a doofus to most of the remaining fans, and if the highlight of your life is running onto a field during a baseball game, well ...

—Albert Pujols, on homering for the first time against the Angels, who tossed him aside like he was worthless: “To me, I’m just glad to be able to contribute to the ballclub and help win the series. I didn’t put too much thought into it. It can be looked at a different way since it’s a former team, but I don’t look at it like that.” That’s the right thing to say, but I’m not buying it.

—It’s amazing to me that in a season where no breaks have gone the Dodgers’ way, when injuries have piled up like cordwood, where everything has gone the Giants’ way (on top of them playing outstanding baseball), that the Dodgers are on pace to win 97 games, normally enough to win the NL West.

Enjoying this newsletter? Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Become a Los Angeles Times subscriber.

Extra-inning losses

The Dodgers lost in extra innings on Friday, falling to 1-12 on the season in extra-inning games. Emails always come in asking what is happening, and my general response is the Dodgers haven’t had a lot of bullpen depth, and that their offense isn’t designed for small ball, and small ball is a good strategy when the inning starts with a runner on second and you need one run to win.

But it might be helpful to revisit all 13 extra-inning games the Dodgers played and see what happened. So here we go.

April 7

at Oakland 4, Dodgers 3 (10)

The Dodgers get two fly balls and a strikeout in the top of the inning, while Oakland wins in the bottom of the 10th after a flyball advances the runner to third and a single. Losing pitcher: Jimmy Nelson.

Advertisement

April 16

Dodgers 11, at San Diego 6 (12)

Dodgers get a grounder to advance the runner to third in the 10th, but Chris Taylor lines out and Zach McKinstry strikes out to end the inning. Padres leave the bases loaded against Dennis Santana in the bottom of the 10th. Dodgers don’t advance the runner at all in the 11th. Padres do with a ground out, but David Price walks a guy and strikes out two to end the inning. Dodgers get a leadoff homer in the top of the 12th and tack on three more for the win. Winning pitcher: David Price.

April 25

San Diego 8, at Dodgers 7 (11)

Padres advance the runner to third with a ground out in the 10th, but Jimmy Nelson strikes out two to end the threat. Dodgers also advance the runner to third in the bottom half, but the Padres walk the next two intentionally to load the bases and Clayton Kershaw and DJ Peters strike out. In the top of the 11th, the Padres get a walk, a double steal and a sacrifice fly to score the go-ahead run. Dodgers do not advance the runner in the bottom half. Losing pitcher: Garrett Cleavinger.

Advertisement

April 26

Cincinnati 5, at Dodgers 3 (10)

Jesse Winker leads off the top of the 10th with a home run. Corey Seager steals third with one out in the bottom half, but he is stranded there when Max Muncy and Luke Raley strike out. Losing pitcher: Kenley Jansen.

May 1

at Milwaukee 6, Dodgers 5 (11)

The Dodgers score in the top of the 10th, when, after a fly out and a walk, Justin Turner singles to center. Muncy is walked intentionally to load the bases, then pinch-hitter Kershaw strikes out and AJ Pollock grounds out. The Brewers load the bases with nobody out in the bottom half and score the tying run off of Alex Vesia on a sacrifice fly. The Dodgers score two more run in the top of the 11th, when, after a one-out walk, Will Smith triples. Mookie Betts walks, gets caught stealing second, and the inning ends on a strikeout.

Advertisement

In the bottom of the 11th, Vesia walks the first two batters, bringing in Mitch White. He gives up a sacrifice fly and a strikeout, then two consecutive run-scoring singles. Losing pitcher: Vesia.

May 4

at Chicago Cubs 4, Dodgers 3 (9)

This was the second game of a doubleheader and was scheduled to go seven innings. In the top of the eighth, Gavin Lux advanced the runner with a groundout, the runner scored on a wild pitch and Turner homered for a 3-1 Dodger lead. In the bottom half, Javy Baez homered off White with two out. The Dodgers did not advance the runner in the top of the ninth (two strikeouts and a fly ball) and David Bote‘s single off of Cleavinger won it for the Cubs. Losing pitcher: Cleavinger.

May 5

at Chicago Cubs 6, Dodgers 5 (11)

Advertisement

In the top of the 10th, Turner walked and Muncy doubled, scoring the runner at second with Turner thrown out at home. The Cubs tied it in the bottom half on a sacrifice fly after the runner moved up on a wild pitch by Jansen. The Dodgers scored again in the top of the 11th on a single by Smith and a groundout by Matt Beaty, but left the bases loaded when Betts grounded out. Cleavinger struck out the first two Cubs in the bottom half, but gave up a tying single, a walk, and a winning single. Losing pitcher: Cleavinger.

May 28

San Francisco 8, at Dodgers 5 (10)

Kenley Jansen gave up the go-ahead single to LaMonte Wade Jr., walked a batter, and gave up a two-run double to Evan Longoria. The Dodgers went down in order in the bottom half, with the runner moving to third on a two-out balk. Losing pitcher: Jansen.

July 6

at Miami 2, Dodgers 1 (10)

Advertisement

Will Smith was thrown out at third on a groundball to the pitcher, which hurt because the next batter singled. Albert Pujols grounded into a double play. In the bottom half, runner Starling Marte took third on a wild pitch and scored when Smith’s throw to third got by Turner. Losing pitcher: Blake Treinen.

July 18

at Colorado 6, Dodgers 5 (10)

The Dodgers scored in the top of the 10th, when, after a walk and two strikeouts, Turner singled. In the bottom of the inning, the Rockies’ runner moved to third on a long fly ball and scored on a sacrifice fly. Charlie Blackmon then homered to win it. Losing pitcher: Phil Bickford.

July 23

Colorado 9, at Dodgers 6 (10)

Advertisement

The Rockies got a single by Trevor Story and a homer by Blackmon in the top of the 10th. The Dodgers did not advance the runner at all in the bottom half and went 1-2-3. Losing pitcher: Jimmie Sherfy.

July 30

at Arizona 6, Dodgers 5 (10)

The Dodgers hit three fly balls and failed to advance the runner in the top half, then Asdrubal Cabrera singled to win it for the Diamondbacks in the bottom half. Losing pitcher: Nelson

Aug. 6

Angels 4, at Dodgers 3 (10)

Advertisement

The Angels led off the 10th with a double from Jose Iglesias to score the runner, a walk to Shohei Ohtani, the runners moved up on a groundout and one scored on a single by Jack Mayfield. Muncy led off the bottom half with a single to put runners at first and third. Pujols struck out, but Seager hit a sacrifice fly. Chris Taylor singled, but Pollock’s fly ball ended the game. Losing pitcher: Cleavinger.

So what did we learn? Don’t bring Cleavinger in during extra innings, because he is 0-4. The Dodgers had a chance to win four more extra-inning games, but the bullpen couldn’t hold a lead.

Dodgers hitting in extra innings

.230/.338/.328, 12 runs scored

Dodger opponents in extra innings

.280/.438/.500, 23 runs scored

Advertisement

Pitching has really let the Dodgers down (not that the offense has been outstanding). But, if the bullpen does its job, the Dodgers are tied with San Francisco, not four games back.

NL West records in extra innings (through Sunday)

San Francisco, 8-6

Colorado, 6-5

San Diego, 5-6

Colorado, 5-6

Dodgers, 1-12

(Best record in baseball: St. Louis and Pittsburgh, 5-1. Worst: Dodgers)

NL West records in one-run games (through Sunday)

Advertisement

San Francisco, 18-14

Colorado, 16-18

San Diego, 15-17

Dodgers, 13-20

Arizona, 5-22

(Best record in baseball: Angels, 20-9. Worst: Arizona. Dodgers are 26th of 30 teams)

NL West records in last 30 games (through Sunday)

San Francisco, 19-11

Dodgers, 16-14

Colorado, 16-14

San Diego, 15-15

Arizona, 12-18

(Best record in baseball: Tampa Bay, 21-9. Worst: Texas, 7-23).

What’s the Dodgers roster now?

Cleavinger goes to the IL, Justin Bruihl replaces him. Darien Nunez goes on the IL, Kevin Quackenbush replaces him. Jimmy Nelson goes on the IL, Brusdar Graterol replaces him.

Here’s the 26-man roster as of Monday:

Advertisement

Pitchers (12)

Phil Bickford

Justin Bruihl (LHP)

Walker Buehler

Advertisement

Brusdar Graterol

Kenley Jansen

Joe Kelly

David Price (LHP)

Advertisement

Kevin Quackenbush

Max Scherzer

Blake Treinen

Julio Urías (LHP)

Advertisement

Alex Vesia (LHP)

Catchers (2)

Austin Barnes

Will Smith

Advertisement

Infielders (5)

Max Muncy

Albert Pujols

Corey Seager

Advertisement

Justin Turner (Note: Turner is day-to-day after injuring a groin muscle during Sunday’s game).

Trea Turner

Outfielders (7)

Matt Beaty

Advertisement

Cody Bellinger

Mookie Betts

Billy McKinney

AJ Pollock

Advertisement

Zach Reks

Chris Taylor

Injury Report

Scott Alexander (10-day IL, left shoulder inflammation): Alexander has had shoulder problems all season.

Danny Duffy (60-day IL, left flexor strain): Duffy believes he has turned a corner on his rehab, but no timetable for his return has been announced.

Advertisement

Tony Gonsolin (10-day IL, right shoulder inflammation): Gonsolin continues working on strengthening his shoulder.

Victor Gonzalez (10-day IL, right knee inflammation): The injury is not believed to be serious and he could be back at the end of this week.

Clayton Kershaw (60-day IL, elbow inflammation): He won’t be available until “sometime in September) according to Dave Roberts.

Corey Knebel (60-day IL, right lat strain): Knebel pitched well in a rehab assignment at triple-A Oklahoma City and should be activated today.

Advertisement

Gavin Lux (10-day IL, strained left hamstring): He has begun a rehab assignment at Oklahoma City, but unless Justin Turner requires an IL stint, there doesn’t really appear to be a roster spot for him at the moment.

Jimmy Nelson (60-day IL, elbow surgery): Nelson is out for the remainder of the season.

Jimmie Sherfy (60-day IL, right elbow inflammation): He was transferred to the 60-day IL last week and probably won’t return this season at all.

Edwin Uceta (10-day IL, strained back): There is no timetable for his return.

Advertisement

Caleb Ferguson, Tommy Kahnle and Dustin May are all recovering from Tommy John surgery and are out the rest of this season. Edwin Rios had shoulder surgery and is also out for the rest of the season.

Trea Turner gets No. 6

Trea Turner wears No. 6 for the Dodgers, best known for being the number Steve Garvey wore. Others to wear No. 6 for the Dodgers:

Brian Dozier (2018)

Curtis Granderson (2017)

Advertisement

Charlie Culberson (2016)

Darwin Barney (2015)

Jerry Hairston (2012-2013)

Aaron Miles (2011)

Advertisement

Tony Abreu (2007)

Kenny Lofton (2006)

Jason Grabowski (2005)

Brent Mayne (2004)

Advertisement

Jolbert Cabrera (2003)

Steve Garvey (1969-1982)

Ron Fairly (1961-1969)

Carl Furillo (1946-1960)

Advertisement

Bill Hart (1944-1945)

Jack Bolling (1944)

Carden Gillenwater (1943)

Hal Peck (1943)

Advertisement

Joe Medwick (1941-1942)

Tony Giuliani (1941)

Johnny Hudson (1938-1940)

Buddy Hassett (1936-1937)

Advertisement

Rod Dedeaux (1935)

Sam Leslie (1933-1935)

Lefty O’Doul (1932-1933)

Up next

Tonight: Dodgers (Max Scherzer, 9-4, 2.75 ERA) at Philadelphia (Aaron Nola, 7-6, 4.49 ERA), 4 p.m., Sportsnet LA, AM 570

Advertisement

Wednesday: Dodgers (*David Price, 4-1, 3.53 ERA) at Philadelphia (Kyle Gibson, 8-3, 2.79 ERA), 4 p.m., Sportsnet LA, AM 570

Thursday: Dodgers (TBD) at Philadelphia (TBD), 10 a.m., Sportsnet LA, AM 570

And finally

Vin Scully and Dick Enberg have a conversation. Watch and listen here.

Until next time... Have a comment or something you’d like to see in a future Dodgers newsletter? Email me at houston.mitchell@latimes.com , and follow me on Twitter at @latimeshouston . To get this newsletter in your inbox, click here .
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Doug Emhoff, the husband of Vice President Kamala Harris, is taking his first solo trip abroad and will lead a delegation to the Paralympic Games in Tokyo this month.

President Biden made the announcement Tuesday.

Emhoff will lead a small delegation of himself and one other person to the Games that, like the Olympics, were delayed a year because of the coronavirus and also will be held as Tokyo sees a surge in infections fueled by the more contagious Delta variant of the virus.

He’ll attend the Aug. 24 opening ceremony with Raymond Greene, the U.S. official in charge of the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo until an ambassador is sworn in.

Advertisement

About 4,400 athletes with physical disabilities from 160 countries will compete in more than 20 sporting events under strict public health measures, much like the Olympics, through Sept. 5.

Japan has tallied 1 million infections and more than 15,700 deaths from COVID-19, faring better than many countries, but the Delta variant has caused many of the newest cases and is quickening the spread of the virus.

Tokyo’s new daily cases more than doubled during the Olympic Games, which ended Sunday, with 2,884 cases recorded Monday.

Biden tapped his wife, First Lady Jill Biden, to attend the Olympics opening ceremony July 23. She also met with the Japanese prime minister and the emperor, and attended several Olympic competitions before returning to Washington.

Emhoff, a former entertainment lawyer, has traveled to more than 20 states since Biden and Harris took office in January. He mostly has toured COVID-19 clinics and encouraged people to get inoculated against the disease.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He smiled. He scowled. He was sweet. He was curt.

Russell Westbrook treated his first Lakers news conference Tuesday at Staples Center like he has treated virtually every NBA game since he joined the league 13 tumultuous years ago.

He was all over the place.

Dishing out disparate answers while dribbling through varying narratives, he was difficult to corner and impossible to read.

Advertisement

Is he going to be a savior or destroyer? Couldn’t tell.

Will his attitude be conducive to a championship or collapse? No idea.

Was it really smart for Rob Pelinka to bring such a strong, ball-dominant, shoot-from-the-hip personality into a team that really only needed health? Tuesday offered no answers.

In one breath, while dressed in a Hollywood pin-striped short-pants suit and white high tops, Westbrook lapsed into the neat sentimentality of returning home to play for his childhood heroes. He assembled his family in the front row of the Chick Hearn press room, grinned down at them during the questioning and then warmly posed for pictures with them afterward

“It’s surreal,” said Westbrook, 32, later adding, “Being a Laker fan and being from LA… everything coming full circle for me, it’s a blessing ... a lot of things I can’t put into actual words because some of these dreams don’t come true for people like myself and I’m truly blessed and thankful for this opportunity.”

Lakers Russell Westbrook says he can impact the Lakers without the ball in his hands L.A. native, former UCLA star and new Lakers starter Russell Westbrook calls signing with his hometown team a blessing and says he is focused on helping the team win a championship.

Yet in the next breath, he confirmed the difficult reality of his dream, the molding of his game into the championship résumés of LeBron James and Anthony Davis. This is the main worry of the many in town who questioned the trade that sent Kyle Kuzma, Kentavious Caldwell-Pope and Montrezl Harrell to the Washington Wizards for Westbrook.

“There will be ups and there will be downs,” Westbrook acknowledged. “That’s normal, that’s OK, but we’re going to figure out how to play the best way that we want to play to be able to win a championship.”

Advertisement

Um, James and Davis already have it figured out. They’ve won championships. Westbrook hasn’t. It’s up to him to do the figuring. He offered few clues as to whether he will.

One minute he said he’s open to letting James control the ball.

“’Bron is one of the best players to play this game and his ability to be able to kind of do everything on the floor allows me to be able to just figure it out … I’m coming to a championship-caliber team and my job is to make sure that I’m able to make his game easier for him and I’ll find ways to do that throughout the game,” Westbrook said. “As it pertains to ballhandling and all that, it really doesn’t matter. There’s many different ways you can impact the game without having the ball in your hands and I’ve been able to do that for many years and we’ll figure it out.”

The next minute he said he will never really change an overbearing style that, while it made him the greatest triple-double machine ever, has also resulted in him playing for four teams in four years.

Advertisement

“One thing I always have done and always will do is stay true to myself,” Westbrook said. “I think you can never waver — and I could never waver — in this league. ... I always want to stay true to who I am, and with that, making sure that I’m able to listen and be all ears because I’m coming to an unbelievable organization and team and players that I’m able to learn from.”

Russell Westbrook holds up his Lakers jersey after being introduced to the media as one of the newest Lakers by vice president of basketball operations/general manager Rob Pelinka and head coach Frank Vogel during a news conference at Staples Center on Tuesday. (Allen J. Schaben / Los Angeles Times)

Perhaps the most interesting signal came from a subtle exchange between coach Frank Vogel and Westbrook after Vogel was asked his one and only question of the brief session.

Vogel was queried as to how Westbrook would work with James and Davis, and, typical of the team-building coach, the first sentence out of Vogel’s mouth contained the word “sacrifice.”

Advertisement

“I think any time you have three great players like this, there is an element of sacrifice required,” said Vogel. “And we’ve all talked about that and are all in on that.”

Westbrook heard this and slightly nodded. So that’s good. Or is it? Maybe Westbrook thinks James and Davis are the ones who must do all the sacrificing? As of yet, who knows?

Incidentally, congrats to the underrated lame-duck Vogel for scoring a contract extension last week. Enjoy the new job security. With this aging madhouse, you’ll need it.

The reshaped roster is a truly bizarre bunch of guys chasing rings or reputations. Good thing they have both a Monk (Malik) and a Nunn (Kendrick) because it’s going to take a deity to sort this all out.

Advertisement

They have the eminently likable Carmelo Anthony, 37, searching for his first title on his last legs.

Russell Westbrook is greeted by his dad, Russell, after receiving his new Lakers jersey and being introduced to the media as one of the newest Lakers during a news conference at Staples Center on Tuesday. (Allen J. Schaben / Los Angeles Times)

“I like when people talk about the age, it gives a better story,” he said.

They have the eminently frustrating Dwight Howard, 35, returning after a season-long sabbatical in Philadelphia, challenging those who note that the Lakers will have the league’s oldest team.

Advertisement

“They calling us the old Lakers … we ain’t old, we just experienced,” he said.

They’re also celebrating the return of Trevor Ariza, 36, former Lakers champion and local kid who had the best reason for coming home.

“The biggest recruiter, if you want me to be honest, was my children,” he said.

Lakers Kyle Kuzma shares special Kobe Bryant memories in farewell letter to L.A. Kyle Kuzma talks about how Kobe Bryant put him at ease in their first meeting and how a morning in the gym with Bryant was “the hardest workout I’ve ever had.”

Advertisement

Nobody in this crazy mix works if the bristly Westbrook doesn’t work. Nothing fits if he doesn’t fit. The Big Two must become a Big Three, or the Lakers will dissolve into a Big Zero.

So I asked Westbrook if he has something to prove.

“No, I don’t,” he said. “I’ve been blessed and thankful to be in this league so long, and lucky to be able to play and be healthy when I got drafted in the NBA. That was me proving people wrong. When I was able to go to UCLA from the inner city, that was me proving people wrong. Just to make it out the hood, I was proving people wrong. I don’t need to do that anymore. I’ve been able to … impact people all around the world with this platform that’s been given to me. And I’ll continue to do that. Obviously, I want to win the championship, but the ultimate goal is to reach communities with what we have, impact others around you.”

Thus summed up Russell Westbrook in his first appearance as a Laker.

Advertisement

Inspirational, yet defiant. Huge heart, yet steely stare. Smiling like this could be the best move ever. Scowling like this could be the worst.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Trevor Bauer and his attorneys would like to make one thing perfectly clear: The Dodgers pitcher does not plan to discuss a financial settlement with the woman who has accused him of sexual assault.

“No settlements or cash offers have or ever will be made,” Bauer attorneys Shawn Holley and Jon Fetterolf wrote in a court filing Tuesday.

A Los Angeles Superior Court hearing is set to start Monday over whether a temporary restraining order against Bauer should remain in effect. In the court filing, Bauer’s attorneys argued the order should be lifted and said the woman had provided no legitimate reason to be granted protection from him.

Rather, his attorneys wrote, the woman pursued the matter “to generate publicity, try to end [Bauer’s] baseball career, and gain a monetary settlement.”

Advertisement

Bauer’s career remains on hold, amid separate investigations by the Pasadena Police Department and Major League Baseball.

Pasadena police have said Bauer is under investigation for felony assault. He has not been arrested or charged with a crime. Legal analysts have noted that, under a potential settlement, the woman could agree not to testify against Bauer in any criminal proceeding.

The league first put Bauer on leave July 2, three days after the temporary restraining order was granted. The leave has been extended four times, most recently through Friday, and is likely to be extended again.

The hearing, the first chance for Bauer to make his legal case, was originally set for July 23 and has twice been postponed.

In her request for the temporary restraining order, the woman said she was choked and lost consciousness during two sexual encounters with Bauer and was hit in the face on the second occasion.

In Tuesday’s court filing, Bauer’s attorneys wrote that the accuser did not request the temporary restraining order until about six weeks after the last sexual encounter and about a month after her last text message with Bauer, indicating the accuser “did not see an imminent concern about hearing from or seeing [him].” during that time and undermines the credibility of her allegations.”

The filing included a text message from the accuser on the night before she obtained the temporary restraining order, saying “This is his last MLB start,” and another text in which she said her attorneys thought Bauer might “try to settle with me[,] offer me major cash then make me sign [a non-disclosure agreement].”

Advertisement

The filing also included a text from the woman to a cousin the day after the second encounter: “It was consensual but like didn[’]t expect two black eyesl? Like he def took it too far don’t you think lol.”

In her request for the temporary restraining order, the woman wrote: “I agreed to have consensual sex, however, I did not agree or consent to what he did next. I did not agree to be sexually assaulted.”

A representative for the woman did not immediately return a message seeking comment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Phillip Danault is standing on the Manhattan Beach Pier, shorts and sunglasses on, happily unrecognized. The sun is out, the pier overlooking the Pacific Ocean and surfers below. It’s a slow moment in the middle of a fast day, at the start of a whirlwind week.

Danault is asked about finding a house.

“We have two days,” he says.

“Actually, we could have three, but with the plane and everything, we have two,” his wife, Marie, says.

Advertisement

“It’s kinda crazy right now,” Danault says.

“We’ll do our best,” Marie jokes.

Danault is just under two weeks removed from signing with the Kings in free agency, coming here from Montreal, where he played for most of the last six seasons, culminating in a Stanley Cup Final berth this season. His signing, on a six-year, $33-million deal, represents another step forward by the Kings — a franchise trying to speed its transition from young and rebuilding back to contending.

They’ve also traded for forward Viktor Arvidsson from Nashville and signed defenseman Alex Edler from Vancouver.

Danault is easily cast as a defense-minded center. That was the role in which the Canadiens played him. When the Kings called him, right as free agency hit on July 28, part of the appeal to Danault was being used as an offensive weapon.

“I still think I have lots and lots to give and L.A. was seeing that in myself as well,” Danault said. “That’s what I liked too. They were seeing me the way I see me.”

New Kings player Phillip Danault with his wife Marie meet with general manager Rob Blake as they get their first tour of the Kings’ practice facility in El Segundo on Tuesday. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

Danault’s agent, Don Meehan, told him and Marie to have someone watch their child during the early hours of free agency. Indeed, the phone started to ring. The Kings called him first and were aggressive in their pursuit. Soon enough, a Zoom meeting was set up with Danault, team President Luc Robitaille, general manager Rob Blake, coach Todd McLellan and Jake Goldberg, senior director of hockey operations .

“Not about gaining a more offensive game, it’s just they were seeing the offense that I didn’t have the chance to use in Montreal as much, I think,” Danault said. “Cause they were putting me in that certain role — which was OK, we went to the Cup. But I feel like I had another gear.”

It’s easy to draw a parallel between the situation in Los Angeles, where Quinton Byfield and Alex Turcotte are waiting in the wings as highly touted young centers, and Montreal, where Jesperi Kotkaniemi and Nick Suzuki took strides under Danault’s tutelage. When Danault toured the Kings’ practice facility in El Segundo, his locker was next to Turcotte’s.

Phillip Danault and wife Marie are taken on a tour of the Kings’ practice facility Tuesday by Jon Gomez, the team’s senior manager of communications. (Al Seib/Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

The atmosphere here, where Danault can be a leader without the world falling on his shoulders, seems to fit him.

“I don’t think I can have more pressure than I had in Montreal,” Danault said. “… Montreal is pressure, which I love, but it’s gonna be a different pressure (in Los Angeles). I put enough pressure on myself.”

The time for all of that, though, will be once training camp starts in September. Right now, there is a slight preoccupation. The house. The move. Meeting everyone in the organization.

Danault’s day starts around 9 a.m. in a gated parking lot at the Toyota Sports Performance Center. Someone makes a joke about the weather and he’s shown the parking lot, then frisked inside. Tyler Toffoli and Jeff Carter — two former Kings — are working out in the gym. Danault says a quick hello, then it’s a walk down another hallway for an introductory meeting with Blake.

Advertisement

That is how the next hour will go — walking through the facility, sitting down with a few more senior members of the organization, shaking hands and exchanging introductions with everyone. It is a lot, but, it’s pointed out, not quite as much as when Danault was traded from Chicago to Montreal, when a throng of media met Danault getting off the plane.

“Everyone knows you, so it’s a different pressure,” Danault said of Montreal. “You do a mistake, you’ll hear about it. ... It’s either a real high or a real low.”

Last season, when the Canadiens made their first Cup Final since 1993, was the high. The team had to wait inside the Bell Centre for crowds to clear before they could leave after clinching a series.

Advertisement

Phillip Danault of the Montreal Canadiens skates during Game 1 of the 2021 Stanley Cup Final against the Tampa Bay Lightning. (Phelan M. Ebenhack/Associated Press)

It’s a different vibe in El Segundo. Here, he’s dealing with a reporter, a photographer and a content person for the team. He tries on a jersey, meets Brendan Lemieux in the locker room, then goes up another hallway and to the right, walking into the practice area. The main sheet of ice is filled with kids, the next with a handful of pros — new teammates and otherwise — here to get work in over the summer. Toffoli is about to get on the ice and another brief conversation ensues.

The tour is almost over. The Danaults are shown the Ontario Reign’s gym — which doubled as a COVID-testing room for the last year, meet one last person, then are given the keys to their rental car.

This process is not wholly unfamiliar to the Danaults. Though he’s spent the last six years in Montreal, Marie estimates they’ve moved 14 times during his career. This one, though, is bigger — they’re crossing the continent. Everything from the weather to the language will be different.

Advertisement

Both Phillip and Marie are fluent in English, but they hail from Quebec. In the house, they speak French. Their 2 1/2-year-old child speaks French.

“It’s like wearing slippers in Montreal,” Danault says. “Everyone speaks French.”

Kings player Phillip Danault tries his team jersey for the first time in the locker room of the Kings practice facility in El Segundo on Tuesday. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

Los Angeles is new, different. Danault is used to the bitter cold and snow of the Northeast. “It’s also weird to live beside the beach all the time,” he says. He may take up surfing — he’s already learned wakesurfing, so that feels like a logical next step.

Advertisement

The conversation vacillates between living arrangements and hockey. They’ll look at four or five houses on Tuesday, hopefully finding one they like, with space for their dog. The plan is to go back to Canada this week, enjoy Quebec for the rest of the month and get back to California in September. They’ve sold their house, but still need to pack.

Jon Gomez, the Kings’ senior communications manager, mentions that Arvidsson will be in town next week. Around that time, Edler will be in Vancouver to get his stuff and figure out how to get it down Interstate 5.

It’s a good reminder. As Danault slows down and settles in, the whirlwind will move onto someone else.

Hockey NHL to investigate claim San Jose Sharks’ Evander Kane bet on own games The NHL said it will investigate an allegation made by Evander Kane’s wife that the San Jose forward bet on his own games and has intentionally tried to lose for gambling profit.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There were sinkers and four-seam fastballs, changeups and cut-fastballs. Philadelphia Phillies right-hander Kyle Gibson threw everything he had at Cody Bellinger in the fourth inning Wednesday night, and the Dodgers center fielder refused to give in.

An easy out two weeks ago, Bellinger is finally beginning to emerge from a brutal, season long slump, providing further evidence in that fourth inning by capping a 13-pitch at-bat in which he fouled off seven two-strike pitches with a two-run homer to left-center field.

Bellinger’s first opposite-field homer since 2019 keyed a three-run rally, and his towering two-run shot to right in the ninth put the finishing touches on an 8-2 victory before a crowd of 32,186 in Citizens Bank Field, extending the Dodgers’ win streak to four games.

“We were both grinding — he was trying to make good pitches on me, and I continued to foul them off,” Bellinger said of the longest at-bat of his career. “He left one over the middle of the plate that I saw well and put a good swing on and barreled it up.”

Advertisement

The left-handed-hitting Bellinger has been slowed all season by his continued recovery from offseason right-shoulder surgery and a broken left fibula suffered in early April.

Dodgers Trevor Bauer case: ‘No settlements or cash offers,’ his attorneys say Trevor Bauer and his attorneys say the pitcher does not plan to discuss a financial settlement with the woman who has accused him of sexual assault.

He entered August with a .163 average, .548 on-base-plus-slugging percentage, five homers and 21 RBIs in 48 games, a far cry from his National League most valuable player season in 2019, when he hit .305 with a 1.035 OPS, 47 homers and 115 RBIs.

But Bellinger is regaining strength in his front shoulder and finding a more consistent swing path. He’s hitting .333 (10 for 30) in his last eight games and has hit four homers in his last four games.

“He’s been grinding, battling, trying to strengthen [the shoulder] and perform at a high level, and a lot of good things are happening,” manager Dave Roberts said. “You look at these last four games, he’s hit some home runs, but for us, it’s the at-bat quality, he’s swinging at strikes and competing. It’s really good to see.”

Bellinger’s timing couldn’t be better. While the Dodgers battled the Phillies, Mookie Betts flew back to Los Angeles to undergo further tests on his inflamed right hip, which sent him to the 10-day injured list again on Wednesday.

Betts missed the final two weeks of July with the hip injury, and there is no timetable for his return. He hit .381 (eight for 21) with three homers in five games after being activated on Aug. 1 and is batting .277 with an .899 OPS, 17 homers 25 doubles, 44 RBIs and 68 runs in 87 games on the season.

Dodgers’ Trea Turner, from left, Cody Bellinger, Corey Seager and AJ Pollock celebrate after the Dodgers beat the Philadelphia Phillies on Wednesday in Philadelphia. (Matt Slocum / Associated Press)

Advertisement

If the Dodgers are going to catch the San Francisco Giants, who are four games ahead of them in the NL West, they’ll have to do it without one of their most dynamic players for the next few weeks.

With Betts out, does Bellinger put more pressure on himself to make up for his absence?

“Yeah, most definitely, man,” he said. “I still have a lot of faith in a lot of the guys here, but losing a guy like that always hurts. You just try to stay in your approach and help the team win in multiple ways.”

David Price weathered a 53-minute rain delay between the second and third innings to throw four solid innings, and he capped the fourth-inning rally with an RBI double to right-center, the first extra-base hit of his 13-year career.

Advertisement

“That was really cool, getting that hit,” Price said. “My first double, my second RBI.”

Price would have completed four scoreless innings had second baseman Trea Turner’s relay throw on Alec Bohm’s potential inning-ending double-play grounder not sailed over first baseman Max Muncy’s head.

Didi Gregorius doubled to left center to put runners on second and third with two outs, and Ronald Torreyes grounded a two-run single to center to cut the Dodgers’ lead to 3-2. The inning ended with Bellinger making a leaping catch of Odubel Herrera’s 406-foot drive at the wall.

Advertisement

The Dodgers broke the game open with a three-run seventh, scoring one run on Bohm’s fielding error at first, another on catcher Andrew Knapp’s passed ball and the third on AJ Pollock’s two-out RBI single to center.

Phil Bickford threw a scoreless fifth, Brusdar Graterol threw two perfect innings, striking out Odubel Herrera and Brad Miller with 100-mph fastballs, Blake Treinen struck out the side in the eighth, and Edwin Uceta threw a scoreless ninth, giving the bullpen 10 2/3 scoreless innings in the first two games here.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Seventeen long months had passed since Miller Moss last stepped into a huddle, but when he arrived at USC during the spring as one of two touted freshmen vying to emerge as the heir apparent to quarterback Kedon Slovis, Moss expected to pick up right where he left off in high school.

“I don’t think it was a realistic expectation,” the freshman realizes now.

Moss has never lacked confidence, but the long layoff from football left him feeling overwhelmed. Suddenly, everything was faster and more competitive. The transition proved to be a steeper learning curve than he expected. While Jaxson Dart, the Trojans’ other four-star freshman quarterback, turned heads with his big arm and big-play potential, Moss spent most of the spring just finding his footing.

The disparity was enough for some to quickly anoint Dart over his counterpart. But a few days into a critical fall camp that could determine the direction USC takes with its next quarterback, Moss appears to have closed that gap to some degree.

Advertisement

“I just keep feeling better and better,” Moss said.

That’s been clear on the field through four days of fall camp. Moss has looked much more comfortable and confident commanding the offense. After settling too often for checkdowns in the spring, the freshman has taken more shots down the field as his confidence has grown.

USC quarterback Miller Moss catches during USC’s spring football game at the Coliseum on April 17. (Genaro Molina / Los Angeles Times)

Not all of those throws have been on target. On Tuesday, he laced a deep throw into coverage, but was bailed out by a jaw-dropping, one-handed snag from tight end Josh Falo. The fact that he trusted himself to make the throw suggested some measure of progress from spring.

“We want to throw completions, we want to take care of the football, but at the same time, we don’t want to be overconservative,” offensive coordinator Graham Harrell said. “So that’s something we’ve talked about with him, and he’s done a good job of taking that coaching and doing it.”

The summer, Moss said, made a major difference in that regard. During USC’s player-run practice periods, he felt free “to take chances and make mistakes.”

“I’ve definitely tried to be more aggressive,” Moss said. “I think there are plays that can go either way, and those are the ones on the borderline that I’ve tried to push and take different chances.”

Advertisement

For Dart, that approach has never been a problem.

“My play style is pretty aggressive,” Dart said. “I kind of like to take risky chances here and there.”

USC quarterback Jaxson Dart looks to pass during USC’s spring football game at the Coliseum on April 17. (Genaro Molina / Los Angeles Times)

After a dynamic spring, some of those risks have backfired through the first four days of fall camp. When they have, Harrell challenges Dart to quickly move past his mistakes.

Advertisement

“He talks about it like we have a gunslinger mentality,” Dart said. “So if I make a mistake, I just have to shake it off, try to make the next play better. Just try to play within myself.”

While Moss sat out his final high school season because of the pandemic, Dart excelled as a senior at Corner Canyon High in Draper, Utah, throwing for 67 touchdowns and rushing for 12 more on his way to National Gatorade Player of the Year honors.

The charmed season proved to be a perfect steppingstone into the spring, Dart said.

“I think it gave me a lot of confidence,” Dart said. “Everything kind of has played in my favor with just being a little bit more comfortable in this style of offense. I was lucky for sure at Corner Canyon because I just had such a strong foundation and a great core of players and bonds with kids. So I’m just going to try and carry that over.”

Advertisement

That advantage was clear in the spring, as Dart emerged as the favorite to earn the backup job behind Slovis, who remains entrenched as the starter. Neither freshman was eager to discuss the status of that battle Tuesday, but Dart admitted that the backup job was “for sure” on his mind during camp.

“My whole life, I’ve been able to be the guy,” Dart said. “We have a ton of competition in our room, and it’s great because it brings the best out of all of us. I have my goals, and I’m just going to keep pushing for them.”

Dart has a feeling he and Moss share one goal in particular — to be the future of USC football.

Advertisement

“He’s the Gatorade Player of the Year,” Moss said of Dart. “It’s not like I’m competing with some bum. But I think competition only makes you better. It’s been really cool. Some days I wish I hated Jaxson. It would make it easier. But he’s a really good dude.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Five Southern California teams have agreed to require employees to be vaccinated against COVID-19.

The Lakers, Kings, Ducks, Galaxy and Chargers have mandated vaccinations for full-time employees at offices within the United States, according to a statement Wednesday from AEG, the parent company of the Kings and Galaxy and the Staples Center landlord of the Lakers. The requirement would include “limited exceptions as required by law,” the statement said.

The mandate would not apply to athletes. Players on those teams are represented by unions, and working conditions generally are negotiated in collective bargaining.

The agreement also covers live entertainment companies and events: AEG, Live Nation Entertainment, Goldenvoice, the annual Coachella music festival, and ticket-buying platform AXS.

Advertisement

“Vaccination against COVID-19 is the most effective means of preventing infection from COVID-19 virus, and subsequent transmission and outbreaks,” California Health and Human Services Secretary Dr. Mark Ghaly said in a statement. “These organizations are setting a good example for other companies, and I applaud their efforts.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Los Angeles Kings welcomed their newest star to the Southland with a tour of the practice facility and the Manhattan Beach Pier.

About two weeks ago, Phillip Danault signed with the Kings in free agency, coming here from Montreal, where he played for most of the last six seasons.

Los Angeles Times photographer Al Seib accompanied Danault on Tuesday to documenting the welcoming tour.

At the conclusion of my time with Phillip, I showed him the historic photo (googled on my phone) I shot in 1994 when Wayne Gretzky, then with the Kings, scored his 802nd goal, breaking Gordy Howe’s record. Phillip smiled broadly and said, ‘You took that photo? I was 1 year old when that happened. That will be me one day!’ L.A. Times photographer Al Seib

Advertisement

Advertisement

New Kings forward Phillip Danault, center, and his wife, Marie, are led on a tour of the team’s El Segundo practice facility by Jon Gomez, Kings senior manager of communications. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

New Kings forward Phillip Danault and his wife, Marie, are greeted by teammate Akil Thomas in the locker room of the El Segundo practice facility. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

New Kings player Phillip Danault checks out his team jersey during a tour of the locker room. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

New Kings player Phillip Danault tries on his team jersey during a tour of the locker room. At right is his wife, Marie. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

New Kings player Phillip Danault and his wife, Marie, meet with general manager Rob Blake as they get their first tour of the Kings’ practice facility in El Segundo on Tuesday.

(Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

New Kings forward Phillip Danault is greeted by Rob Koch, director of team operations, at the practice facility. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

Jeff Andrews, assistant athletic trainer for the Kings, leads Phillip and Marie Danault on their tour of the El Segundo practice facility. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

New Los Angeles Kings player Phillip Danault, his wife, Marie, waves to a former teammate. At left is Jon Gomez, senior manager of communications. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

New Kings forward Phillip Danault laughs as he is greeted inside the practice facility. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

Phillip Danault and wife Marie take in the historic photographs during a tour led by Jon Gomez, senior manager of communications.

(Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)

New Kings player Phillip Danault and his wife, Marie, get a tour of the Manhattan Beach Pier with Jon Gomez, senior manager of communications. (Al Seib / Los Angeles Times)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Trea Turner extended his right leg and dropped to his left hip just outside the batter’s box.

The Dodgers second baseman casually reached out his left hand to touch home plate as he slid by, then rotated 180 degrees as he rose back onto his feet.

All in essentially one motion.

Few have ever looked so smooth while sliding home to score than Turner did Tuesday night against the Philadelphia Phillies.

Advertisement

The fact that the run gave the Dodgers a two-run lead in the sixth inning of an eventual 5-0 win was just a bonus.

It was fitting that the Dodgers accompanied the video of Turner’s slide with a reference to a K-pop group with some smooth moves of their own.

Smooth like butter, pull you in like no other. pic.twitter.com/GlxknGumhQ — Los Angeles Dodgers (@Dodgers) August 11, 2021

“Smooth like butter, pull you in like no other,” the team tweeted, quoting the BTS hit “Butter.”

The maneuver may have looked like a choreographed dance move, but Turner said it’s just a method he’s developed over the years because, well, sliding can be painful.

“That’s just how I slide, I guess,” he said. “I try to not hit the ground very hard because it usually doesn’t feel great, so I try to be as soft as I can and slide, whether it’s head-first or feet-first. I try to avoid tags, but that’s just how I’ve slid basically my whole life.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Angel City FC announced its debut season-ticket prices Wednesday, offering packages that start at $15 per game and incentives that include limited access to free road-match tickets.

A limited number of season tickets for Angel City’s 12 home games at Banc of California Stadium in 2022 will cost $180 per person. More than 10,000 season-ticket packages are available for less than $240 and another 15,000 are priced at less than $360.

Single-game ticket rates have not been announced yet and will go on sale at a later date.

Angel City is an expansion franchise joining the National Women’s Soccer League for the 2022 season. It is led by a celebrity ownership group that includes founder Natalie Portman. It also is backed by 14 former U.S. women’s national team stars, including Mia Hamm, Julie Foudy and Abby Wambach.

Advertisement

The team is early in the expansion process, led by sporting director Eniola Aluko, and is soon expected to announce its first coach and player signee. The Times’ Kevin Baxter reported Angel City is pushing to land U.S. women’s national team star Christen Press, a Southern California native who helped the Americans win the bronze medal at the Tokyo Olympics. The bulk of player acquisitions likely won’t be completed until January and the NWSL season featuring 12 teams is expected to begin in April.



Those who sign up for Angel City season tickets by Dec. 31 will be known as Angel City “Day Ones” and get limited access to free road-match tickets, first access to preseason events and early access to purchase merchandise.

All season-ticket packages will include interest-free flexible payment plans, a 15% discount on merchandise, first right to purchase nonregular-season game tickets, season-ticket holder rates for additional tickets and seasonong parking, access to Angel City fan events, a season-ticket holder gift and access to sponsor discounts.

Those who purchase the highest-priced packages also can get access to VIP events and VIP entrances and club spaces at Banc of California Stadium.

Season-ticket seat deposits can be purchased at angelcity.com/tickets and questions can be sent to tickets@angelcityfc.com.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Third in a series of stories profiling top high school football players in the Southland by position.

Jakob Galloway of Wilmington Banning might as well have shouted “abracadabra” after catching a short swing pass in a football game against Elsinore, because what happened next was magical.

By the time he reached the end zone on a 42-yard touchdown play, eight defensive players took shots at trying to tackle him. Several made contact. Three actually got their arms around him. Somehow, he escaped each time.

At 5 feet 10 and 220 pounds, the senior running back has stamped himself as the best at his position in the City Section based on a sophomore season in which he helped Banning reach the Open Division championship game while rushing for 1,276 yards and 21 touchdowns as a 15-year-old. He continued his improvement during a brief spring season, rushing for 137 and 181 yards in two games before being shut down to prevent injury.

Advertisement

“He’s still a baby,” coach Raymond Grajeda said.

Look at those hands. Jakob Galloway of Banning. pic.twitter.com/ot6ecwMVtz — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) April 24, 2021

Galloway played primarily as a linebacker in his freshman year at Banning.

“Nobody was looking at him at running back,” Grajeda said.

By spring practice, Banning’s No. 1 running back decided not to play. Grajeda turned to Galloway, who needed a complete tutorial on how to play the position.

2022 RB/LB Jakob Galloway Finishing off today’s workout repping 405 on the squat. @jgthelb If you haven’t heard, you better ask somebody! #PilotPride #UnfinishedBusiness Great Day to be a Pilot! B🏠 pic.twitter.com/xNvBAJq0PG — Banning Football (@Pilot_FB) March 3, 2020

“I’m more of an aggressive runner, and that comes from playing linebacker,” Galloway said.

He made his first varsity start in the season opener against L.A. Cathedral. As soon as he scored his first touchdown on a short run, he said it made him feel comfortable.

“I was, ‘Wow, I can get used to this,’” he said. “The adrenaline is rushing through. That’s a great feeling. I was really proud of myself.”

With each game, Galloway became more confident.

“I wasn’t thinking. I just knew what I had to do,” he said.

Galloway ended up gaining more than 100 yards in eight games.

Advertisement

“The rest is history,” Grajeda said. “He is a linebacker playing running back. He is a ground-and-pound running back. It’s give him the ball and he’ll pound you. If it’s a defensive back, he’ll be run over. If it’s a linebacker, he’ll get a headache. His hands are as big as a basketball player’s hands.

“Last year he was a 15-year-old kid running the football with no direction and all talent. This year will be a great developmental year and senior [season this fall] will be icing on the cake.”

Nicknamed “Cinco” for his No. 5 jersey, he remembers playing football “because my mom made me play.”

“I was too aggressive,” he said.

Advertisement

His size and strength didn’t match his age.

“A lot of people think I’m older,” he said. “Everybody makes jokes, ‘We need to see your birth certificate.’ They don’t believe it.”

His mother died before he reached high school, and his father has tried to keep him on a path to success on and off the field. This month, his family faced a crisis with eviction. Galloway isn’t letting anything stop him.

He attends Banning’s Firefighter Magnet, which gives students the opportunity to learn from the Los Angeles Fire Department. He has committed to San Jose State.

Advertisement

If his magnet classmates ever need someone to run up the stairs of a smoke-filled building in rapid fashion, they know Galloway would be the choice. Just get out of the way and watch him run.

Thursday: Sam Yoon, L.A. Loyola offensive lineman.

RUNNING BACKS TO WATCH

Players, School, Ht., Wt., Year, Comment

Advertisement

Raleek Brown, Mater Dei, 5-8, 185, Sr. Oklahoma commit is fast and elusive.

Jakob Galloway, Banning, 5-10, 220, Sr. Loves to break tackles and run over tacklers.

Max Garrison, St. Francis, 5-10, 185, Sr. Four-year standout.

Floyd Chalk, Bishop Alemany, 5-9, 185, Sr. Watch him run wild.

Advertisement

Desmin Jackson, Orange Lutheran, 5-10, 180, Sr. Ready to show great improvement.

Jason Jones, Sierra Canyon, 5-9, 185, Sr. Could be best player on team.

Rayshon Luke, St. John Bosco, 5-8, 160, Sr. Speed separates him.

Jadyn Ott, Norco, 5-11, 195, Sr. Cal commit returns to Southland with big expectations.

Advertisement

Tahj Owens, Loyola, 5-11, 185, Sr. Has explosiveness and toughness.

Dijon Stanley, Granada Hills, 6-1, 170, Jr. 400-meter runner is big-play weapon.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A torrential downpour rinsed starters Max Scherzer of the Dodgers and Aaron Nola of the Philadelphia Phillies out of the game in the fourth inning Tuesday night, leaving the bullpens to settle things in Citizens Bank Park.

What a relief that was for the Dodgers, who found the Phillies’ bullpen arms much more hospitable than Nola’s right arm in a 5-0 victory that snapped the eight-game win streak of their National League East-leading hosts.

After a 1-hour, 44-minute rain delay, the offensive floodgates cracked open enough for the Dodgers to cobble together five runs on 11 hits in the last five innings, with Corey Seager and Max Muncy hitting solo homers and AJ Pollock keying a three-run sixth with a two-run single.

“I felt like both teams had to deal with having a good starter come out early,” said Dodgers second baseman Trea Turner, who doubled and scored in the sixth. “They both were dealing and having their way with the lineup, and it came down to who can get some runs off the bullpen.”

Advertisement

The Dodgers roughed up Phillies relievers JD Hammer, Matt Moore and Enyel De Los Santos for four runs in the fifth and sixth innings, and Muncy hit a 405-foot homer into the second deck in right field off Mauricio Llovera in the ninth.

Six Dodgers relievers — Alex Vesia, Corey Knebel, Justin Bruihl, Brusdar Graterol, Blake Treinen and Conner Greene — combined to give up three hits and strike out nine in 5 2/3 scoreless innings to keep the Dodgers four games behind the first-place San Francisco Giants in the NL West.

Of the six relievers Dodgers manager Dave Roberts used Tuesday night, how many of their names did he know two weeks ago?

“Yeah, I would say if 50% is the line, I probably would have taken the under on that,” he said with a laugh. “The most important thing is, I do know them now. I’m still kind of learning these guys, but I’m happy to have them, and they’ve been great for us.”

The Dodgers played the opener of the three-game series without right fielder Mookie Betts, who was scratched because of a sore right hip and is expected to be placed on the 10-day injured list on Wednesday, and third baseman Justin Turner, who is nursing a sore left groin.

Roberts can’t see Turner “coming back any sooner than Friday in New York,” but he remained hopeful Turner would avoid the injured list.

Not so with Betts, who, after two days off, arrived at the park on Tuesday “achy, sore” and unable to play, Roberts said. The manager said it’s “very probable” that Betts, who missed the final 11 games of July because of a hip pointer, will return to the injured list.

Advertisement

Dodgers’ Max Scherzer follows through on a pitch during the fourth inning against the Philadelphia Phillies Tuesday in Philadelphia. (Matt Slocum / Associated Press)

With the speedy Trea Turner, acquired with Scherzer from Washington on July 30, replacing Betts in the leadoff spot, Roberts dropped Betts to third on Saturday, believing his combination of power and plate discipline would be a great middle-of-the-order fit.

Instead, with the 162-game marathon reduced to a 49-game sprint, the Dodgers will play the next week or two — if not more — without one of their most dynamic players. Betts is batting .277 with an .899 on-base-plus-slugging percentage, 17 homers 25 doubles, 44 RBIs and 68 runs in 87 games.

“It certainly makes it more challenging,” Roberts said, “but it doesn’t change our outlook.”

Advertisement

Chris Taylor will fill in at third base this week and, once Justin Turner returns, Taylor will join Cody Bellinger and Pollock in the outfield. Infielder Gavin Lux will play some third base — a position he has not played as a professional — during this week’s triple-A rehabilitation stint and could be an option there.

Scherzer, making his second start for the Dodgers, gave up two hits and struck out six in 3 1/3 scoreless innings Tuesday night. He had an 0-and-2 count on J.T. Realmuto with one out in the fourth when the skies opened so quickly and forcefully that the right-hander headed to the dugout as the first heavy drops fell.

The Dodgers caught a break when the delay ended Nola’s night. The curveball specialist gave up one hit and struck out seven in four scoreless innings.

Advertisement

“He’s a pretty funky guy — he has a weird delivery and three really good pitches to go with it,” Trea Turner said of Nola. “I’ve been in this division for a while and always thought he was a tough at-bat, so when don’t see him very often, he can jump on you.”

After the lengthy delay, Seager dropped the hammer on Hammer, leading off the fifth with a homer to left-center field. Trea Turner doubled to lead off the sixth and scored on Will Smith’s single to make it 2-0. Seager doubled to right, and Pollock grounded a two-run single to center to make it 4-0.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Howdy, I’m your host, Houston Mitchell. Let’s get right to the news.

Broderick Turner on the Lakers: They already have two alpha males in LeBron James and Anthony Davis and now the Lakers have added another in the uber-talented Russell Westbrook.

Newsletter Go beyond the scoreboard Get the latest on L.A.'s teams in the daily Sports Report newsletter. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

How the three of them make it fit will determine the fate of the Lakers as they chase the franchise’s 18th NBA championship.

Advertisement

Westbrook, who was acquired from the Washington Wizards for Kyle Kuzma, Kentavious Caldwell-Pope, Montrezl Harrell and the No. 22 pick in the first round of the NBA draft, seems determined to make the marriage work.

“I’ve been blessed to able to go on my 14th season and each year I try to find ways, like I mentioned, to be able to uplift and make my teammates better around me,” Westbrook said Tuesday at his Lakers introductory news conference at Staples Center. “And AD and Bron are friends of mine first, and me being a teammate, my job is to come in and uplift it and they’ll do the same with me, vice versa.

“And as the season prolongs, we will figure it out. There will be ups and there will be downs. That’s normal, that’s OK, but we’re gonna figure out how to play the best way that we want to play to be able to win a championship.”

Westbrook will be the starting point guard for the Lakers, and he has been at his best with the basketball in his hands.

James is at his best with the basketball in his hands, a leading role he has dominated during his career and in the last three seasons with the Lakers.

Westbrook led the league in assists last season, averaging 11.7 per game. He also averaged a triple-double, adding 22.2 points and 11.5 rebounds to go with the assists. And, he has averaged a triple-double in four of his last five seasons.

“As you know, Bron is one of the best players to play this game and his ability to be able to kind of do everything on the floor allows me to be able to just figure it out,” Westbrook said. “I’m coming to a championship-caliber team and my job is to make sure that I’m able to make his game easier for him and I’ll find ways to do that throughout the game. As it pertains to ball-handling and all that, it really doesn’t matter. There’s may different ways you can impact the game without having the ball in your hands and I’ve been able to do that for many years and we’ll figure it out.”

————

Advertisement

Kyle Kuzma shares special Kobe Bryant memories in farewell letter to L.A.

Enjoying this newsletter? Consider subscribing to the Los Angeles Times Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Become a subscriber.

DODGERS

Mike DiGiovanna on the Dodgers: Newly acquired speedster Trea Turner was in the leadoff spot. Max Muncy hit second, and Mookie Betts hit third. Corey Seager, who missed 10 weeks because of a right hand fracture, batted cleanup. Justin Turner, Will Smith, Chris Taylor and Cody Bellinger hit fifth through eighth, respectively.

Dodgers manager Dave Roberts should have saved the lineup card from Saturday night’s game against the Angels, because it might be a while before gets all of his superstars on the field at the same time again.

Advertisement

Betts was scratched from Tuesday night’s 5-0 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies because of a sore right hip, and Roberts said another stint on the 10-day injury list for the right fielder is “very probable.”

Betts was sidelined by the same injury for the final two weeks of July. He hit .381 (eight for 21) with three homers and four RBIs in five games since being activated on Aug. 1.

“He came in achy, sore … basically he can’t play,” Roberts said. “I’m frustrated for Mookie because he wants to be out there, and he can’t physically do it. We had one day together on Saturday, when we had everyone [in the lineup] how we envisioned.”

ANGELS

Luca Evans on the Angels: With no Mike Trout, Jared Walsh or Anthony Rendon in a usually formidable Angels lineup, manager Joe Maddon has been experimenting over the last couple of weeks to find the right combination behind Shohei Ohtani.

Advertisement

In the first game of a Tuesday doubleheader against the Toronto Blue Jays, he found it in first baseman Phil Gosselin, who played the hero in driving the Angels to a 6-3 win in seven innings at Angel Stadium.

In the top of the sixth inning, with the Angels leading 4-3 and outfielder Juan Lagares on third, Toronto — serving as the home team in the game — issued an intentional walk to Ohtani with two outs. After Ohtani swiped second, Gosselin, hitting third, promptly hit a two-run single to push the Angels’ lead to three.

Angels starter Chris Rodriguez didn’t have his best stuff, lasting just four innings and giving up six hits and two walks, but walked away with just one run given up. Timely infield defense, particularly from shortstop Jose Iglesias and third baseman Jack Mayfield, helped Rodriguez out of multiple jams.

The Angels lost the second game, 4-0.

Advertisement

SOCCER

Lionel Messi signed a contract with Paris Saint-Germain on Tuesday to end his career-long association with Barcelona and start a new era for PSG.

The French club said in a statement that the 34-year-old Argentina star signed a two-year deal with the option for a third season.

“I am excited to begin a new chapter of my career at Paris Saint-Germain,“ Messi said. “Everything about the club matches my football ambitions. I know how talented the squad and the coaching staff are here. I am determined to help build something special for the club and the fans, and I am looking forward to stepping out onto the pitch at the Parc des Princes.”

1943 — Volo Song, driven by Ben White, wins the Hambletonian Stakes in the third heat.

Advertisement

1948 — Demon Hanover, driven by Harrison Hoyt, wins the Hambletonian Stakes in straight heats.

1974 — Lee Trevino beats Jack Nicklaus by one stroke to capture the PGA Championship.

1979 — Peter Haughton wins his second International Trot at Roosevelt Raceway by driving Doublemint to victory.

1984 — Britain’s Sebastian Coe sets an Olympic record in the 1,500 meter with a 3:32.53 winning time.

Advertisement

1985 — Hubert Green beats defending champion Lee Trevino by two strokes to take the PGA Championship.

1986 — Bob Tway’s bunker shot on the final hole gives him the PGA Championship over Greg Norman.

1991 — John Daly, the last alternate to make the field, wins the 73rd PGA Championship with a 1-under 71 to finish three strokes ahead of Bruce Lietzke.

1995 — Michael Johnson wins the 200 meters in 19.79 seconds in the World Track & Field Championships to become the first runner to capture the 200 and 400 meters in a major championship.

Advertisement

1996 — Mark Brooks makes a 5-foot birdie putt on the first hole of a playoff with Kenny Perry to win the PGA Championship.

2002 — Karrie Webb’s latest comeback establishes a new standard of excellence on the LPGA Tour: the Super Slam — winning the four tournaments currently regarded as majors as well as the du Maurier, which lost its major status in 2000 after 21 years. Webb shoots a 6-under 66, rallying from three strokes behind to the first three-time winner in the Women’s British Open.

2012 — Usain Bolt is a perfect 3 for 3 at the London Olympics — three events, three victories — just like Beijing four years ago. Almost even with the last U.S. runner when he gets the baton for the anchor leg of the 4x100 meters, Bolt steadily pulls away down the stretch to cap his perfect Summer Games by leading Jamaica to victory in a world-record 36.84 seconds. Allyson Felix wins her third gold medal, giving the United States a 20-meter lead after the second leg of the 4x400-meter relay. DeeDee Trotter, Felix, Francena McCorory and Sanya Richards-Ross bring home the victory for the Americans’ fifth straight Olympic title in the event.

2012 — Candace Parker scores 21 points and the heavily favored U.S. women’s basketball team wins a fifth straight Olympic gold medal with an 86-50 victory over France.

Advertisement

2013 — Ashton Eaton of the United States wins the decathlon world championship title to add to his Olympic gold medal. He completes his collection with a season-leading total of 8,809 points in a 10-event competition.

2013 — Jason Dufner wins his first major title with a two-stroke victory over Jim Furyk at the PGA Championship.

2016 — Michael Phelps wins his fourth gold medal of the Rio Olympics and 22nd overall with a victory in the 200-meter individual medley. It was the 13th individual gold and 26 medals overall.

2016 — Simone Biles soars to the all-around title in women’s gymnastics at the Rio Olympics. Her total of 62.198 is well clear of silver medalist and “Final Five” teammate Aly Raisman and Russian bronze medalist Aliya Mustafina.

Advertisement

2017 — The NFL suspends Dallas Cowboys running back Ezekiel Elliott six games after a yearlong NFL investigation of his domestic violence case in Ohio.

And finally

John Daly wins the 1991 PGA Championship. Watch it here.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“CBS This Morning” is shaking up its co-host lineup with the hiring of NFL analyst Nate Burleson.

CBS News announced Wednesday that Burleson is joining the morning show’s table alongside current co-hosts Gayle King and Tony Dokoupil starting next month when the program moves to its new studio in New York’s Times Square.

Burleson, a former NFL wide receiver, will replace CBS News veteran Anthony Mason, who becomes a culture correspondent reporting across the network’s programs and digital platforms. Mason, who joined the network in 1986, is known for his coverage of music and art, and will continue to appear on “CBS This Morning” in his new role.

The moves are the first major on-air personnel decisions by Neeraj Khemlani, who was named co-head of the division in May, succeeding Susan Zirinsky.

Advertisement

Burleson, 39, who played for the Minnesota Vikings, Seattle Seahawks and Detroit Lions, is a studio analyst on “NFL Today,” the CBS Sports pregame show during football season. He is also co-host on the daily NFL Network program “Good Morning Football,” and a New York correspondent for the syndicated entertainment news program “Extra.”

Burleson will leave “Extra,” but will remain in his role at CBS Sports and become a contributor at the NFL Network.

Nate Burleson, from left, Bill Cowher and Boomer Esiason attend the CBS Network 2018 Upfront in 2018

(Andy Kropa/Andy Kropa/Invision/AP)

Burleson first gained the attention of CBS News in June, when “CBS This Morning” used several guest hosts while Dokoupil was on paternity leave. His high-energy performances impressed the program’s executive producer, Shawna Thomas, leading to discussions about him joining on a full-time basis.

“CBS This Morning” co-hosts Gayle King, Anthony Mason and Tony Dokoupil interview Patricia Heaton (far left) in 2019. (CBS via Getty Images)

Burleson also earned positive reviews for his work as color analyst for the Nickelodeon telecast of an NFL Wild Card game between the New Orleans Saints and the Chicago Bears in January.

Burleson will be the second retired NFL player to become a network morning show co-host. Former New York Giants star Michael Strahan has been a part of ABC’s “Good Morning America” since 2014. Strahan left the syndicated “Live with Kelly and Michael” to join “GMA” full time in 2016.

Advertisement

While CBS has tended to stick to morning co-hosts with news backgrounds, Burleson will not be the first non-journalist in the role. Actress Mariette Hartley briefly served as a morning co-host for the network in 1987. Susan Molinari, a former member of Congress with no TV experience, got the job in 1997 and lasted nine months.

“CBS This Morning” became the network’s most successful attempt at morning television when it gained viewers in the first five years after its 2012 launch. But it has seen its ratings slide since Charlie Rose, one of its founding anchors, was fired from the program in Nov. 2017 over allegations of sexual harassment from women who worked on his eponymous talk show that aired for many years on PBS stations and Bloomberg Television.

There has also been an overall decline in traditional TV viewing, which has led to audience erosion for “Good Morning America” and NBC’s “Today” as well as “CBS This Morning.”

While it trails “GMA” and “Today” in the ratings, “CBS This Morning” has been getting accolades for its journalism, most recently on its exclusive interview with Brittany Commisso, the executive assistant for New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo.

Advertisement

Commisso alleged that Cuomo groped her while they worked together in the governor’s mansion. Cuomo, who faces allegations from 11 current and former state employees, announced Tuesday that he will step down.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amid loud fanfare and much relief, the Clippers officially retained their best player Thursday by signing the great and powerful Kawhi Leonard.

Whatever.

In a deal that surely sent celebratory waves through much of Clipper Nation, the free-agent Leonard will return to a team with a four-year contract worth $176 million.

Whoopee.

Advertisement

Sorry, but it’s hard to get too excited about a presence that comes with so much fine print.

Sure, Leonard is one of the NBA’s true superstars, a two-time NBA champion and Finals MVP, a five-time All-Star and a renowned defender.

But the fine print … he could miss next season after undergoing knee surgery, which means they’re basically giving him millions to sit on the bench with no certainty of a full recovery. The Brooklyn Nets did the same with Kevin Durant a couple of years ago after his Achilles tendon surgery, and that worked out tremendously, but Leonard is more frail and more cautious.

Certainly, Leonard’s numbers with the Clippers have been impressive, as he is the only NBA player over the last two seasons to average at least 26 points, 6.8 rebounds, 5 assists and 1.7 steals.

But the fine print … how many of those numbers have accounted for impact Clippers victories?

In his first season here, aside from his infamous load management, Leonard was best known for helping to blow what might have been the Clippers’ best chance for an NBA title. He made only six of 22 shots and scored just 14 points in that Game 7 collapse in the second round to the Denver Nuggets.

In his second season, he absolutely saved them with 45 points in a near-perfect Game 6 of the first round against the Dallas Mavericks this summer, then totaled 65 points in two wins to tie the second-round series against the Utah Jazz.

Advertisement

But then he got hurt. And the Clippers won those final two games against the Jazz without him. Yet the Paul George-led team with a couple of breaks could have beaten the Phoenix Suns in the Western Conference finals without him.

As the Clippers forged their identity as an emotional group filled with an unselfish energy and unrelenting work ethic — garnering hordes of new fans even in their largely hostile hometown — Leonard just didn’t seem to fit.

Assuming he doesn’t opt out of the final year of this new contract and hold the Clippers hostage again — a big assumption — Leonard will now be the face of the franchise as it makes the monumental move into its new Inglewood arena in 2024.

Advertisement

But the real heart and soul of the Clippers can be found elsewhere.

They are the portrait of a team. Leonard stands alone. Their new leader George fiercely plays until he drops. Leonard is a quiet wingman who watches his minutes. They are brilliantly run by one of the league’s top five coaches in Tyronn Lue. Leonard has his own agenda.

Appropriately, the most glaring and compelling recent example of Leonard’s presence was his absence. When he was injured during the recent playoffs, he rarely sat on their bench, preferring to keep his wisdom and inspiration locked upstairs in a suite.

Just as the Clippers are emerging from local anonymity and headed toward a new brand with a generous owner and limitless possibilities, was it really smart to continue maintaining a cornerstone who doesn’t really seem to anchor anyone but himself?

Advertisement

“This agreement marks another important moment for our franchise and our fans, as we strive to create a championship-caliber organization, where players find the success and fulfillment they seek,” said Lawrence Frank, Clippers president of basketball operations, in a signing statement. “We’re eager to continue building with Kawhi.”

To be honest, they’ve created a championship-caliber organization while tiptoeing around Leonard, and they could have continued building without him. There were no good free-agent options this year, but couldn’t they have gutted it out without Leonard next year — they’re going to have to do that anyway — and then forged ahead with someone else?

The Clippers have rebuilt the team this offseason around All-Star forwards Kawhi Leonard (2) and Paul George (13). (Luis Sinco / Los Angeles Times)

This is, first and foremost, PG13’s team. Despite great and mocking criticism this postseason, George proved to be a force worthy of being at least a leading piece of a championship effort.

Advertisement

The Clippers have surrounded George this summer with energy and inspiration, smartly re-signing Reggie Jackson and Nicolas Batum, adding solid wing defender Justise Winslow, and then watching Serge Ibaka opt back in. Ivica Zubac is an emerging talent. Marcus Morris is steady. Terance Mann is explosive. Luke Kennard can still shoot. Patrick Beverley is a hoot.

This was never going to be a title team without another superstar, but if they didn’t re-sign Leonard and held the vacancy, it could have been an attractive destination next summer for any number of trade possibilities or potential free agents like Chicago’s Zach LaVine.

Leonard might be one of the league’s best players, but he’s just not the Clippers’ best fit. They have basically gone all-in on a guy who has never seemed to go all-in on them.

In the words of Steve Ballmer, “Hardcore baby!”

Advertisement

In the current reality, buyer beware.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rob Manfred could be on the clock.

The commissioner’s office and the players’ union agreed Friday to extend Trevor Bauer’s leave from the Dodgers through Aug. 20. By that date, a judge could have issued a ruling in the only legal proceeding currently facing Bauer. That could force Manfred to decide whether to suspend Bauer for alleged sexual assault before the Los Angeles County district attorney‘s office decides whether to charge him with a crime.

In a hearing scheduled to start Monday and last up to four days, a Los Angeles County Superior Court judge is set to decide whether the temporary restraining order against Bauer should remain in place. That sets up this dynamic: Bauer likely would not testify at the hearing because anything he says could be used in a potential criminal case against him, but the district attorney might not decide whether to charge him until considering what evidence might emerge at the hearing, including how the woman who has accused Bauer fares on the witness stand.

“I would certainly imagine that it would be beneficial to see how the civil case proceeds before deciding whether to file charges,” said Chloe Wolman, a Los Angeles family law attorney.

Advertisement

Dodgers Trevor Bauer case: ‘No settlements or cash offers,’ his attorneys say Trevor Bauer and his attorneys say the pitcher does not plan to discuss a financial settlement with the woman who has accused him of sexual assault.

Lou Shapiro, a veteran Los Angeles criminal defense attorney, said he believed the judge would consider delaying the hearing until the district attorney decides whether to charge Bauer. Wolman said the judge might not be amenable to that, with the hearing date already postponed twice and four days of court time set aside. Bauer’s attorneys have laid out a case that would not necessarily require the testimony of their client.

“He doesn’t necessarily need to testify,” said Josh Ritter, a Los Angeles attorney and a former prosecutor in the Los Angeles County district attorney’s office. “But it certainly puts him in a more difficult position if he is unable to.”

Bauer has been under investigation for three months.

“At some point, the D.A.’s office has to make a decision,” Shapiro said. “They can’t just hold onto it forever.”

Ritter said he does not believe the district attorney should need to assess next week’s hearing before deciding whether to file charges against Bauer. The district attorney’s office can interview the accuser and evaluate evidence independently, he said, and should be able to make a decision without considering how vigorous a defense might be mounted by someone with ample financial resources.

“If you have a complaining witness who says they were assaulted,” Ritter said, “and they have physical evidence to back that up, and their story is trustworthy to the extent they can corroborate it by other evidence, I don’t see why they would hesitate to file, even given the seriousness of the person who is involved.

Advertisement

“So it is very curious to me that they would be waiting this long, unless they don’t feel it is that solid of a case.”

If next week’s hearing proceeds as scheduled, and if the judge makes a ruling, that would conclude the matter of the restraining order and could force Manfred’s hand.

MLB Rob Manfred watches batting practice before the All-Star game in Denver on July 13, 2021. (David Zalubowski / Associated Press)

The league could ask Bauer and the union for another extension of his paid administrative leave, to accommodate what would be continuing investigations by the Pasadena Police Department and by MLB.

Advertisement

However, if that request is declined, and if the district attorney still has not decided whether to charge Bauer, Manfred would likely not be able to invoke a clause in the MLB domestic violence and sexual assault policy that authorizes him to levy paid suspensions of a player involved in a “criminal or legal proceeding.”

At that point, Manfred could reinstate Bauer while the MLB investigation continues, deferring any discipline until its conclusion. He also could decide whether to suspend Bauer without pay, and for how long, based on whatever information MLB has, including evidence from next week’s hearing. That decision would come with the risk that additional evidence might later come to light but too late to affect the suspension decision.

Manfred also could decide to let the Dodgers discipline Bauer. If that were to happen, the team could reinstate him, release him and pay off the balance of his $102-million contract, or try to void the contract and risk an almost certain grievance.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Doctors finally solved the mystery of the injury that has caused painful inflammation in Mookie Betts’ right hip and sent the Dodgers right fielder to the injured list twice in the past month.

Medical tests revealed that Betts has a spur in one of his pelvic bones but not in the labrum area of the hip, manager Dave Roberts said on Friday.

The condition usually requires surgery to shave down or remove the bone spur, but Betts received a second cortisone injection to ease the pain on Thursday and will try to finish out the season before undergoing any medical procedure.

“It’s a short-term solution,” Roberts said of the injection. “Right now, where we’re at, we’re trying to figure out what’s the best way to get him back with us and through the season. Once we get to the offseason, we’ll address that.”

Advertisement

Betts was scratched from Tuesday night’s game in Philadelphia. He was placed on the 10-day injured list Wednesday and flew back to Los Angeles that night for further tests on Thursday.

“It’s a bone spur that is sort of tied into the hip,” Roberts said. “It’s really internal. We don’t know how it came to be. I really don’t know the exact location. All I know is it causes enough pain to prevent him from being out there.”

Betts was sidelined by the hip injury for the final two weeks of July. He was activated on Aug. 1 and hit .381 (eight for 21) with three homers and four RBIs in five games before returning to the injured list this week.

Betts, who is batting .277 with an .899 on-base-plus-slugging percentage, 17 homers 25 doubles, 44 RBIs and 68 runs in 87 games, has not resumed baseball activities, and there is no timetable for his return.

“But I do know the pain has subsided,” Roberts said. “When he can return, I still don’t know because he still has to get ramped up to see how it feels.”

The Dodgers trailed San Francisco by five games with 47 games left entering Friday, and they’ll have to navigate at least another week or two without one of their most dynamic players.

“It’s been tough,” Dodgers third baseman Justin Turner said. “Talking to him over last couple of days, he’s pulling hard for us, he’s doing what he can to make sure he gets back on the field as soon as he can. Until that time, we have to step up and fill in for him and figure out a way to win games.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Seeing 10 healthy players on the court was enough to bring a smile to coach Derek Fisher’s face. The seemingly mundane sight of two teams of five matched up against each other has been rare on the Sparks’ purple-and-gold court at Academy USA this year.

Battered by injuries, the Sparks subsisted mostly on drills and mental reps while learning on the fly during the first half of the season. They fell to 10th in the WNBA standings and limped into the Olympic break with a six-game losing streak.

Now they’re calling in reinforcements. The Sparks (6-13) resume their season Sunday against the Indiana Fever at Staples Center with hopes that leadership from Nneka Ogwumike and Kristi Toliver can help dig them out of their first-half hole.

“Elite teams are player-led,” Fisher said. “Coaches, management, ownership, we try and help them set the table but then once the table is set, they have to then handle it from there. So Kristi and Nneka give us a chance to be a player-led team.”

Advertisement

Ogwumike played in only five games before suffering a knee sprain. An eye injury kept Toliver out for the last six games. Chiney Ogwumike, who played in only three games, is battling through lingering knee soreness and still questionable for Sunday’s game.

Even without three starters, the Sparks are only 2 1/2 games out of a playoff spot. Five of their final 13 regular-season games are against the last-place Fever and the Atlanta Dream, which entered the Olympic break tied with the Sparks in the standings, and eight are on the road.

Sports Sparks’ Nneka Ogwumike determined to rise after injury, Olympic snub Sparks leader Nneka Ogwumike has fought off self-doubt and worked through an injury in hopes of helping herself and the team “rise from the ashes.”

“We’re kind of entering a new season with this second half and also with a new team almost,” Ogwumike said. “As we develop this chemistry on defense, I think that’s really what’s going to fuel us to know each other on both ends of the floor.”

The Sparks relied on their defense to stay competitive, but often broke down late in games. Fatigue and the mental strain of a struggling offense that was the worst in offensive rating were evident. Erica Wheeler tried to carry the backcourt with 14 points and 4.4 assists per game as second-year guard Te’a Cooper and mid-season signing Karlie Samuelson moved in and out of the starting lineup.

Toliver “gave them an ‘A’ for everything” considering the challenges, but the 13-year veteran also noticed some bad habits. Composure was lost at times. It might have reminded the former Maryland star of her younger self, which she called a “loose cannon.”

“Now at the ripe age of 34, I’ve kind of brought it down,” Toliver said smiling. “So just having the different levels of personality, demeanor, I think I’ll bring a little bit more of just an even-keeledness to our team when things get helter-skelter.”

Toliver and both Ogwumike sisters tried to coach their younger teammates through the struggles from the bench. They poked their heads into huddles and pulled players aside to provide additional advice.

Advertisement

“The constant message that I gave my team was I don’t care about the outcome. It’s about how it happens,” Nneka Ogwumike said. “Whether it’s a win or a lose, it’s about how we win and how we lose.”

With Chiney Ogwumike inching toward a return, the Sparks are close to their full team, but will be without Maria Vadeeva, who did not join the team after the Olympic break as planned.

Fisher called the situation “a little frustrating and disappointing” as the team saved a coveted roster spot for the Russian center. Vadeeva hasn’t played for the team that drafted her 11th overall in 2018 since 2019.

The absence opens a larger role for forward Lauren Cox, who joined the Sparks after Indiana cut the former No. 3 overall pick in June. With almost no practice time during her five-game stint with the Sparks before the break, the former Baylor star averaged 3.4 points and four rebounds per game. That’s just the beginning of what the two-time Big 12 Conference defensive player of the year wants to show Sparks fans.

Advertisement

“I take defense personally,” Cox said.

The break was especially beneficial for Cox as it gave her extra time to practice with the team after her trial-by-fire beginning. Players called it almost like a second training camp and the hiatus has restored hope for the Sparks roster that’s as healthy as it’s been since the end of May.

“That’s exciting to think about, the possibilities of what we as a team can still accomplish this season,” Fisher said. “We want to make a push to get into the playoffs … but the only way to get there is to take care of the business in front of us.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@During training camp, as they’ve stood on the sidelines watching Matthew Stafford and John Wolford take reps at quarterback, Devlin Hodges and Bryce Perkins have turned to each other and talked of Aug. 14 — the date of the Rams’ first preseason game.

That, they both knew, would be their time in the spotlight. With Stafford and Wolford both sitting out Saturday’s game against the Chargers, the third and fourth men on the depth chart will get a chance to make their case for a roster spot.

For Perkins, it will be his first chance to take the field in an NFL uniform. The journey to this point has been arduous.

Originally enrolling at Arizona State in 2015 and redshirting, Perkins broke two vertebra in his neck, then missed the entire 2016 season. That led him to Arizona Western College, where he played for a year prior to transferring to Virginia. In two years with the Cavaliers, Perkins led them to eight and nine wins, their first postseason win since 2005, the 2019 ACC championship game, then an Orange Bowl loss.

Advertisement

“You talk about really raising the level of play of everybody around you, being able to lead those guys to a conference championship game, I remember watching that opening drive as he takes them right down the field,” Rams coach Sean McVay said Friday. “Clemson is a pretty impressive team.”

This was in response to a question about why Perkins went undrafted — the next malady to afflict his career. Still, he did enough in Charlottesville to catch the eye of Les Snead and McVay, eventually signing with the Rams as an undrafted free agent. With the lack of preseason games in 2020, though, he never had a chance to see game action.

“Going out there and performing all the things that we practiced over the last year — for me, for the last two years, this year and last year — it’s gonna be exciting,” Perkins said. “I know energy’s gonna be up.”

Given that the latest stats from Perkins are from the 2019 ACC season, they should be taken with a grain of salt. But we do know he’s capable of using his legs, having rushed for a combined 1,692 yards over two seasons with the Cavaliers.

“It just keeps defenses honest,” McVay said. “So much of what you see is predicated on defenses usually playing 11 on 10 where they’re not necessarily having to account for the quarterback as a runner. You can certainly do those things with him and then when things break down off schedule — if somebody gets beat — that athleticism, he can kind of find a way of, when it’s wrong, making it right.”

Asked about nerves, Perkins said he wasn’t feeling any. The biggest thing for him is making sure everything goes smoothly before the play — in particular getting the right play call in. Last year, with no preseason, he felt a lack of comfort with the Rams’ playbook. That has since evaporated.

Advertisement

“I remember hearing some of the play calls, I’m like, ‘There’s no way that I would ever be able to get these play calls down,’ ” Perkins said. “But now, feeling really comfortable about hearing the play call, getting them out and then going up there and executing. That alone just allows you to play faster and as we know, when you’re allowed to take some of the stress off, thinking a lot at quarterback, you perform better.”

The stakes here are no small deal for someone in Perkins’ position. Even if he doesn’t make the Rams’ roster, it’s a chance to put something good on tape for the first time in two years. With a brother, former UCLA running back Paul Perkins, who used to play in the league, Bryce knows how quickly chances can evaporate.

“I’d rather go out there when I felt ready mentally than going out there, rushing out there just because I want to be out there,” Perkins said. “So I love coming out here, going and watching the guys and taking different stuff from different guys and learning how to be a pro’s pro.”

Etc.

It was a light day of work on Friday, with things wrapping up about an hour early ahead of Saturday’s game. ... Cornerback Robert Rochell participated but wore a club and a non-contact jersey. ... Linebacker Terrell Lewis and corner Darious Williams both missed practice with knee and ankle injuries, respectively.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Running in transition with the ball in his hands Friday, a place a 6-foot-10 player rarely enjoys possession, Clippers center Daniel Oturu lobbed a pass to teammate Amir Coffey. The soft touch ended resulted with a thunderous dunk.

It was perhaps the easiest basket the Clippers scored all night in the Lakers’ 86-84 victory at Thomas & Mack Center.

This was not Paul George and Co. against LeBron James and Russell Westbrook. The dates of those future Lakers-Clippers showdowns are expected to be revealed as soon as next week, when the NBA publishes its schedule for the upcoming season.

Instead, this was each team’s third Summer League game, a night of sputtering offense — the Clippers shot 45% overall, the Lakers 38% — a blown 11-point Lakers lead and, with it, a lively finish that ended with Brandon Boston Jr.’s missed three-pointer for the win in the final seconds.

Advertisement

The Clippers remain winless in Las Vegas, while the Lakers are 2-1.

Five takeaways from Summer League:

The top scorers

Vic Law led the Lakers with 15 points. Boston Jr., the second-round pick for whom the Clippers hold such high hopes, settled in for his most comfortable performance yet as a professional, making seven of his 13 shots and finishing with 17 points in front of an audience that included coach Tyronn Lue, top executive Lawrence Frank and guard Patrick Beverley. He had made seven of his 22 shots in his first two games combined. Boston’s lithe frame needs strength, but his mechanics are smooth and his 6-7 height allows him to get his shot off against defenders of all sizes. He also has yet to miss a three-pointer from either corner this summer, a location he’s focusing on by design.

“Regular season you’re playing with [Paul George], Kawhi, Rondo, all those big guys so you’re not going to be able to dribble like I want to,” Boston said. “So just dribbling to that corner, getting the shots that I need and the shots that are going to be taken during the season is something I’m just practicing.”

The highlight

Clippers second-round pick Jason Preston split the defense with three minutes to play in the fourth quarter and hung in the air at the rim before spinning his layup into the basket on the opposite side of the rim where his leap began. It was a much-needed offensive highlight for the former Ohio guard after making one of his first six shots in his first two games and struggling to get past his defender with his dribble.

Advertisement

He finished with 12 points, making four of his 10 shots — including his first made three-pointer of the summer — and kept the game close with a block from behind and steal in the final two minutes.

The runner-up award? That goes to Lakers guard Trevelin Queen, only 6-2, who saw minimal boxing out by the Clippers and leaped over their backs for a put-back dunk in the final minute of the third quarter.

Drive-kick-swing

“Drive, kick, swing” was already the Clippers’ unofficial motto under Lue, the three words outlining their offensive philosophy of driving to the paint, passing to the perimeter and moving the ball around the arc until an open shot is found. It was made a bit more official this summer when the team printed the three words on T-shirts.

Advertisement

There were times Friday when the Clippers finally followed those commandments, turning one pass into another, and another and lastly into an open shot. Whether it missed or not it was a signal, even if faint, that despite an often ugly offensive performance through three three summer games, they’ve begun to get a better handle on the right process. They finished with 22 assists, four more than their first-game total and six more than in their second.

“From last game we watched a lot of film, we talked a lot and they just grew from watching the film of themselves not doing it,” said Jeremy Castleberry, the Clippers’ coach. “We moved the ball a lot more this game compared to the last game. We got the ball to change sides of the floor, especially in the second half.

“It was a lot of good, positive things I saw over there. … As much as I do want to win and I’m frustrated by losing, it’s about getting these guys better and more prepared.”

Getting comfortable?

Advertisement

Entering Friday the Clippers looked exactly like a team that had practiced together no more than five days before their summer opener — disjointed, with missed opportunities and missed communication. They began to settle in Friday.

Clearly frustrated but not paralyzed by his brutal shooting start, forward and restricted free agent Amir Coffey — who has now made one of his 17 three-pointers — stayed aggressive in looking for opportunities by driving into the paint, including two drives to the rim in the final minutes of a close game.

Preston appeared more comfortable creating for others, lofting passes upcourt to start a fast break and over the top of the defense to a backup big man for another close look in the second half. Keon Johnson is the last draft pick to find his rhythm, having made 10 of his 40 shots through three games.

Advertisement

Scrubb changes focus

For Jay Scrubb, who had taken 38 shots combined, but with only two assists, in his first two games, Friday’s game was essentially played with an eye on next winter, when his shooting opportunities won’t come as easily as they have against summer competition. How will he fare then, when he is not the best option to score? This was a preview.

Having displayed his bona fides as a scorer early in Monday’s summer debut — the quick first step, handle and easy release that rebounded along with his health last spring — he took only seven shots while dishing six assists, including a dump-off for a layup while floating near the rim. He also pushed the ball upcourt with a bounce pass threaded between two defenders that showed his willingness to move the ball. Scrubb has also said he plans to use this summer to improve as a defender. There was more mixed progress there. He blocked a shot in the first half to start a fast break, but later also was beaten by a backdoor cut for a layup.

Scrubb can get his shot nearly any time he wants against summer competition. But that alone won’t secure him rotation minutes next season, and he seems to know it.

Advertisement

“I’m just trying to focus more on getting my teammates involved,” he said. “I know that in any play, in any second that I can get myself involved I can create a shot for myself. Tonight I just wanted to focus more on getting others involved, driving into the paint , kicking it out, not taking forced shots, just making the right play.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The optimists among the Dodgers’ faithful will point to Friday night’s 6-5, 10-inning victory over the New York Mets in Citi Field as cause for celebration, the Dodgers finally snapping an overtime hex that saw them lose 12 of their first 13 extra-inning games this season.

The pessimists — and many of the realists — among them will look at a disastrous seventh inning, which featured a bullpen meltdown and some managerial moves and non-moves that left Dave Roberts open to second-guessing, and gnash their teeth in their belief that this game never should have reached extra innings.



For the record: An earlier version of this story said the Dodgers had lost 11 of their first 12 extra-inning games this season. They lost 12 of their first 13.

Catcher Will Smith popped a two-run homer into the left-field seats to open the 10th inning, redeeming himself for his seventh-inning passed ball that allowed the tying run to score, and Kenley Jansen threw two hitless innings of relief, allowing the Dodgers to high-five each other after a grueling 4-hour, 18-minute game.

“It’s baseball,” Roberts said of the brutal record in extra innings. “I can’t explain all those losses, but I can explain the win tonight. We got a big hit from Will, and Kenley pitched two big innings. Just huge performances from our ballclub.”

Advertisement

But that seventh inning … that one left a mark. It seemed like a warped magic act. The Dodgers had a four-run lead with two outs and the bases empty, and somehow made it disappear.

They built a 4-0 lead on the strength of Corey Seager’s RBI double in the first and sacrifice flies by Smith in the third, Trea Turner in the fourth and Billy McKinney in the sixth. A heads-up play by Chris Taylor actually netted the fourth run.

The Dodgers third baseman doubled to left-center to open the sixth and took third when Mets catcher James McCann’s errant throw back to Drew Smith after a strikeout of Cody Bellinger nicked off the reliever’s glove and trickled behind the mound. That put Taylor in position to score on McKinney’s sacrifice fly to center.

Dodgers starter Julio Urías was dominant in five scoreless innings, giving up two hits, striking out five and walking two, reliever Corey Knebel struck out two in a scoreless sixth, and Brusdar Graterol struck out the first two batters of the seventh.

Then the roof caved in. Graterol gave up a double to pinch-hitter Michael Conforto, and Roberts pulled the right-hander in favor of Justin Bruihl, a 24-year-old left-hander who hadn’t pitched above the Class-A level until this season and was making his fourth big-league appearance.

“Looking at the next four hitters, three of them were left-handed, and this was three of four [nights] for Brusdar,” Roberts said of his decision to pull Graterol. “Justin has been every good for us, and it gives him two cracks to get us through the inning.”

But Dominic Smith flared an RBI single to center, snapping a streak of 17 1/3 consecutive scoreless innings by the Dodgers bullpen and cutting the lead to 4-1. Brandon Nimmo walked to put two on.

Advertisement

Dodgers’ Corey Seager follows through on an RBI double next to New York Mets catcher James McCann during the first inning on Friday in New York. (Frank Franklin II / Associated Press)

Up stepped Pete Alonso, who has 25 homers this season and has won the last two home run derbies. Roberts had the option of walking the right-handed-hitting slugger intentionally to load the bases — it would have fulfilled Bruihl’s obligation of facing three hitters — and summoning setup man Blake Treinen.

But Roberts let Bruihl in to face Alonso, and he threw a first-pitch wild pitch, advancing the runners to second and third.

Alonso was intentionally walked, but Roberts still didn’t go to Treinen, the right-hander who was untouchable in his previous 19 games, giving up no earned runs and seven hits, striking out 21 and walking five in 20 innings.

Advertisement

Bruihl remained in the game to face left-handed-hitting Jeff McNeil, who blooped a two-run single to shallow center to make it 4-3. Roberts finally summoned Treinen, but Smith, the Dodgers’ catcher, misplayed a 96-mph fastball for a passed ball, Alonso scoring from third to tie score 4-4.

“If I can get McNeil out there, we can stay away from an up and down for Blake,” Roberts said. “A couple of unlucky soft balls found the outfield grass, but that’s baseball. If I had to do it again, I’d do it.”

Jansen, who hadn’t recorded more than three outs in an appearance since June 9, needed only 11 pitches to retire the side in order in the ninth, allowing the closer to start the 10th.

Advertisement

Smith’s clutch homer, which came on a full-count, 96-mph fastball from Jeurys Familia, gave Jansen the cushion to absorb a run in the bottom of the 10th.

“We had a four-run cushion and let the lead slip away, but to win the game, no one in that clubhouse cares how we did it,” Roberts said. “We’re just happy we won a ballgame.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than three decades after “Field of Dreams” seeped into the country’s cultural consciousness, with a one-year delay caused by the pandemic, one of the most famous cornfields in Hollywood history finally gets the opportunity to host real major league ball.

“Is this heaven?” the ghost of John Kinsella asked in the movie that inspired Thursday’s game between the Chicago White Sox and New York Yankees next to the actual site used in the 1989 film, which is maintained as a tourist attraction.

“No, it’s Iowa,” dutiful farmer Ray Kinsella — played by Kevin Costner — responded to his father with a smile before they played catch under the lights in the movie’s most poignant scene.

This week, the ball playing wasn’t fiction.

Advertisement

Advertisement

A general view of the Field of Dreams during the first inning between the Chicago White Sox and the New York Yankees in Dyersville, Iowa. (Getty Images)

“Shoeless” Joe Jackson and other long-ago players who took the field in the movie were replaced by José Abreu and Aaron Judge.

The proud and quintessential Midwestern state, usually only in the spotlight every four years during presidential campaigns, hosted a Major League Baseball game for the first time when the White Sox and Yankees played at a temporary venue built for about 8,000 fans in tiny Dyersville — population “about 4,400, we’re hoping for in the next census,” Mayor Jim Heavens said.

Tim Anderson hit a two-run homer with one out in the ninth inning into the cornfield to end the Field of Dreams game in cinematic fashion, as the White Sox outslugged the Yankees 9-8.

“The fans came to see a show, and we gave them a show,” Anderson said.

Actor Kevin Costner, from the 1989 drama “Field of Dreams,” speaks to the crowd prior to the game between the Chicago White Sox and the New York Yankees. (Stacy Revere / Getty Images)

Advertisement

Chicago White Sox pitcher Lance Lynn warms up in the outfield before the game against the New York Yankees. (Associated Press)

New York Yankees relief pitcher Wandy Peralta reacts to a strikeout against the Chicago White Sox in the seventh inning. (Charlie Neibergall / Associated Press)

A White Sox bullpen pitcher watches from the outfield corn during the game against the Yankees. (Charlie Neibergall / Associated Press)

Fans cheer during the game between the New York Yankees and Chicago White Sox in Dyersville, Iowa. (Charlie Neibergall / Associated Press)

Eloy Jimenez of the White Sox anticipates a pitch during the third inning against the Yankees. (Stacy Revere / Getty Images)

White Sox shortstop Tim Anderson celebrates his walk-off home run against the Yankees in the ninth inning. (Associated Press)

The old-timey scoreboard is shown in the outfield during the game between the New York Yankees and Chicago White Sox. (Associated Press)

Yankees right fielder Aaron Judge sports Field of Dreams cleats before the game. (Associated Press)

Yankees center fielder Brett Gardner jumps to catch a fly ball. (Charlie Neibergall / Associated Press)

Text by The Associated Press.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@He enters his first NFL season toting massive expectations, Rashawn Slater representing the Chargers’ hopes at left tackle.

Yet after a recent training camp practice, the rookie was spotted carrying something else: the helmet of fellow offensive lineman Scott Quessenberry.

Slater was the No. 13 overall pick in April and signed a contract that guarantees him $16.6 million.

None of that clout could prevent him from experiencing the kind of rookie rituals that have long existed in the NFL.

Advertisement

So there was Slater, carrying his own helmet and Quessenberry’s as he walked off the field.

He handled the assignment with a smile, another sign suggesting Slater is on the right path.

“He’s got grit,” left guard Matt Feiler said. “He wants to learn. As an offensive lineman, that’s what you need to do. You need to learn from your mistakes and ask questions. He’s asking all the right questions.”

The Chargers will continue to get answers about Slater on Saturday night in their exhibition opener at SoFi Stadium against the Rams.

He is one of their few starters who will play in the preseason, Slater needing the experience after opting out last year at Northwestern because of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The vast majority of the Chargers’ regulars will not play in this game or the two exhibitions that follow.

Coach Brandon Staley and his staff instead will use training camp and a pair of upcoming joint practices with San Francisco to ready their starters.

Advertisement

That makes Slater’s appearance Saturday all the more noteworthy as he prepares to join an otherwise veteran offensive line charged with protecting prized quarterback Justin Herbert and spring a much-needed running game.

Slater, 22, has been praised throughout camp for his work ethic and intelligence. The physical traits of the 6-foot-4, 315-pounder have been admired by NFL talent evaluators for much longer than that.

Calling him “a young guy who’s capable of absorbing a lot,” Staley said Slater’s development hinges on his ability to master techniques, work together with Feiler and transfer his strengths to the NFL game.

Right tackle Bryan Bulaga, who is entering his 11th season, said Slater possesses the traits necessary to deal with the ups and downs that come from a position where every snap is a win or a loss.

Advertisement

“Something I always find is a very good sign for rookies is, when they come out here and make a mistake, they learn from it,” Bulaga said. “They don’t come back out the next day and make the same mistake.

“They might make a different mistake, but it’s not the same one that they were corrected on the day before … Rashawn’s a really smart kid. So far I’ve been very impressed with him.”

Against the Rams, Slater will not face the sort of competition he has encountered daily in practice. Like the Chargers, the Rams will sit most of their top players all preseason.

Advertisement

Slater might not play for long Saturday, either, with Staley committed to trying to get his team to the regular-season opener as healthy as possible. That will be the priority for Slater over an extended string of snaps against fringe NFL players.

So Slater’s best work will continue to come against the likes of teammates Joey Bosa and Uchenna Nwosu. When the 49ers visit Costa Mesa next week, he should have a chance to match up against Nick Bosa, too.

That doesn’t make this preseason appearance by Slater insignificant, not when the Chargers are relying so much on their latest first-round choice.

“He’s picking up things a lot quicker than I thought he would,” Feiler said. “Definitely a lot faster than I did when I was a rookie. He’s taking big strides and he’s looking good.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The roulette wheel that the Dodgers have spun all season in search of a reliable left-handed reliever appears to have landed on No. 51.

That’s the jersey number worn by Alex Vesia, the 25-year-old who was shaky in a first-half stint with the Dodgers but has been dominant since being recalled from triple-A Oklahoma City in early July.

Vesia replaced starter Max Scherzer after a lengthy rain delay Tuesday night and threw 1 2/3 scoreless innings, striking out four and walking none, in a 5-0 win over the Philadelphia Phillies.

He threw another scoreless inning in Thursday’s 2-1 loss to the Phillies, striking out Alec Bohm with a 95-mph fastball and Brad Miller with a 96-mph fastball in a one-two-three fifth and departing after walking Bryce Harper on a full-count slider that appeared to catch the top of the strike zone to open the sixth.

Advertisement

After going 0-1 with a 5.91 ERA, striking out 16 and walking 11, in 10 2/3 innings from May 1 to June 2, Vesia is 2-0 with an 0.66 ERA since July 9, striking out 17 and walking three in 13 2/3 innings. He has given up only five hits to 48 batters in that stretch.

“Going down to triple-A, I got to clear my head, and coming back up, I was able to bring what I was doing in triple-A and carry it over to big leagues,” said Vesia, who was acquired from the Miami Marlins in February. “It was nothing super crazy [as far as changes]. It was just kind of building confidence one inning at a time.”

Vesia, a Cal State Hayward product, has the stuff to succeed in the big leagues, mixing a fastball that averages 93.6 mph with an 84.4-mph slider and an 86.1-mph changeup, but command issues torpedoed his first stint with the Dodgers.

“I’d walk two guys in a row then punch a guy out, walk another guy, then strike out the next guy on three pitches,” Vesia said. “I had little flashes, and now it’s being able to fully pound the zone and command it the way I know how.”

After his early June demotion to triple-A, Vesia gave up one earned run in nine innings of nine appearances, striking out 19 and walking three. He struck out 10 consecutive batters over one four-appearance stretch. But he said the adjustments he made were more mental than mechanical.

“I try to grip it and rip it,” Vesia said. “When you’re in your rhythm and [catchers] Will [Smith] or [Austin] Barnes puts down a sign and you have full conviction, it plays. I think that mentality is what works for me.”

Advertisement

It also works for the Dodgers, who have cycled through left-handers like face coverings this season. Victor Gonzalez, Garrett Cleavinger, Scott Alexander and Darien Nunez have all been ineffective and are now injured.

Where does Vesia fit in?

“He’s right there,” manager Dave Roberts said. “He really wasn’t on the radar early in the year, but he’s played himself into that role.”

How has Vesia changed since the beginning of the season?

Advertisement

“I think he’s just more comfortable,” Roberts said. “Last year was his first stint in the big leagues, and it was a quick ascension for him. Coming to a new club, you’re trying to fit in and compete and perform, and it took a couple of times up here to get comfortable.

“I think he’s found his confidence, his swagger, and certainly, the performance has been very consistent. It’s been a huge add for us.”

Barnes also noticed a difference in Vesia from his first-half stint with the Dodgers.

Advertisement

“I feel like he’s more comfortable,” the Dodgers catcher said. “He knows what he wants to do on the mound. Things are a little more clear for him out there. He trusts his fastball, and he’s throwing off-speed pitches at the right times. When he’s throwing with confidence, he’s throwing the ball really well.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Howdy, I’m your host, Houston Mitchell. Let’s get right to the news.

Andrew Greif on the Clippers: Kawhi Leonard is returning to the Clippers on a four-year maximum contract, tying himself to the franchise long term.

Newsletter Go beyond the scoreboard Get the latest on L.A.'s teams in the daily Sports Report newsletter. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Leonard, an unrestricted free agent, agreed to return to the team last week while still working out the terms of his contract. A person with knowledge of the contract said Thursday that the fourth year is a player option; he will earn $176 million over the length of the deal.

Advertisement

The final season runs through 2024-25, the same season the Clippers hope to open their proposed arena in Inglewood that carries a privately financed budget of $1.8 billion. Leonard’s deal also is equal in length to that of teammate Paul George, potentially keeping the All-Star duo together for years. By choosing this contract structure, Leonard will earn the maximum allowed under the league’s collective bargaining agreement. But he still didn’t take options that would have secured him more money.

Had he exercised his $36 million player option for next season, he could have then added a four-year extension worth around $187 million. Had he declined his player option and re-signed on a two-year contract with another player option, he could have re-signed a five-year contract next summer, worth $235 million.

————

Can Kawhi Leonard recover from surgery in time to help Clippers next season?

Enjoying this newsletter? Consider subscribing to the Los Angeles Times Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Become a subscriber.

DODGERS

Mike DiGiovanna on the Dodgers: The excessive heat warnings in Citizens Bank Park, where the combination of mid-90s temperatures and 60% humidity created a heat index of 104 degrees, did not extend to the Dodgers’ bat rack.

An offense that produced 13 runs and 24 hits, including four homers, in the first two games of the series went cold in a 2-1 loss to the Philadelphia Phillies before a sweaty crowd of 26,122 on Thursday.

The Dodgers mustered only three hits off Phillies starter Ranger Suarez and four relievers, two of them infield singles, and went hitless after Austin Barnes’ one-out single in the fifth, their four-game win streak coming to an end.

Advertisement

Spot-starter Mitch White gave up two runs and three hits in four innings, and relievers Alex Vesia, Phil Bickford, Justin Bruihl and Kenley Jansen each threw scoreless innings, capping a superb series in which the bullpen combined for 14 2/3 scoreless innings. The Phillies managed only four hits themselves on Thursday.

————

Bill Plaschke: Dodgers may be running out of time to catch the Giants

ANGELS

Jack Harris on the Angels: Earlier this season, Shohei Ohtani’s pitching starts were riveting affairs — for better or worse.

Advertisement

The right-hander, then struggling with his fastball command, would walk a lot of batters, get into tricky jams, then escape with wicked splitters and wipeout sliders. He limited damage, though struggled to work very deep into games. He was pitching well, but still had room to grow.

Lately, Ohtani’s recent starts have become almost routine — in all the best ways.

He works quickly, benefitting from improved command with the four-seamer and an increasingly effective cutter. He stays out of trouble, issuing walks to fewer than 4% of batters since the start of July. And he makes quality starts (at least six innings, no more than three earned runs) look easy, pitching his fifth straight on Thursday in the Angels’ 6-3 win against the Toronto Blue Jays.

RAMS-CHARGERS

Sam Farmer on the NFL: They arrived in Los Angeles in the hopes of building something special.

Advertisement

They left in dejection and disappointment.

Now, Jared Goff and Anthony Lynn are ready for a reboot, primed to redefine themselves with the Detroit Lions, a franchise that hasn’t won a playoff game in 30 years.

Goff is the quarterback the Rams swapped for Detroit’s Matthew Stafford. Lynn was the first head coach of the relocated Los Angeles Chargers but was fired in January, less than a year after signing a contract extension. He’s now the Lions’ offensive coordinator, his future tied to a quarterback with whom he once shared space in SoFi Stadium.

“I’ve never been fired before in my life, so it took me a little while to get over that,” Lynn told the Los Angeles Times last week after a training camp practice.

Advertisement

“I was going to take a gap year. Ever since I was 6 years old, I haven’t done anything but football. Then this opportunity came up. I had made my mind up that I was staying out this year. But I said, ‘Hey, I can do this.’ ”

————

Three knee surgeries later, Rams rookie running back Jake Funk appears ready to rumble

Ryan Kartje on Pac-12 football: The Pac-12 announced Thursday that any conference team “unable to play a contest through its own fault” this season will be forced to forfeit. New Pac-12 Commissioner George Kliavkoff will ultimately make the decision.

Advertisement

Any forfeited contest will be considered a loss for the team at fault.

The policy marks a return to the conference’s long-standing rules on forfeiture. But with COVID-19 likely to impact college football through 2021, the rule could come into play this season far more than before.

Last season, the Pac-12 was forced to step in and declare USC’s critical November matchup with Colorado a no-contest after three positive COVID-19 cases left the Trojans without the necessary number of players to field its offensive line. Under the current policy, USC would have forfeited the game, and Colorado likely would have gone on to represent the Pac-12 South in the conference championship game.

OLYMPICS

Robert Gauthier on photographing the Olympics: Photographing the Olympics is a uniquely challenging experience. The variety of sports, venues, athletes and shooting positions compels photographers to dig deep into their metaphorical toolboxes to create impactful images.

Advertisement

Witnessing humans experience their greatest highs or deepest disappointments multiple times a day ratchets up the intensity of our shooting sessions. Capturing such a moment effectively in a single image is my job. And, spoiler alert, it’s fun!

Without going into the minutiae of shuttle buses, crowded sidelines, television camera operators blocking our views of the athletes, the Tokyo Olympics was like none of the others I have covered. No fans in the stands, the unseen threat of the coronavirus cast a heavy pall over the competition.

But the competitive spirit of the athletes and the determination of the local staff and volunteers won out. This collection of photos represents my visual journey. Whereas I usually plan thoughtfully before each event, I came into these Games open-minded and let the moments come to me: a sort of search for predicted outcomes and styled images.

To see Gauthier’s amazing photos, click here.

Advertisement

1919 — Upset scores a win against Man o’ War in the Sanford Memorial Stakes at Saratoga. The defeat is Big Red’s only loss in 21 starts.

1933 — Gene Sarazen wins the PGA Championship by defeating Willie Goggin 5 and 4 in the final round.

1935 — The first roller derby begins in Chicago by promoter Leo Seltzer.

1979 — Lou Brock of the St. Louis Cardinals reaches 3,000 career hits with an infield hit off Chicago Cubs pitcher Dennis Lamp.

Advertisement

1987 — Jackie Joyner-Kersee equals the world record in the women’s long jump — 24 feet, 5½ inches — in the Pan American Games at Indianapolis. She matches the mark set in 1986 by Heike Dreschler of East Germany.

1995 — Cuba’s Ana Quirot, severely burned in a 1993 kitchen accident, wins the 800 meters at the world championships at Gothenburg, Sweden.

1995 — Steve Elkington shoots a final-round 64 and birdies the first playoff hole to beat Colin Montgomerie and win the PGA Championship. The 64 is the lowest final round by a PGA Championship winner.

1997 — Wilson Kipketer topples Sebastian Coe’s 16-year-old record in the 800 meters, finishing in 1 minute, 41.24 seconds in Zurich, Switzerland. Haile Gebrselassie also shatters his own 5,000 record with a time of 12 minutes, 41.86 seconds.

Advertisement

2002 — Natalie Coughlin breaks the 100-meter backstroke world record, timed in 59.58 seconds at the U.S. national championships. She is the first American to hold the world record since Catherine Ferguson in 1966.

2008 — Michael Phelps swims into history as the winningest Olympic athlete with his 10th and 11th career gold medals and five world records in five events at the Beijing Games. He wins the 200-meter butterfly and swims leadoff for the U.S. 800 freestyle relay team.

2016 — The U.S. women’s 4x100-meter medley relay team of Kathleen Baker, Lilly King, Dana Vollmer and Simone Manuel — winners at the Rio Games — delivers the nation’s 1,000th gold medal in Summer Olympics history. Michael Phelps closes the Rio Olympics with a gold medal in the butterfly leg of the 4x100 medley relay. Phelps finishes his career with 28 medals, having won five golds and a silver at these games.

And finally

Lou Brock gets his 3,000th hit. Watch it here.

Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@High school girls’ volleyball is back in the Southern Section after a year’s absence because of last year’s COVID-19 restrictions. Athletes were pretty much left with club competitions, though the City Section did move its season to spring, enabling championships to take place.

The Lakewood/Molten Classic starts the schedule Saturday at Lakewood High. Among the teams entered in the Division 1 competition are Redondo Union, Harvard-Westlake, Los Alamitos and Long Beach Poly.

Southern Section favorite Marymount lost out on a chance to win a Division 1 title last season, but the Sailors are the team to beat this season with the return of Stanford-bound Elia Rubin and Duke-bound Kerry Keefe.

The question is, which teams will challenge Marymount?

Advertisement

Redondo Union usually competes for championships, and this season should be no different. The return of All-CIF junior Mele Corral-Blagojevich gives coach Tommy Chaffins a 6-foot-1 standout to build around. She was a star as a freshman.

Girls’ volleyball is back. The Lakewood tourney on Saturday starts off a season that was pretty much canceled in Southern Section because of COVID-19. pic.twitter.com/6kxaMbDfH2 — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 12, 2021

Santa Ana Mater Dei will challenge with seniors Jordyn Schilling (libero) and Shanelle Puetz (setter). But the Monarchs’ real strength could come from a gifted group of sophomores, including Babi Gubbins (outside hitter) and Isabel Clark (middle blocker).

Lakewood has a standout in Oregon State-bound Laura Williams.

In the City Section, Palisades returns the City Section MVP in senior setter Kaia Kanan, plus outside hitter Ava Pearce, an All-City selection as a freshman.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Fifth in a series of stories profiling top high school football players in the Southland by position.

Matayo Uiagalelei’s father, David, cried the first time he heard one of his son’s beats.

The elder Uiagalelei had tried to break into the music industry when he was younger. His dream didn’t pan out — he simply wasn’t good enough, he said. He prayed that one of his kids would fall in love with making music.

One of them did.

Advertisement

Around three years ago, David bought a computer that came with GarageBand. Matayo, at the time 12 years old, started messing around with it, watching YouTube videos on how to use the software. One day, he played his dad a sample he’d made.

“I said, ‘You getting paid?’” David said. “I couldn’t believe it.”

Fast forward three years, and Uiagalelei is a dual-threat phenom on the football field, lining up on both sides of the ball as a junior for Bellflower St. John Bosco. When he graduates, he has the potential to be the No. 1-ranked recruit in the country at both tight end and defensive end says his coach, Jason Negro. Uiagalelei caught two touchdown passes and racked up 16 tackles in five games during the spring COVID-19 season, and looks to be in a featured role entering this fall.

There’s a new Gronk and his name is Matayo Uiagalelei. Sophomore. On fourth down he does this. Bosco 31-21. pic.twitter.com/8yTU12jxvZ — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) March 27, 2021

Yet as physically imposing as Uiagalelei can be on the field, he’s also artistically gifted off of it, weaving together beat patterns as a producer.

“It’ll probably be one of my careers after football,” Uiagalelei said of producing music, “or even during football.”

A few seconds into rapper Trill Vont’s latest single “Long Road,” a producer tag rings out amidst the loop of an airy electric guitar: “Yo, Concrete, you made this?”

The identifier belongs to Uiagalelei. He goes by “@young_concrete” on both Instagram — where he’s amassed more than 17,600 followers — and Twitter.

It’s an apt stage name, indirectly connecting to the scuffs that mark his elbows on the football field. Early on in Bosco games, Uiagalelei barely spends a minute on the sidelines. He has but a second when coming off the field on defense to take a breath, before turning and jogging back out on offense.

No DJ but little brother is pretty good. Matayo Uiagalelei 27 yards on TD catch. 10-7 Bosco. pic.twitter.com/kkoF3TYpqX — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) March 27, 2021

“I try to tell people, ‘OK, it’s cool to start both ways, but you’re doing it at the Trinity League, at the highest level of high school football, and then you’re doing it as a sophomore?’” his father said. “I think any other kid would’ve broke down. … Not this guy.”

He stands 6 feet 5, weighing in around 260 pounds. Off a snap, Uiagalelei is more methodical than explosive, driving tree trunk-sized legs into the turf and pushing his way around one — or often two — blockers.

Advertisement

“A lot of kids as a sophomore that are that big, they’re still growing into their body and they’re a little bit awkward,” Negro said. “But he doesn’t have any awkwardness about him at all.”

Uiagalelei had no choice but to grow up quickly. He’s been playing football since age 5. But while many kids first fall in love with the game by playing a skill position, Uiagalelei took his licks in youth ball in the trenches of the offensive and defensive lines.

Those leagues separated out divisions by weight class. Thus, being big from a young age, Uiagalelei was playing against kids three or four years older than him.

“It was tough, but I always think it was a positive thing,” David said. “The one thing that I know about Matayo — mentally, he was strong.”

Advertisement

Uiagalelei’s brother D.J., now the starting quarterback with the Clemson Tigers, also played at St. John Bosco. And as D.J. would torch other high schools, watching from the sidelines was Matayo, a ball boy for the team until his freshman year and D.J.’s senior season. The younger brother understood Bosco’s “culture” immediately, Negro said.

With that intimate knowledge of the program, Uiagalelei set out to play both ways from his freshman season, following an eighth-grade year in which his father says he spent time at six positions. Negro said Uiagalelei’s ability to learn two game plans — splitting reps at practice between tight end and defensive line — was impressive.

“You have to give him a lot of credit for the mental side,” Negro said.

The connection in the younger Uiagalelei’s life between music and football, his father said, was a drive to be the best. Uiagalelei has spent hours watching YouTube videos of producers demonstrating their process, just as he has spent hours upon hours dissecting film of his team’s sets.

Advertisement

Uiagalelei’s father might have never made it in music as a producer. But he did make it in another sense. Thanks to a career as a bodyguard, he established 20 years of connections with industry titans such as Chris Brown, Rihanna and, most prominently, Shawn Holiday, then the co-head of Columbia Records’ urban music division.

Knowing Holiday had a weekly barbecue on Sundays with his producers and engineers, David Uiagalelei gave him a call, asking if he could bring his son and have him play a couple of tracks.

“That’s what he thought I was coming up there to do,” David said. “I already knew what was going to happen. I already knew, once Matayo played the track, Shawn was going to look at Matayo [and say], ‘You made this?’ And it happened, just like how I thought it was going to happen.”

Uiagalelei is again preparing to be a key player on offense and defense for the Braves this season while working with some up-and-coming artists. He doesn’t plan, at the moment, to make a decision on which position he wants to pursue in the future — just as he doesn’t seem to plan on choosing between music or football.

Advertisement

In the meantime, those who are watching him sack a quarterback or nodding their heads to his songs can be assured of one thing: he’ll keep his head down and continue working.

“This is the best part about Matayo; you hang out with him, you would never know any of this stuff, because he would never talk about it,” his father said. “All he wants to do is be a kid and have fun.”

Saturday: Arlis Boardingham, Lake Balboa Birmingham, defensive lineman

TIGHT ENDS TO WATCH

Advertisement

Keyan Burnett, Servite, 6-5, 215, Sr. Arizona commit has great hands, athleticism, toughness.

Nick Fernandez, San Pedro, 6-4, 270, Jr. Three-sport athlete.

Cody Hoffman, St. Bonaventure, 6-5, 240, Sr. Made impact in spring season.

Freddy Lujan, Bishop Amat, 6-1, 240, Jr. Transfer will fit in nicely.

Advertisement

Tanner Mehrens, San Clemente, 6-5, 215, Sr. School produces good tight ends.

Jack Pedersen, Vista Murrieta, 6-5, 245, Sr. UCLA commit has returned.

Matayo Uiagalelei, St. John Bosco, 6-5, 260, Jr. Setting the standard for excellence.

John Vanisi, Leuzinger, 6-3, 225, Sr. Aggressive, physical player.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Heading into my eighth Olympics I knew things would be different. With the heat, never-ending bus rides between venues and the daily testing, our coverage was limited. Because of social distancing, photo positions were lacking, and on some occasions, we had to get there three hours in advance to get the best spot. Did I mention the heat?

In the photo of Simone Biles being consoled, the body language tells the story of the moment she dropped out of competition.

Simone Biles after competing on the vault and withdrawing from competition in the women’s team final. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

Simone Biles on the uneven bars, shot with a telephoto lens. The details in her feet and hands outlined by chalk show the rigors of being a gymnast, and at the same time the gracefulness of the sport.

Advertisement

Advertisement

The U.S.’ Simone Biles competes on the uneven bars in the women’s team qualifying. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

It helps being ready for the unpredictable, and this high jumper doing a backflip with the sunglasses flying off after winning the gold medal is an example.

Qatar’s Mutaz Barshim does a back flip and loses his sunglasses. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

Panning horizontally is a common technique, so I tried to do it in a vertical manner. I only succeeded once out of over 100 frames where the face is sharp.

Brazil’s Augusto Dutra clears the bar in the men’s pole vault qualifying. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

I have always been curious about how athletes prepare before competition, and look for the moments of solitude and light.

Advertisement

A member of China’s men’s synchronized 3-meter springboard prepares for the final. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

Keeping an eye out for aesthetics is a goal when everything else seems cliché, such as using circles and squares with a bowing athlete in judo.

Uzbekistan’s Bekmurod Oltiboev bows after a match in the men’s 100-kilogram judo match. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

The typical photo for shot put is to get the actual throw with chalk flying off the hand. Trying a different angle, I was able to get the shot putter within the lines and the divots in the grass.

Ukraine’s Olha Golodna competes in the women’s shot put qualifying. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

Olympic Stadium in Tokyo has a beautiful oval shape and I wanted to emphasize that, and included a javelin competitor on a really hot day.

An athlete stands in the shade before the start of the men’s javelin throw. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

It had just rained a few hours before, and as the track was drying in some areas it created a pattern. I placed the runner at the corner of the frame to emphasize the color and pattern.

With a wet track, Uganda’s Stephen Kissa leads the pack early in the men’s 10,000-meter final. (Wally Skalij / Los Angeles Times)

Always tough to battle television when they rush the court but got lucky with a sliver of an opening to capture the peak emotion of the U.S. men’s basketball team winning gold.

Advertisement
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hi, and welcome to another edition of Dodgers Dugout. My name is Houston Mitchell, and there have been as many players for the Dodgers this season as grains of sands on the beach.

Newsletter Are you a true-blue fan? Get our Dodgers Dugout newsletter for insights, news and much more. Enter email address Sign Me Up You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

OK, maybe that’s a big of an exaggeration, but it seems every time you turn on a game, someone new is playing for the team. Justin Bruihl. Kevin Quackenbush. Connor Greene.

Especially pitching. It’s like the whole bullpen comes from the witness protection program sometimes. Who’s this guy? Who’s that guy?

Advertisement

The Dodgers have used an astounding 33 pitchers this season, even more amazing when you consider it’s a 26-man active roster.

Enjoying this newsletter? Your support helps us deliver the news that matters most. Become a Los Angeles Times subscriber.

Let’s list all 33 in order of innings pitched. How many do you remember?

Walker Buehler

Julio Urías

Trevor Bauer

Clayton Kershaw

David Price

Advertisement

Blake Treinen

Kenley Jansen

Tony Gonsolin

Phil Bickford

Advertisement

Victor Gonzalez

Joe Kelly

Jimmy Nelson

Mitch White

Advertisement

Alex Vesia

Dustin May

Edwin Uceta

Garrett Cleavinger

Advertisement

Scott Alexander

Dennis Santana

Brusdar Graterol

Max Scherzer

Advertisement

Nate Jones

Josiah Gray

Darien Nunez

Corey Knebel

Advertisement

Jake Reed

Jimmie Sherfy

Justin Bruihl

Mike Kickham

Advertisement

Yefry Ramirez

Connor Greene

Andy Burns

Kevin Quackenbush

Advertisement

Burns is a position player, so if we discount him, that leaves 32 pitchers used. A few of them, such as Santana, Jones, Gray and Reed aren’t with the Dodgers anymore.

The Dodgers have used 24 position players this season, meaning they have used 56 players overall (57 if you count Burns as a position player and a pitcher). Wow.

How does that compare to recent seasons? We won’t count 2020 since it was only 60 games.

2021: 24 position players / 32 pitchers / 56 total

2019: 22/24/46

2018: 22/30/52

2017: 26/26/52

2016: 24/31/55

2015: 24/31/55

2014: 25/24/49

2013: 23/26/49

Advertisement

The Dodgers have used more players this season than any year since they started their division-title streak. And the season still has 47 games to go. But how does their usage this season compare to the rest of the NL. After all, injuries are up this season because of the short season last year and the ramped up spring training this season. We will not count position players who pitched.

Milwaukee: 26/33/59

Chicago: 27/31/58

New York: 25/33/58

Arizona: 25/32/57

Dodgers: 24/32/56

Miami: 25/29/54

Pittsburgh: 25/29/54

Atlanta: 25/28/53

Washington: 26/26/52

San Francisco: 23/28/51

St. Louis: 20/29/49

Cincinnati: 20/28/48

San Diego: 21/27/48

Philadelphia: 21/26/47

Colorado: 18/22/40

Fifth-most players used, and only two teams have used more pitchers. Just for fun, I looked back at some classic Dodger teams of the past:

2021 Dodgers: 24/32/56

1988 Dodgers: 20/18/38

1978 Dodgers: 23/15/38

1977 Dodgers: 23/14/37

1965 Dodgers: 21/12/33

1963 Dodgers: 21/14/35

1955 Dodgers: 17/15/32

Advertisement

Hall of Fame: the first basemen

We continue our look at who the top Hall of Fame candidates at each position are in Dodger history and whether they deserve entry or not. To determine the top candidates, we look at two stats, WAR (wins above replacement), which gives us a good idea of how players with long careers compare to each other, and JAWS (Jaffe WAR score system), which is their career WAR averaged with their seven-year peak WAR. It was created by Jay Jaffe and is detailed in his excellent book, “The Cooperstown Casebook.” For example, the top 10 first basemen in JAWS are in the Hall of Fame except for Albert Pujols, who isn’t eligible yet. And again, like I always say, no one stat is perfect. But this gives us an easy comparison to make, and, this is supposed to be the fun part of the newsletter. Debating stuff like this should be enjoyable.

Those 10 first baseman, with their JAWS score:

1. Lou Gehrig, 90.7

2. Albert Pujols, 80.6

Advertisement

3. Jimme Foxx, 75.1

4. Cap Anson, 68.1

5. Roger Connor, 65.6

6. Jeff Bagwell, 64.1

Advertisement

7. Dan Brouthers, 63.5

8. Frank Thomas, 59.6

9. Johnny Mize, 59.6

10. Jim Thome, 57.3

Advertisement

There are 24 players in the Hall of Fame as first basemen. Here’s where the other 15 Hall of Famers rank:

13. Willie McCovey, 54.7

16. Eddie Murray, 68.6

18. Hank Greenberg, 55.5

Advertisement

19. George Sisler, 51.0

21. Bill Terry, 49.9

22. Harmon Killebrew, 49.2

27. Jake Beckley, 45.6

Advertisement

29. Tony Perez, 45.3

34. Orlando Cepeda, 42.3

36. Frank Chance, 46.0

56. Jim Bottomley, 32.7

Advertisement

62. Mule Suttles, 31.0

94. High Pockets Kelly, 24.7

108. Buck Leonard, 23.3

140. Ben Taylor, 17.5

Advertisement

A couple of notes here:

—Suttles, Leonard and Taylor were Negro Leagues players, and their score is based on the limited stats we have available. There is virtually no one who saw them play who don’t believe they all would have been among the top first basemen in MLB history. To read more about them, read their Hall of Fame bios. Suttles’ is here, Leonard’s is here and Taylor’s is here.

—This series isn’t the place to determine the Hall of Fame qualifications of those already in. We are here just to see if any Dodgers at each position have been overlooked.

Now, let’s look at the highest JAWS totals for those first basemen eligible for, but not in the Hall of Fame:

Advertisement

12. Rafael Palmeiro, 55.4

15. Todd Helton, 54.2

17. Mark McGwire, 52.0

20. Keith Hernandez, 50.8

Advertisement

23. John Olerud, 48.6

25. Jason Giambi, 46.3

26. Will Clark, 46.3

31. Fred McGriff, 44.3

Advertisement

33. Norm Cash, 42.8

35. Dolph Camilli, 41.6

And now, the top first basemen not in the Hall who spent more years with the Dodgers than any other team:

35. Dolph Camilli, 41.6

Advertisement

38. Adrian Gonzalez, 39.1 (not eligible yet, but thought I’d include him anyway)

40. Gil Hodges, 38.8

51. Steve Garvey, 33.4

57. Jake Daubert, 32.6

Advertisement

70. Ron Fairly, 29.6

113. Wes Parker, 21.8

189. Eric Karros, 12.0

We’ll stop there.

Advertisement

Last week, I asked you to vote in a poll on your thoughts about Garvey and Hodges making the Hall of Fame. Well, after 11,020 responses, here are the results:

Which first baseman should be in the Hall of Fame?

Gil Hodges, 46.6%

Both of them, 43.9%

Advertisement

Steve Garvey, 7.3%

Neither of them, 2.2%

So, 90% of people who voted believe Gil Hodges should be in the Hall of Fame, and about 50% believe Steve Garvey should be.

And, if you look at their numbers and overall careers, that’s about right. Hodges should be in, Garvey shouldn’t. Don’t get me wrong, Garvey was one of my favorite players, and he was a very good player for quite a while, but he has some drawbacks. He almost never walked for a guy who came to the plate 600 times a year. He walked 40 or more times only twice, leading to low on-base percentages relative to his batting average. He grounded into a lot of double plays (the only categories Garvey led the NL in were games played, hits and grounded into double play). He cost the Dodgers some double plays on defense by not being able to make a good throw to second most of the time. He won an MVP award that should have gone to Jim Wynn.

Advertisement

That’s not to say he was a bad player. He should get credit for being an outstanding postseason hitter (.38/.361/.550 with 11 homers in 55 postseason games). He definitely should be in a Dodgers Hall of Fame, just not the Baseball Hall of Fame.

That brings us to Hodges, a key member of the “Boys of Summer” Dodgers. Some argue there are already enough Dodgers from that era in, which makes no sense because you’re either a Hall of Famer or not, and it doesn’t matter how many of your teammates are. Some argue that he never finished near the top 10 in MVP voting, so writers at the time didn’t view him as special. Which takes a lot of mindreading, because there are other reasons they didn’t vote for him that are equally valid. He finished in the top 10 three times, in the top 20 eight times.

He often finished behind his teammates and I know a lot of MVP voters now and back then would not vote for more than two people on the same team in the top 10. Should he be punished for being on a team with Jackie Robinson and Roy Campanella? Because suddenly the Hall of Fame credentials of others are looking might suspect. I don’t think anyone held it against Johnny Bench that he was on the same team with Joe Morgan, Pete Rose and Tony Perez, not should they. Almost every player who was on those Boys of Summer teams say Hodges should be a Hall of Famer. Vin Scully says he should. That’s not rock-solid proof, but it’s not like those players were saying anyone else should be in the Hall, and I can’t recall Scully mentioning anyone else should be in the Hall as much as he did Hodges.

But, truthfully, Hodges’ numbers make him a borderline case. You could see it going either way. Hodges is very similar to Garvey. He led the NL only in games played, strikeouts and sacrifice flies. Hodges was on the ballot for 15 years and the highest percentage he received was just over 63% (you need 75% to make it). People who look at only analytics will say he doesn’t belong. But if the only thing you do is study analytics, then you’re missing a great game being played in front of you. Hodges was another coach on the bench. He did a lot of little things that don’t show up in a statistical retrospective.

Advertisement

Back before computers told fielders where to stand on every play, Hodges was the Dodgers’ computer, positioning the infielders. He gets credit for things like this. Enough to put him in the Hall? Well, it certainly pushes him closer. But for me, what puts him over the top is this: He managed the 1969 Miracle Mets in what is considered one of the great managing feats of all time. And while the Hall says what a person does as a player and manager should be kept separate, it really shouldn’t.

Of course, if you look at the JAWS list, Hodges and Garvey are in line behind quite a few other first basemen, including another former Dodger, Dolph Camilli. He was a better hitter than either of them. He led the NL in RBI’s, walks, home runs, His career was shorter, so his total numbers don’t quite stack up (he had 239 homers, compared to 370 for Hodges).

We could get into a lengthy debate on the merits of Keith Hernandez over Hodges or Garvey. But we won’t. We’re here for two men, and, if I’m voting, Hodges gets in, and Garvey doesn’t.

Next week: Second base.

Advertisement

Mookie Betts

Mookie Betts was put back on the 10-day IL because of his sore right hip and flew back to Los Angeles for further tests. Hopefully everything is fine, but whenever I read about lingering hip injuries, a name pops into my head: Bo Jackson, who hurt his hip playing football and was never the same. Britt Burns was an All-Star pitcher whose career ended because of a chronic, degenerative hip injury. Of course, those are just two cases out of hundreds of hip injuries, but my paranoid side doesn’t care about things like that.

The best Tweet in history

Presented without comment:

Jeopardy says whoever hosts full time will have to quit their other job, so I’m crossing my fingers it’s Joe Buck — James Holzhauer (@James_Holzhauer) August 9, 2021

In case you missed it

Trevor Bauer case: ‘No settlements or cash offers,’ his attorneys say

Advertisement

How smooth was Trea Turner’s slide vs. Phillies? It inspired Dodgers to quote BTS

These names look familiar

A look at how players from the 2020 Dodgers who are no longer on the team are faring this season (through Thursday):

Pedro Báez, Houston, 0-0, 0.00 ERA (1 IP, 1 hit, 1 strikeout)

Dylan Floro, Miami: 3-4, 2.72 ERA, 4 saves (46.1 IP, 38 hits, 18 walks, 42 strikeouts)

Kiké Hernández, Boston: .249/.333/.457 (27 doubles, 3 triple, 15 HRs, 43 RBIs, 110 OPS+)

Advertisement

Adam Kolarek, Oakland: 8.00 ERA (9 IP, 15 hits, 5 walks, 4 strikeouts), in minors

Jake McGee, San Francisco: 3-2, 2.44 ERA, 24 saves (48 IP, 30 hits, 9 walks, 51 strikeouts)

Joc Pederson, Atlanta: .241/.316/.426 (15 doubles, 3 triples, 14 homers, 52 RBIs, 99 OPS+)

Josh Sborz, Texas: 3-3, 4.54 ERA, 1 save (39.2 IP, 36 hits, 21 walks, 50 strikeouts)

Advertisement

Ross Stripling, Toronto: 5-6, 4.34 ERA (93.1 IP, 86 hits, 28 walks, 91 strikeouts), on 10-day IL

Alex Wood, San Francisco: 9-3, 4.22 ERA (108.2 IP, 99 hits, 34 walks, 115 strikeouts)

Up next

Tonight, Dodgers (*Julio Urías, 13-3, 3.41 ERA) at New York Mets (Tylor Megill, 1-2, 3.20 ERA), 4 p.m., Sportsnet LA, AM 570

Saturday, Dodgers (Walker Buehler, 12-2, 2.13 ERA) at New York Mets (Taijuan Walker, 7-7, 3.89 ERA), 4 p.m., Sportsnet LA, AM 570

Advertisement

Sunday, Dodgers (Max Scherzer, 9-4, 2.67 ERA) at New York Mets (Carlos Carrasco, 0-0, 6.75 ERA), 4 p.m., ESPN, AM 570

*-left-handed

And finally

Vin Scully discusses the four most memorable home runs he called. Watch it here.

Until next time... Have a comment or something you’d like to see in a future Dodgers newsletter? Email me at houston.mitchell@latimes.com , and follow me on Twitter at @latimeshouston . To get this newsletter in your inbox, click here .
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In March, an Arizona mother posted on Twitter that her son had been bullied and asked the internet to deliver him birthday wishes. Trevor Bauer saw the post, invited the family to a Dodgers spring training game, and presented the son with an autographed jersey. Bauer said he could relate to the bullied boy.

“That is a story I identify with,” Bauer said that day. “That was my entire childhood.”

It is particularly unfortunate, then, that Bauer and his representatives have used bullying tactics in responding to sexual assault allegations against him.

On Saturday, after the Washington Post reported that an Ohio woman had obtained a temporary order of protection against him last year, Bauer complained on Twitter that the Post had “spent the last six weeks digging into my life … in an effort to create a false narrative.”

Advertisement

In a hearing that begins Monday, a Los Angeles Superior Court judge will consider whether to keep in place a temporary restraining order against Bauer, this one obtained by a California woman. The allegations made in her request for the restraining order — that he choked her unconscious twice and injured her face — naturally triggered probes by police detectives, Major League Baseball and investigative reporters. It would be irresponsible not to determine if there might be evidence of a pattern of behavior, particularly given Bauer’s checkered, often bullying, social media interactions with women.

Bauer claimed the Ohio woman had “attempted to extort me for millions of dollars.” The Post reported that an attorney representing Bauer “first mentioned the possibility of a financial settlement” and asked for an offer, after which an attorney representing the woman proposed $3.4 million. The woman, according to the report, dismissed the protection order after six weeks, following threats of legal action by Bauer’s attorneys.

In the California case, attorneys for Bauer wrote in a court filing this week that the woman pursued the matter in part to “gain a monetary settlement.” The evidence in the filing: a text message from the woman to a friend, in which the woman said of her attorneys: “They think he[’]s gonna try to settle with me[,] offer me major cash.” Bauer’s attorneys cite that text message in saying the woman “hoped” for a settlement, but that text message does not support the use of that verb.

Publicists representing Bauer aggressively and repeatedly demand “urgent corrections” to stories — not because of errors in the stories, but to offer information and perspective.

If there is a false narrative here, it comes from a well-worn playbook. For now, President Trump is undefeated in using the deny-deny-attack-deny-deny-distract strategy in response to allegations of sexual assault.

Bauer’s baseball career is at stake, but that convenient framing obscures the larger story. Bauer is under investigation for felony assault. His attorneys have denied the allegations. He has not been arrested or charged. If he is, then his freedom is at stake.

Advertisement

There are serious allegations here, and the selective use of photographs and text messages — on both sides — obscures the resolution of those allegations: Did Bauer in fact choke a woman to the point of unconsciousness and, if so, is consent rendered invalid when a person becomes unconscious?

It remains astounding that the Dodgers have not yet offered a robust denunciation of that kind of behavior, independent of whether Bauer might be guilty of it.

When MLB put Washington Nationals infielder Starlin Castro on leave last month, amid an investigation into an allegation of domestic violence, this is what Nationals manager Dave Martinez said: “What I can tell you about me and this organization, as you know, we do not tolerate any kind of domestic abuse.”

Advertisement

This is what Nationals general manager Mike Rizzo said four days later, just before MLB suspended Castro: “We do pride ourselves ... you’ve heard me say it a million times, that you read about our guys in the sports section and not the other sections. And this time we failed.”

From the Dodgers, we got jokes from President Stan Kasten, for which Kasten has not apologized, either before or after he was rebuked by Commissioner Rob Manfred. Bauer almost certainly will receive a lengthy suspension from Manfred, and maybe the Dodgers will speak up then.

We know where the Nationals stand. We do not know where the Dodgers stand. We know Bauer stands for bullying, all the sadder since he knows what it feels like to be bullied.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In his first public statement since being accused of sexual assault in a temporary restraining order filed in June, Dodgers pitcher Trevor Bauer denied another sexual assault allegation that surfaced in a story published by the Washington Post on Saturday.

The investigation by the Post outlines that an Ohio woman filed a temporary order of protection in June 2020 when Bauer pitched for the Cincinnati Reds. The Post reported that it obtained photos showing facial injuries that the woman’s attorney said Bauer caused by punching and choking her during sex without consent. The article also reports that the woman attempted to show police officers photos of her injuries in an incident at Bauer’s apartment in 2017. The Post added that it could not independently confirm the date or location where the photos were taken.

“This is a continuation by the woman and her attorneys to make good on their threats to harm me by perpetuating false narrative,” Bauer said in a post on social media. “This has been a game to her from the beginning but my life is not a game and I won’t stand by idly and allow this conduct to continue.”

Advertisement

The report surfaced two days before a hearing to decide whether to keep in place another woman’s temporary restraining order against Bauer is scheduled to start in Los Angeles County Superior Court. The hearing could last up to four days.

Bauer hasn’t pitched for the Dodgers since a California woman accused him of sexual assault in Pasadena and obtained a temporary restraining order against him in late June. Major League Baseball placed him on a seven-day paid administrative leave three days later. Since then, MLB and the players’ union have agreed to extend the leave multiple times. The two sides extended the leave again Friday through Aug. 20, until after Bauer’s hearing.

MLB sought records of the 2017 incident in early July, according to a person with knowledge of the situation who was not authorized to speak publicly, and is investigating the Ohio woman’s allegations.

Meanwhile, the Dodgers are in New York in the midst of a six-game trip and are trying to catch the San Francisco Giants in the NL West. Bauer seems to be in the news every week.

“I don’t think it’s a distraction,” Dodgers manager Dave Roberts said before Saturday’s game. “I think our win-loss [record] speaks to that. We just have to keep going. And honestly, it’s enough focusing on the guys who are with us and trying to win baseball games, and that’s where I put all of my focus and energy.

“We know what’s going on outside of our clubhouse, but it’s not even a topic of conversation, and I don’t think it will be. We have to win baseball games. I haven’t addressed the team about it one time.”

Times staff writer Mike DiGiovanna contributed to this report from New York.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Three years after LeBron James arrived at his courtside seat at the NBA’s Summer League in Lakers gear, heralding for the first time his arrival to his new team, he returned to the Thomas & Mack Center on Saturday night to mark another new beginning for the franchise.

James wasn’t alone. He entered the arena alongside new Lakers teammate Russell Westbrook, drawing surprised cheers from a half-filled arena predominantly filled by Lakers fans not expecting to see the All-Star duo show up to watch the team’s Summer League team play against Detroit.

Rather than enter the arena’s lower bowl from the loading dock used by teams to enter and exit, the pair took a shorter route to their seats by entering from the opposite side of the court. Fans sitting above their route, recognizing what was happening, began standing and pointing at the duo as they passed below.

Advertisement

At the first break in play after James and Westbrook took their seats, a group of photographers formed a semicircle in front of them.

James and Westbrook have trained together recently, according to an Instagram post published Saturday by James, but this was their first public appearance together since the Lakers completed a five-team trade that brought the 32-year-old guard who had discussed his desire to return to Los Angeles, his hometown, with James and Anthony Davis in the weeks before the trade was finalized, according to Los Angeles Times reporter Broderick Turner.

The Lakers sent center Montrezl Harrell, forward Kyle Kuzma and guard Kentavious Caldwell-Pope to Washington and the draft rights to last month’s 22nd overall draft pick to Indiana.

During his official introduction as a Laker, Westbrook said Tuesday that as the starting point guard, he hoped to continue what he called his focus of being “able to uplift and make my teammates better around me.”

“And AD and Bron are friends of mine first, and me being a teammate, my job is to come in and uplift it and they’ll do the same with me, vice versa,” Westbrook said.

“And as the season prolongs, we will figure it out. There will be ups and there will be downs. That’s normal, that’s OK, but we’re gonna figure out how to play the best way that we want to play to be able to win a championship.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Rams opened SoFi Stadium with a packed house that watched them take on the co-tenant Chargers in Saturday’s preseason opener.

Here are four observations from the Rams’ side:

Raymond Calais, trying to carve out a spot as a returner, showed a burst of speed in the first quarter, making something out of nothing for a 29-yard return.

Rookie receiver Tutu Atwell, who missed the start of camp with a positive COVID test, looked quick and explosive — necessities for a player generously listed at 165 pounds. On his first NFL reception, he turned a short pass from Devlin Hodges into a 20-yard gain up the sideline. At the start of the second quarter, he had a big punt return that was wiped out by a hold.

Advertisement

Quarterback Bryce Perkins completed six of his first seven passes, mostly short stuff, and carved out a bit of personal history. He threw the first touchdown pass at SoFi Stadium — in front of fans, that is — with a four-yard toss to Trishton Jackson.

Outside linebacker Justin Lawler had four tackles in the first half and looked like someone who could contribute in a rotation at the position. He clearly knows how to apply pressure and stop the run.

Rams linebacker Justin Lawler sacks Chargers quarterback Chase Daniel on Saturday at SoFi Stadium. (Gina Ferazzi / Los Angeles Times)

It was a rough night for Rams kickers. Matt Gay missed an extra point in the second quarter then Austin MacGinnis doinked a 40-yard field goal off the left upright in the third.

Fans cheer in the stands during the Chargers-Rams preseason game Saturday at SoFi Stadium. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Not many NFL home teams are on the side of the field facing the press box, but the Rams are. The midfield Rams logo is upside down from their perspective, and the national anthem singer faces away from them. If there’s a truly jaw-dropping area, it’s the patio club. That sunken space — identical on both sides of the venue — has an indoor/outdoor feel with greenery cascading down the tiered retaining walls, giant fans on the ceiling and towering white columns.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dodgers manager Dave Roberts didn’t have many levers to pull as Saturday night’s game against the New York Mets barreled toward extra innings.

Closer Kenley Jansen, setup man Blake Treinen and short reliever Brusdar Graterol were down because of excessive workloads in recent days, leaving Alex Vesia, Phil Bickford and Corey Knebel as the team’s best high-leverage options.

The Dodgers were in good hands.

Starter Walker Buehler burnished his Cy Young Award resume with another dominant start, giving up one run and four hits, striking out 10 and walking three in seven innings, and Vesia, Bickford and Knebel nailed down the final nine outs of a 2-1, 10-inning victory before a crowd of 38,669 in Citi Field.

Advertisement

Will Smith broke up Mets right-hander Taijuan Walker’s no-hitter with a one-out, score-tying solo homer in the seventh, and Cody Bellinger lined an RBI double to right for the game-winner in the 10th, giving the Dodgers their second overtime win in two nights after losing their previous 11 extra-inning games.

Vesia, who struggled in a first-half stint with the Dodgers, replaced Buehler to start the eighth and retired four batters. The left-hander has given up one earned run in 15 innings (0.60 ERA) of 13 games since his early July recall from triple A, striking out 18, walking three and yielding only five hits to 52 batters.

Bickford, a right-hander with an effective fastball-slider mix, replaced Vesia and got the final two outs of the ninth before striking out James McCann and Brandon Drury to open the 10th. He earned the win and is 2-1 with a 2.08 ERA in 37 games.

Knebel, the hard-throwing right-hander who was activated Tuesday after missing more than three months because of a right-lat strain, got Brandon Nimmo to ground out to first to end the game.

“They’re just coming into their own and being comfortable in their own skin as big league ballplayers,” Roberts said of Vesia and Bickford. “It’s really fun to see those guys who, before the season started, I didn’t know who they were, and to play such an impactful role for our club is fun to see.”

Michael Conforto staked the Mets to a 1-0 lead in the fourth inning when he lined a cut-fastball off Buehler into the right-field seats for a solo homer.

Advertisement

Walker, a 2010 graduate of Yucaipa High School, needed only 73 pitches to complete six no-hit innings in which he walked two, but he left an 0-and-1 slider in to Smith, who sent a 444-foot homer soaring into the second deck in left field for a 1-1 tie.

Dodgers starting pitcher Walker Buehler gave up one run and four hits, striking out 10 and walking three in seven innings against the New York Mets on Saturday.

(Noah K. Murray / Associated Press)

Buehler ran into trouble in the bottom of the seventh when J.D. Davis led off with a single and Jonathan Villar walked. But the right-hander struck out Tomas Nido and pinch-hitter Travis Blankenhorn and got Nimmo to pop out to Smith, who made a nice running catch in front of the third base dugout to end the inning.

“If they’re gonna leave me in there and trust me to have the ball, the goal is to get out of it,” said Buehler, who ran his pitch count to 110. “You’re just trying to grab whatever you have left and empty it, and luckily it worked out for us.”

Advertisement

Roberts said Buehler was losing command of his cutter in the seventh but was confident he would reach back for something extra.

“There’s a switch that goes off with the great ones,” Roberts said. “He understood where he was at in the lineup, where he was at with his pitch count, and he was smelling the finish line. Guys like that have a way of turning up the dial.”

Buehler (12-2) settled for a no-decision but lowered his ERA to a major league-leading 2.09, keeping him in Cy Young Award consideration with Philadelphia’s Zack Wheeler and Milwaukee’s Corbin Burnes and Brandon Woodruff.

Advertisement

But the prestigious pitching award doesn’t motivate Buehler as much as overcoming a four-game deficit to San Francisco in the National League West.

“We have to make the playoffs, man, and my main thing is trying to be a piece of that equation and pushing us to where we want to go,” Buehler said. “The individual stuff is cool, but when the team isn’t where it wants to be, it’s kind of meaningless at this point.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Chargers opened their preseason Saturday night against the Rams in a game that didn’t include most of the team’s regulars.

Coach Brandon Staley announced Thursday that the majority of his starters wouldn’t participate in any of the three exhibitions scheduled for this month.

Still, there was plenty to observe early in the Chargers’ eventual 13-6 win.

Rookie left tackle Rashawn Slater looked impressive in his only series. Drafted No. 13 overall in April, Slater was strong and steady as the Chargers went on a 21-play, 73-yard drive that ended in a 21-yard field goal by Tristan Vizcaino.

Advertisement

He started off matched up against outside linebacker Chris Garrett, a seventh-round pick out of Concordia-St. Paul.

As the series unfolded, Slater next took on Earnest Brown IV, a rookie defensive lineman the Rams took in the fifth round.

That matchup was a familiar one for Slater. He and Brown were teammates at Northwestern.

After the opening drive, Slater was replaced by Trey Pipkins. On the first snap of that next series, Pipkins gave up a pressure.

Chargers quarterback Chase Daniel is sacked by Rams linebacker Justin Lawler. (Gina Ferazzi / Los Angeles Times)

Chargers’ Donte Vaughn (39) and John Brannon (38) break up a pass intended for Rams receiver Jeremiah Hayde. (Gina Ferazzi / Los Angeles Times)

Chase Daniel started at quarterback and led the offense on its extended field-goal drive to begin the game.

Advertisement

The Chargers picked up six first downs en route to moving from their own 25-yard line to the Rams’ two.

The possession stalled after a short run by Justin Jackson and back-to-back incompletions. Daniel was pressured on the first misfire as rookie tight end Tre’ McKitty was unable to hold his block.

Along with Slater, the rest of the starting offensive line featured Brenden Jaimes (left guard), Scott Quessenberry (center), Tyree St. Louis (right guard) and Storm Norton (right tackle).

Advertisement

Jaimes, a rookie, was a fifth-round pick.

Rams tight end Jacob Harris can’t make the catch in the end zone with Chargers defensive back Tevaughn Campbell defending. (Gina Ferazzi / Los Angeles Times)

A Chargers fan walks through Rams territory outside SoFi Stadium. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

The Chargers’ first series on defense also was impressive as they rose up to force a punt after the Rams moved past the 50-yard line.

Advertisement

Veteran defensive lineman Christian Covington had a tackle for loss, Drue Tranquill pressured Devlin Hodges into an incompletion with an expertly timed blitz and Kyzir White had a tackle for loss.

Rookie wide receiver Josh Palmer, who has been impressive in training camp, continued to shine with six catches for 36 yards in the first half.

Palmer, a third-round pick, has emerged as a potential target for quarterback Justin Herbert behind veterans Keenan Allen and Mike Williams.

Advertisement

Along with Tranquill, White and Jackson, edge rushers Uchenna Nwosu and Kyler Fackrell, cornerback Michael Davis and safety Nasir Adderley were among the Chargers who played.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tyler Gilbert became the first pitcher in 68 years to throw a no-hitter in his first big league start, lifting the Arizona Diamondbacks over the San Diego Padres, 7-0, Saturday night with the record-tying eighth no-hitter in the majors this season.

Gilbert, who was 5-2 with an ERA of 2.79 in 22 appearances during his sole season at USC in 2015, joined Bumpus Jones (in his major league debut with the Cincinnati Reds on Oct. 15, 1892) and Bobo Holloman (for the St. Louis Browns on May 6, 1953) as the only players to pitch a no-hitter in their first start.

The eight no-hitters match the mark set in 1884, the first year overhand pitching was allowed.

Gilbert struck out Trent Grisham and Ha-Seong Kim in the ninth before Tommy Pham lined out to center fielder Ketel Marte. Joyous Diamondbacks players threw their gloves in the air and rushed the mound, mobbing the surprising hero who spent six seasons in the minors and was selected in the Triple-A portion of the Rule 5 draft last winter.

Advertisement

“Crazy,” Gilbert said. “It’s not going to hit me for probably another day. I don’t know what just happened.”

The 27-year-old Gilbert threw 102 pitches, including 64 strikes. He rarely delivered his fastball above 90 mph, but he effectively peppered the Padres with breaking pitches and leaned on his defense, which bailed him out on several hard-hit balls.

Pavin Smith caught a liner from Adam Frazier and then stepped on first to double off Tommy Pham in the fourth. There was a line drive snagged by Gilbert off the bat of Eric Hosmer to end the fifth. Third baseman Drew Ellis made a diving catch in the seventh. David Peralta made a leaping grab at the wall on Austin Nola’s long fly ball in the eighth.

Gilbert needed just three pitches to get through the eighth, setting up a dramatic ninth. Marte caught the sinking line drive for the final out while running in from center field.

“I tried to tune out as much as I could,” Gilbert said. “But that last inning, I heard everything.”

Among those celebrating the first Diamondbacks’ no-hitter at home was Gilbert’s family. They were also on hand for his debut in relief Aug. 3. He threw one scoreless inning against the San Francisco Giants, then allowed one unearned run in two-thirds of an inning of relief two days later. His third relief appearance resulted in two scoreless innings against the Padres a week ago.

Gilbert’s no-hitter was stunning for the Diamondbacks, who have the worst record in the big leagues this season. It’s the third no-hitter in franchise history and first since Edwin Jackson on June 25, 2010.

The Chicago Cubs threw the majors’ most recent no-hitter with a combined effort June 24. The other no-hitters this year were thrown by San Diego’s Joe Musgrove (April 9), Carlos Rodon of the Chicago White Sox (April 14), Baltimore’s John Means (May 5), Cincinnati’s Wade Miley (May 7), Detroit’s Spencer Turnbull (May 18) and the New York Yankees’ Corey Kluber (May 19).

Advertisement

In addition, Arizona’s Madison Bumgarner pitched a seven-inning hitless game in a doubleheader April 25 that is not recognized as a no-hitter by Major League Baseball.

Most of those gems were thrown before MLB cracked down on the use of sticky foreign substances by pitchers in late June.

It’s been a brutal series for the Padres, who are struggling to keep up in the playoff race. San Diego still occupies the second NL wild card spot but has fallen 10 games behind the NL West-leading San Francisco Giants.

The Diamondbacks jumped out to a 5-0 lead in the first inning off Joe Musgrove (8-8), who needed 39 pitches to slog through nine batters. Josh VanMeter doubled to lead off the game and Marte brought him home with another double.

Advertisement

Peralta had an RBI single and then the 25-year-old Ellis had the big blow when he smacked Musgrove’s hanging breaking ball into the left field seats.

Gilbert (1-1) struck out five and walked two. The sixth-round pick out of Southern California in 2015 had spent his entire career in the minor leagues until being called up a few weeks ago. He attended Santa Lorenzo Valley High in Felton, Calif., and pitched at Santa Barbara City College before transferring to USC.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For weeks, lists have been coming out identifying top Southland high school football players for the new season that begins Thursday and Friday. Let me offer another list — projected breakout stars for 2021.

Jason Jones, Chatsworth Sierra Canyon, running back, senior. “That running back is special,” West Hills Chaminade coach Ed Croson said of Jones after seeing him in a scrimmage this week. Fast and strong, Jones will be running behind an exceptional offensive line.

Ty Dieffenbach, Agoura, quarterback, junior. A 6-foot-5 receiver moved to quarterback, he passed for 867 yards in six games last spring while learning the position on the job. His coach, former quarterback Dustin Croick, expects a big jump this fall.

Jackson Sievers, Capistrano Valley, safety/linebacker, sophomore. At 6 feet 2, Sievers comes from a family that includes a sister, Jasmine, playing softball at Oregon. Coach Sean Curtis is convinced Sievers will be a defensive standout over the next three seasons.

Advertisement

Jack Pedersen, Vista Murrieta, tight end, senior. Pedersen didn’t play for Vista Murrieta in the spring. He left for IMG Academy in Florida after believing there would be no high school season in California. He has returned as a UCLA commit ready to dominate. “He looks amazing,” coach Eric Peterson said.

Niko Lopez, Santa Margarita, tight end, junior. At 6-4 with basketball instincts on how to go after and secure a ball, Lopez was a summer discovery in seven-on-seven passing tournaments. Now he must transfer that potential and promise with pads on. There’s no reason he can’t become a favorite target of new quarterback Jaxon Potter.

Tomarion Harden, Inglewood, running back, senior. At 6-2, 225 pounds for a team that likes to pass, beware if Inglewood decides to settle for eight yards and a cloud of dust. The Sentinels have chosen to proceed with a much more ambitious schedule, starting with Loyola on Friday night, and Harden will be a key figure to help open the passing attack.

Jadyn Ott, Norco, running back, senior. He’s back. As a freshman, Ott was exceptional. Then he moved to Las Vegas to play for Bishop Gorman. He has returned to Norco for his senior year as a Cal commit. His running and receiving skills should help create a wide-open Norco offense.

Malachi Hannah, Simi Valley, linebacker, senior. At 6-3, 225 with improving agility and quickness. Hannah is going to be turned loose on defense. All signs point to him having a dominating season as a tackler and pass catcher as a tight end on offense.

Servite coach Troy Thomas offers ringing endorsement of WR Mikey Welsh. pic.twitter.com/Z20ws8LE4t — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) August 6, 2021

Mikey Welsh, Servite, receiver, senior. With teams focused on stopping receiver Tetairoa McMillan, Welsh will have many opportunities to show he can make clutch receptions. He did so during the summer and there’s no reason he won’t develop into a unsung standout for the Friars.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sixth in a series of stories profiling top high school players in the Southland by position.

For four seasons, Lake Balboa Birmingham football coach Jim Rose and his standout player, Arlis Boardingham, have engaged in a spirited back-and-forth dialogue.

“He thinks I’m going to be 6-6, 260 pounds,” the 17-year-old senior said. “I think 6-5, 230.”

Either way, Boardingham passes the eyeball test as an athlete many will be hearing and reading about in the coming years.

Advertisement

He’s the only player in Rose’s coaching career that played free safety one game and defensive end in another. Boardingham’s best offensive position is receiver, but he easily could be a tight end. He also punts and returns kickoffs.

As an eighth-grader, he finished second in the nation for his age group in the triple jump. He has grown to 6 feet 5, 230 pounds and can probably play any position on the football field.

He’s a player the City Section can proudly boast stayed around despite all the challenges from COVID-19 restrictions and temptations to play for a private school. It helps that his father is Birmingham’s track coach and his mother works for the City Section.

Boardingham has grown up appreciating the friends he’s made and their loyalty toward helping him succeed. He’s ready for the test of proving to college recruiters he’s worthy of their attention in a time when many are still playing catch up. He got a brief opportunity during the pandemic-delayed spring season.

Let’s count the tacklers for Arlis Boardingham. pic.twitter.com/5EYZZQFEES — eric sondheimer (@latsondheimer) May 1, 2021

“It will be more of a challenge,” he said. “They don’t know how much I’ve grown and how much better I’ve gotten.”

On defense, Boardingham is hoping to use his agility and length to disrupt offenses. He showed his potential as a sophomore chasing down quarterbacks. Birmingham already produced a stellar defensive lineman in Malik Jackson, who plays for the Cleveland Browns.

“The difference with Arlis is he’s already a physical specimen and we haven’t started his senior season,” Rose said. “When Malik graduated, he was 225 pounds. With Arlis, how big is he going to get? He’s always, ‘No, I’ll never be that big.’ He’s just a big kid with skills.”

Said Boardingham: “There’s a lot of technique things to see and get through, but once you get that down and football down, it’s good. With my speed, I don’t do as a normal defensive end because of how fast I can get to the ball.”

On offense, Boardingham delivered some clutch touchdown catches, so he should be one of the best two-way threats in the City Section.

“I feel a little more creative over there at receiver,” he said. “Don’t get me wrong. I enjoy playing both positions, but if you get the ball in your hands, you can do anything.”

It will take years to determine who’s right about Boardingham’s eventual size, but Rose is convinced his future is bright. He remembers a play against El Camino Real.

Advertisement

“He came off the edge,” Rose said. “There was a rollout and he ran him down. That’s exactly what everyone in the world is looking for at that position. Athletically, we can put him anywhere.”

Texas, Arizona State and Notre Dame are colleges pursuing him, some on offense, some on defense.

Defensive linemen to watch

Arlis Boardingham, Birmingham, 6-5, 230, Sr. Rarely leaves the field on defense or offense.

Nathan Burrell, St. John Bosco, 6-2, 285, Sr. Cal commit hangs tough in Trinity League trenches.

Advertisement

Mason Graham, Servite, 6-3, 280, Sr. Let’s see who can block him.

Hero Kanu, Santa Margarita, 6-5, 293, Sr. Native of Germany is athletic freak.

Ezekiel Larry, Sierra Canyon, 6-2, 235, Sr. Had seven sacks in six spring games.

Mathias Malaki-Donaldson, Oaks Christian, 6-5, 210, Sr. Had 19 tackles during spring.

Advertisement

Gavriel Lightfoot, Corona Centennial, 6-3, 295, Sr. Part of strong Huskies line group.

Sione Moa, Mater Dei, 6-3, 260, Sr. Had 11 tackles vs. Servite in spring.

Ashton Sanders-Parker, Cathedral, 6-4, 302, Jr. Made impact in spring games.

Raymond Pulido, Apple Valley, 6-7, 340, Jr. He’s a huge nose guard with ability.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jonathan Klinsmann tied a career high with seven saves, Kévin Cabral scored for the second consecutive game and the Galaxy beat Minnesota United 1-0 on Saturday.

The 24-year-old Klinsmann — son of former German star and U.S. coach Jurgen Klinsmann — made his first start of the season. He made several acrobatic stops, including a diving one-handed parry in the opening minutes and a pair of saves in stoppage time to close out his second shutout in five career starts.

Cabral, on the counter-attack, worked a give-and-go with Dejan Joveljic and then split a pair of defenders before slipping a roller inside the post to give the Galaxy (11-6-2) the lead in the 43rd minute. Joveljic, a 22-year-old Serb who signed with the club Aug. 5, made his first MLS appearance. He was replaced by Víctor Vázquez in the 57th.

Minnesota dropped to 7-6-5.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When the Dodgers departed for a six-game trip to Philadelphia and New York last Monday, they trailed the National League West-leading San Francisco Giants by four games with 50 to play.

When their red-eye cross-country flight lands in Los Angeles following Sunday night’s 14-4 shellacking of the Mets in Citi Field, their fifth win of a grueling trip in which they played 22 hours, 2 minutes of baseball — much of it in scorching heat — and endured 2 hours, 37 minutes of rain delays, they’ll be right where they started, four games behind the Giants, but with 44 games left.

San Francisco kept the Dodgers at arm’s length by winning five of six against Arizona and Colorado. There is still time to catch the Giants, but the Dodgers can’t do it running on a treadmill.

“We can’t worry about the Giants — we just have to worry about ourselves,” said first baseman Max Muncy, who led a 16-hit attack with a pair of two-run homers to left-center field, giving him 25 homers on the season. “At the end of the season, it’s going to be how it’s going to be.

Advertisement

“These two teams are fighting for first place [in the NL East], and they’re pretty hostile environments on top of that. So it was nice to win a bunch of games and go home on a happy note.”

Max Scherzer overcame a series of defensive lapses to throw six solid innings, giving up two runs and four hits, striking out seven and walking two, to improve to 10-4 with a 2.69 ERA on the season, as the Dodgers completed a three-game sweep of the Mets.

Leadoff man Trea Turner reached base five times, with three hits, and scored four runs, and catcher Will Smith hit a solo homer in the first — his third homer in three games here — and hit a two-run single in the eighth. Justin Turner, sidelined by a left-groin injury for most of the past week, hit a two-run homer in the first, and Matt Beaty capped the crooked-number fest with a two-run homer off infielder-turned-pitcher Brandon Drury that traveled 443 feet to right in the ninth.

“It was good for some guys to break out offensively,” manager Dave Roberts said. “Any time you go 5-1 on a trip, you’ve done some good things.”

The Dodgers also did some bad things Sunday night, forcing Scherzer to pitch through heavy traffic the first four innings.

With a runner on second and one out in the first, Smith fielded Pete Alonso’s tapper in front of the plate and hesitated before throwing late to third instead of getting the easy out to first. Scherzer escaped the first-and-third jam by getting Dominic Smith to pop out to third and Jeff McNeil to fly to left. Trea Turner dropped Justin Turner’s perfect feed on James McCann’s potential inning-ending double-play grounder in the second. The runners advanced on Carlos Carrasco’s sacrifice bunt, and Scherzer got Brandon Nimmo to ground to second.

With Jonathan Villar on second and one out in the fourth, Mets reliever Jake Reed hit a grounder that Dodgers shortstop Corey Seager fielded near second. Seager missed Villar on a tag attempt, and his throw to first was late, putting runners on second and third.

Advertisement

Nimmo walked to load the bases, but Scherzer got Michael Conforto to hit an RBI grounder to first to make it 6-2 and struck out Alonso looking with an 85-mph, knee-high slider to end the inning.

The miscues forced Scherzer to throw 15 extra pitches, but the three-time Cy Young Award winner needed only nine pitches to breeze through a one-two-three fifth and 14 pitches to retire the side in order in the sixth.

“I know the line score said Max went six innings, but he actually went seven-plus,” Roberts said. “We didn’t play good infield defense behind him, we gave away bases and outs, but he didn’t bat an eye. And that’s what makes him so great. He picked us up time and time again tonight and was able to limit damage.”

Advertisement

The Mets went 0 for 12 with runners in scoring position Sunday and two for 29 in those situations in the series.

“They had runners in scoring position a lot, and in those situations, you just try to find the right pitch sequence and execute and try to limit the damage, maybe give up one run to prevent big innings from happening,” Scherzer said.

“Once I got through those [first four] innings, I was able to settle in and get through six, and the offense went off. And when the offense goes off, it’s enjoyable for everyone.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Early mornings are no big deal to Sonny Vida.

Back when he was a kid growing up on Guam, he would get up before daybreak on Monday mornings to watch Eric Dickerson and his beloved Rams, and then 21 years in the Coast Guard only cemented his status as an early-riser.

So rest assured he was in Inglewood on Saturday for the dawn of a new day in Los Angeles football.

Vida, along with his son and daughter, got up at 3 a.m. and made the four-hour drive from their home in Henderson, Nev., for the first real game at SoFi Stadium — or the first game with fans, at least. He’s a Rams season-ticket holder, so he plans to make this pilgrimage at least 10 times this season.

Advertisement

Advertisement

“Blown away,” said Vida, standing at the open bed of his pickup truck and gazing at the palatial venue. “It’s an emotional experience.”

He wasn’t alone. Hours before the Chargers defeated the Rams 13-6 in a preseason opener, thousands of spectators (official attendance was not announced) streamed into the pristine stadium with phone cameras raised and — under the face coverings — mouths surely agape. For many, it had to be sensory overload, with the music pulsing and everything illuminated by the frenetic flash of videoboards.

‘It’s an indescribable feeling being here. It’s like a dream come true, and I have to pinch myself.’ Tom Bateman, director of group that led effort to bring the Rams back to L.A.

Both the Rams and Chargers played their home games here last season, but without spectators because of the COVID-19 pandemic. The stadium will play host to the first “Sunday Night Football” game of the season Sept. 12, when the Chicago Bears come to town, as well as Super Bowl LVI on Feb.13.

Fans cheer during the Rams’ first preseason game against the Chargers. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

Fans watch at SoFi Stadium as the Rams attempt an extra point during a preseason game against the Chargers. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Rams fans with watermelon heads cheer during the preseason game against the Chargers. (Gina Ferazzi / Los Angeles Times)

Friday was the fifth anniversary of the NFL’s first game back in L.A., when the Rams played host to the Dallas Cowboys for a preseason game at an overflowing Coliseum. But Saturday was a completely different experience, with the L.A. teams welcoming fans to their new home, the biggest and most expensive stadium in NFL history. The first phase of the project, which includes the stadium and adjoining YouTube Theater, has a staggering price tag of $5 billion.

“It’s an indescribable feeling being here,” said Tom Bateman, director of “Bring Back the Los Angeles Rams,” which spearheaded a grassroots effort to bring the franchise back from St. Louis, where it played from 1995 to 2015.

“It’s like a dream come true, and I have to pinch myself.

Chargers Chargers rookie Rashawn Slater impresses in brief preseason appearance Here’s some observations from the Chargers’ preseason opener against the Rams, a game in which the majority of the Chargers’ players did not participate.

“We’ve been away from the game for a year, so this makes it extra sweet. We’re finally in a stadium that’s built for the Rams.”

The Chargers too call the place home, and there was a fair share of Justin Herbert jerseys to go with all the newly minted No. 9s of Rams quarterback Matthew Stafford. Both teams are capable of making the playoffs.

As for the stadium, with its indoor-outdoor feel and enormous 4D videoboard — the oval-shaped oculus suspended from the transparent roof — it’s unmatched in the league.

Fans are shown on the giant screens at SoFi Stadium on Saturday. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

Maleka March, left, takes a photo with her mother, Tina, before the Rams-Chargers preseason game. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Fans cheer after the Rams’ first touchdown against the Chargers. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

“One of the things we like to do is to go in certain areas of the building and watch people walk in for the first time,” said Jason Gannon, the stadium’s managing director.

“The looks on their faces, the reactions, it’s incredibly fulfilling.”

The place is “Stan Canyon,” the vision of Rams owner Stan Kroenke come to life, with the field sunk 100 feet below ground level.

“Stan’s objective and mandate to the working team was to build this global sports and entertainment destination. His vision of fan-first, fan-friendly, creating these spaces and to see it come to life, that’s really the exciting part. If you look at the risk that he took on, it’s unfathomable.”

There are wrinkles to be smoothed. There’s heavy traffic, naturally. And the 300-acre site is massive, so it’s an ambitious hike to the perimeter of the parking lots.

There’s a lot of construction in those places now, areas that one day will be retail districts.

Rane Laymance and Kristin Malley tailgate in the parking lot outside SoFi Stadium. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

Advertisement

Briana Romo of Los Angeles plays catch while tailgating. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

A Chargers fan walks through Rams territory. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

“You’ve got to walk for miles to get here,” said Willie Thomas, who made that slog with his wife, Lucille, despite paying $80 for parking.

Most of the parking on-site is $60 per game, and more for tailgating lots and oversized vehicles.

There are still lots of unknowns, Gannon said, even though both teams have played a full slate of games in the stadium. For instance, how loud is the place? The decibel count was being measured both inside the stadium, and at various spots around the surrounding site. The real test will be the opener, when the place presumably will be packed.

Rams fans make some noise inside the tailgating area Saturday at SoFi Stadium. (Gina Ferazzi / Los Angeles Times)

Hector Romero of San Diego grills up carne asada while tailgating Saturday at SoFi Stadium. (Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)

As inhospitable as the teams intend to be on the field, “We want to be good neighbors,” Gannon said.

Maybe he made noise when he got to his seat, but longtime Rams fan Paul Kurz was practically speechless when he got his first glimpse of the place.

“You see pictures and you can look at it, but when you get in here it’s…,” said Kurz, his voice tailing off.

Advertisement

“You’re talking to a guy who’s gone to 17 Super Bowls, and I’ve never seen this. Seventeen of them. And they roll out the carpet, you can see a lot of stuff. But none of them have this.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@With too many guards in their backcourt, contracts on their roster and age amid their rotation, the Clippers on Saturday swung a trade with the hope of solving those problems, in part, by reuniting the team with one of its former draft picks.

The Clippers are trading veteran guards Patrick Beverley and Rajon Rondo, and center Daniel Oturu, fresh off his rookie season, to the Memphis Grizzlies in exchange for guard Eric Bledsoe, the team’s 2010 first-round selection, according to a person with knowledge of the trade who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the trade is not expected to become official until Monday.

The trade involves those players only, the person said, and will not include draft picks.

It is a continuation of the intent that has guided the Clippers’ offseason thus far: turning an aging roster younger in hopes that a mix of core veterans and young, developing role players might extend their ability to compete for a championship once Kawhi Leonard recovers from a partially torn anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee, whether that is late in the upcoming season, or for 2022-23.

Advertisement

Bledsoe is not in the same age bracket as the 19-year-old Keon Johnson or 22-year-old Jason Preston, a pair of guards selected in July’s draft. But at 31, he is durable and more than a year younger than Beverley, and four years younger than Rondo.

The trade could be wind up being relatively low risk. In addition to dumping the expiring contracts owed to Beverley and Rondo off their books, the Clippers aren’t locked in long-term with Bledsoe; only $3.9 million of his $19 million salary next season is guaranteed.

His addition was a bet on the belief that the Clippers’ ability to spread the floor with three-point shooting will play to Bledsoe’s strengths by opening driving lanes to the rim. Bledsoe’s 9.3 drives per game led all New Orleans guards (and would have led the Clippers’).. He shot 44.7% on his drives, but more than half ended with a pass, which feeds into coach Tyronn Lue’s desire to create open shots with drives that force a defense to rotate and leave shooters open.

He is also a two-time all-defense honoree, a skillset that will help replace one of Beverley’s key strengths.

Bledsoe averaged 12.2 points per game last season, his lowest average since his third season, and he shot 49% inside the arc, his lowest percentage since 2017, while his 34% accuracy on three-pointers slightly exceeded his career average. He has been dogged throughout his career by his play in the postseason, when he is a career 44% shooter overall, and 25% on three-pointers.

Beverley ($14.3 million) and Rondo ($7.5 million) were both entering the final year of their respective contracts. The trade trims the team’s bill for the luxury tax from around $125 million next season to about $95 million while also creating a traded-player exception worth $8.3 million and bringing the roster to 14 contracts, not including backup guard Yogi Ferrell’s nonguaranteed deal for next season. Teams are allowed 15 roster spots, in addition to two two-way contracts.

Rondo and Beverley’s expiring deals made each natural trade candidates this offseason, as did Beverley’s history of struggling to remain healthy during four seasons with the Clippers, and Rondo’s failure to improve the team in the postseason, the chief reason why the Clippers traded Lou Williams for the two-time champion in March.

Advertisement

While Rondo was on the roster for only three months, Beverley held a much deeper attachment to the team and its fans, who fed off the guard’s attack-dog defense and chest-thumping confidence.

He was the last player remaining on the team from the franchise-changing trade in 2017 that sent Chris Paul to Houston in exchange for Beverley, Williams and Montrezl Harrell. The trio served as the emotional engine of 2018’s playoff eighth seed that registered a playoff-record 31-point comeback to stun top-seeded Golden State in the first round. A year later, they were also among a group of players who were said to struggle at times to adjust to a starkly different locker-room hierarchy after the arrival of superstars Leonard and Paul George. Beverley also suffered personal setbacks during the 2020 postseason following a strained calf and the death of one of his closest friends.

Last season revealed Beverley’s vulnerabilities — two knee injuries and a broken bone in his hand costing him weeks — but also his unique value to a team that multiple people close to the team felt played harder when Beverley was healthy.

Unable to stay on the court during a first-round playoff series because of matchup issues against Dallas’ Luka Doncic, Beverley was effectively benched the rest of the series. But while some on the team wondered how he would handle Lue’s decision, Beverley did not pout. Instead, he stayed engaged and trusted Lue, and when reinserted into the lineup in the second round his defense on Utah’s Donovan Mitchell was vital to the Clippers’ comeback series victory. His disruptive defense against Phoenix’s Devin Booker helped extend the conference final to six games.

Advertisement

While the move relieves some of the logjam for minutes in the backcourt, it also reduces the number of true centers on the roster to two with Oturu gone. Ivica Zubac and Serge Ibaka, who underwent season-ending back surgery only two months ago, are the only players taller than 6-foot-10 on the roster. But what is the team’s appetite to add depth there immediately? Their first appearance in a conference final hinged on the decision to play smaller, with forwards such as Marcus Morris in the center role.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On Wednesday, the NCAA’s Committee on Infractions (COI) announced it was not punishing Baylor University for failing “to report allegations of and address sexual and interpersonal violence committed on its campus” even though the school “admitted to moral and ethical failings in its handling of sexual violence.”

Baylor argued that “those failings, however egregious, did not constitute violations of NCAA legislation. Ultimately, and with tremendous reluctance,” the COI agreed. There was nothing to violate because the NCAA does not have any rules that address how athletic programs should handle reports of gendered violence, let alone how to discipline those programs, like Baylor, that failed victims of that violence.

The NCAA not punishing Baylor is the system working exactly as the NCAA has crafted it.

The system is bad.

Advertisement

Since 2013, I have been looking into how, if at all, the NCAA handles programs with poor track records around gendered violence. In 2016, I published a book titled “Unsportmanlike Conduct: College Football and the Politics of Rape.” In a chapter that specifically focuses on the NCAA, I wrote, “It is never the NCAA’s job to do anything about the problem of sexual violence committed by student-athletes — so says the NCAA.”

The COI report confirmed this. The report dropped almost six years to the day after Dan Solomon and I broke the story of a Baylor football player who had returned to the team even as he was on trial for sexual assault. The resulting media tidal wave prompted the school’s then-president, Ken Starr, to first ask for an internal investigation and then an external one.

Baylor hired the law firm Pepper Hamilton, which announced its findings in 2016. Specific failings in the athletic department and the football program were found, “including a failure to identify and respond to a pattern of sexual violence by a football player, to take action in response to reports of a sexual assault by multiple football players, and to take action in response to a report of dating violence.”

The school terminated the head football coach, suspended the athletic director (who left shortly thereafter and is now at Liberty University) and demoted Starr (who also subsequently left). Baylor’s Board of Regents said that between 2011 and 2016, 19 football players were accused of sexual assault or domestic violence. Between 2011 and 2014, one lawsuit alleged, 31 football players were involved in 52 acts of rape, including five gang rapes. Last week’s COI report said that although the NCAA could not punish the school, “none of this excuses the failures of coaching and athletics staff to report allegations of sexual and interpersonal violence.”

If the NCAA could not punish Baylor, of all schools, for how it dealt with reports of gendered violence, then no school can be held accountable by the organization under current NCAA policy. Administrators at Louisiana State, itself a subject of an external report that cited systemic failure to address sexual violence in its athletic program and a school I recently investigated with a team at USA Today, probably breathed a sigh of relief.

I cannot stop thinking about the contradiction between the NCAA’s description of its mission and its abandonment of student-athletes who are harmed by other athletes. On its own website, the NCAA lists as one of its three priorities the “well-being” of collegiate athletes. It explains that “in 1906, the NCAA was founded to keep college athletes safe.” In that historical vein, the NCAA claims it is “working hard to protect them physically and mentally, on the field and off.” But when it comes to gendered violence, according to the COI’s report, the NCAA member institutions have “signaled that law enforcement, government and other regulatory bodies are the appropriate entities to investigate and hold institutions accountable.”

(There’s never a satisfactory answer why the organization has ceded this responsibility when it devotes so much time and resources to the monitoring and policing of the benefits collegiate athletes receive, no matter how trifling.)

Advertisement

USC Sports USC receiver Bru McCoy temporarily removed from team after partner violence arrest USC receiver Bru McCoy, a Mater Dei alum, was arrested last month on suspicion of felony intimate partner violence with injury and will not participate in the start of training camp.

Most people are harmed by people they know, so it makes sense that in so many of these cases that I have investigated, the people reporting harm at the hands of athletes are other athletes. At Baylor, that included a soccer player, a volleyball player (whose case is specifically addressed in the COI report) and multiple equestrian athletes. At LSU, it was multiple tennis players and two people who worked in football recruitment. Seven women, three of them athletes, are currently suing the NCAA for failing to protect them from sexual violence committed by other athletes.

The NCAA should have a responsibility for their well being too. Mark Emmert, the president of the NCAA for the last decade, released a statement about the Baylor sanctions in which he said “the conduct by some former Baylor administrators, coaches, and student-athletes described in today’s Committee on Infractions decision is unacceptable and runs counter to the values of the NCAA.” Emmert called for “transformational change to create alignment between authority and responsibility to address the most critical issues in college sports.” He hopes the “newly formed Constitutional Committee,” which will soon begin work to draft proposals for changing rules enforcement and governance, can “effectuate this change.”

But Emmert ignored the fact the best way the NCAA can demonstrate its values is creating actual policy that legislates those values into practice. It has had the opportunity to do something on the policy level and chosen not to. Three years ago, The Commission to Combat Campus Sexual Violence, which the NCAA convened for two years, made a final recommendation to the NCAA’s Board of Governors in August 2018. Brenda Tracy, a survivor, founder of the anti-sexual violence organization Set The Expectation and a member of the Commission, told me that their recommendation was for the NCAA to adopt the Big Sky Conference’s Serious Misconduct Rule, which says that any current or prospective player who has been convicted, pleaded guilty or been found responsible by a school for serious misconduct is not eligible to be a part of an athletic department in the conference.

Advertisement

USC Sports USC’s Song Girls project a glamorous ideal; 10 women describe a different, toxic reality Ten former USC Song Girls described to The Times a toxic culture within the famed collegiate dance team that included longtime former coach Lori Nelson rebuking women publicly for their eating habits, personal appearance and sex lives.

Tracy says the Board of Directors for the NCAA did not take this up and decided instead to continue to monitor the issue. That same year, 2018, the NCAA cleared Michigan State of potential rules violations in the case of its onetime sports doctor, Larry Nassar, which involved the sexual abuse of hundreds of victims. Congress has also pushed the NCAA to do something, anything. Of Emmert, Tracy says, “You made it this way. You tied your own hands and you’re complaining that your hands are tied.”

In response to mounting pressure, the NCAA has created a Policy on Campus Sexual Violence that is focused primarily on educating athletic departments on the subject of gendered violence and, starting in 2022-2023, making a serious effort to know whether an incoming or current athlete in their department has been found responsible for misconduct (though there is no policy about what to do if they have been). The punishment for not doing either of these things is the NCAA prohibiting the school from “hosting any NCAA championship competitions for the next applicable academic year.”

That’s it.

Advertisement

As Tracy told me, “rape is not an NCAA violation,” still. Additionally, the Big Sky policy and others like it are primarily focused on the eligibility of individual players rather than addressing the kind of systemic failure the COI outlined at Baylor. After years of trying to work with the NCAA and make change, Tracy says the Baylor ruling felt like “a nail in the coffin.”

“It’s time,” she says, “to go over the NCAA’s head and ask the Department of Education to step in, because this is ridiculous. The NCAA is completely performative.”

It’s hard not to agree It often feels like the NCAA is trying to do the minimum. And in doing so, it continues to abandon athlete survivors. In the COI report about Baylor, the committee writes, “whether the NCAA infractions process has a role to play in addressing its member institutions’ responses to campus sexual violence is a philosophical decision that must be made by the Association’s membership. And if there is a role for the NCAA, the membership must determine the appropriate legislative vehicle to adjudicate such conduct.”

It is past time for the NCAA to seriously grapple with this philosophical decision. And if it does not, it’s worth asking: If the NCAA refuses to create policy that allows it to punish schools that fail to protect student athletes, then why does this organization exist at all?

Advertisement

Jessica Luther is an investigative journalist and author in Austin, Texas. She is co-author of “Loving Sports When They Don’t Love You Back” and co-host of the feminist sports podcast “Burn It All Down.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Since returning to the major leagues earlier this month, Angels outfielder Jo Adell has yet to showcase his most tantalizing skill. Eleven games in, the power-hitting outfielder has yet to hit a home run.

It seems to be the only thing missing so far in his second MLB stint.

Instead, the 22-year-old former first-round draft pick has been showcasing his other talents, the ones that failed him in his debut season last year. He failed to make the Angels’ opening day roster this spring so he spent the summer months trying to hone his skills in Class AAA.

The result: His defense is better. His approach at the plate is more disciplined. His swing is more consistent. And his overall play looks much more polished.

Advertisement

“That was really my only goal,” Adell said. “I told myself, when I come back, just try to be a factor in the lineup, try to contribute and keep moving.”

That process continued on Saturday for Adell, even in the Angels’ 8-2 defeat to the Houston Astros.

On a fly ball by Jason Castro in the third inning, Adell broke to his right in left field, sprinted toward the foul line, then flung his body in the air, making an all-out diving catch at the edge of the warning track. As he stood back up, he pumped his fist and let out a yell.

Later, Adell stayed back on a slider from Astros starter Luis Garcia in the fourth inning and singled up the middle, giving him at least one hit in all but four games since rejoining the Angels.

“Everything’s getting better,” manager Joe Maddon said of Adell this week, adding: “Every part of his game has accelerated since last year.”

Last year, little went right for Adell in his Angels debut.

In 38 games, he hit just .161 with 55 strikeouts and seven walks. He struggled defensively, underscored by an infamous misplay in right field when a fly ball bounced off his glove and over the wall. And after some of those same issues resurfaced during spring training, he was sent to triple-A Salt Lake to start the season.

Advertisement

“When we left camp, we sent him out, we had a laundry list of things [for him] to do, and we gave it to the minor-league coaches to apply to him,” Maddon said. “And they have. Everything he’s doing is better. Everything he’s doing is more precise.”

It wasn’t an immediate transformation.

Sports Angels’ future: promising young arms and Corey Seager at shortstop? The Angels may finally have found a solution to their pitching issues, which means they need to pursue a big-time bat. Corey Seager could be the solution.

While Adell’s natural power showed up in Salt Lake, leading to 15 home runs in his first 30 games, he was still making too many outs and too many mistakes defensively. His swing was still a little too big, with too many moving parts. And his performance was still too inconsistent, too all-or-nothing for a big-league call up.

Advertisement

But then, little changes started to sink in.

At the plate, for example, Adell grew more disciplined not only at laying off pitches outside the zone but also at understanding how pitchers were trying to attack him.

Salt Lake manager Lou Marson cited one example: inside fastballs early in the count. Adell would either get jammed on the pitch or whiff entirely, putting himself in an early hole and allowing opponents to come back with breaking stuff to put him away. He became more patient and waited for pitches he could extend on.

“It’s so hard for pitchers to consistently throw inside, even at the major-league level. And umpires don’t really call it in there,” Marson said. “So if he can learn to take, even if it is a strike, so what? Just continue to look out over the plate.”

Advertisement

There were similar growth areas in the outfield as well. It wasn’t just Adell’s reads and routes that needed improvement, but his decision-making on throws, too.

“I’m pretty transparent, I believe honesty is the best policy,” said Angels general manager Perry Minasian, who kept in contact with Adell during his stint in the minors. “So being straightforward and saying, ‘Hey, defensively you need to be better.’ He’s worked his butt off and he has gotten better.”

Those strides, on both sides of the ball, started showing up in the results. Each month in Salt Lake, Adell’s batting average and on-base-percentage rose, his strikeout-to-walk improved and his defensive impact became more apparent.

Advertisement

“I got to go out and play games, play competitive games, and get my rhythm,” Adell said. “That’s part of this game, finding your rhythm and finding the place where you can take off. And I was able to do that.”

And since getting recalled on Aug. 2, his early results as an everyday player have looked promising, with Adell currently holding a .268 batting average, performing dependably in the field and cutting down on his strikeout rate from last year.

“He’s a completely different player than I saw last year,” Maddon said. “You have to suck up some growing pains on occasion, which we did. And now he’s benefitting, and so are we.”

Adell is still far from being fully developed, as evidenced by other moments in Saturday’s game.

Advertisement

After his diving catch, he failed to deliver an accurate throw to home plate on a sacrifice fly. And in his other three at-bats on the night, he hit two soft pop-ups before finishing with a strikeout.

“It’s still a long way from the finished product,” Maddon said. “But it’s definitely headed in the right direction.”

And for Adell — who has long carried high expectations in the Angels farm system and will seemingly have the chance to compete for a starting corner outfield spot next season — that alone has represented a much-welcomed fresh start.

His power has never been in doubt. He’s starting to prove himself in other areas.

Advertisement

“These are plays I’ve worked on myself, parts of the game I have yet to showcase,” Adell said. “I’m at the point now where I’ve slowed it down, I’m playing the game and reacting to what’s coming to me. Not trying to force anything.”


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Years ago, when he was head coach at Lake Balboa Birmingham, Ed Croson coached identical twins Malik and Marquis Jackson. He said he could figure out the two side by side in 2007.

Croson is now coaching another pair of identical twins at Chaminade, defensive end/linebackers Victor and John Crawshaw.

He’s having trouble separating the two. Both are straight-A students with SAT scores above 1,500 and 6 feet 2, 235 pounds. Unless they are wearing their jersey numbers, he has no idea which is Victor and which is John.

“Somebody asked who is who?” Croson said. “God knows.”

Advertisement

During the spring season, No. 37 Victor was in on 29 tackles. No. 38 John was in on — wait for it — 29 tackles. You can’t make this stuff up.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Seventh in a series of stories profiling top high school players in the Southland by position.

Everyone had choices during the year-long COVID-19 suspension of high school sports, and Braydon Brus of Glendora made the decision to turn the family garage into a personal workout area. His father managed a gym, so they had access to equipment, and Brus’ focus was preparing for the day he could play football again.

“A big thing was realizing you can only control what you can control,” he said. “It was stressful, ‘Oh no, I only have sophomore film. Do you have to join a club team?’ I started grinding and training. My goal was get faster and stronger. Things started falling into place.”

After being a 175-pound outside linebacker as a sophomore, Brus turned himself into a 6-foot-1, 215-pound junior with speed, strength and versatility.

Advertisement

“Quarantine helped me quite a bit. I trained a lot, ate a lot, slept a lot,” he said.

All glory to God! Can’t wait to see what these next 4 years have in store! #GoCats @NUFBFamily pic.twitter.com/VU7YxibOxu — Braydon Brus (@BraydonBrus) June 15, 2021

During a five-game spring season, he had nine tackles for losses among his 58 tackles, two sacks and one interception. He also rushed for 491 yards and eight touchdowns.

“Braydon is must-see TV on the football field,” coach Brandon Rohrer said. “On defense, he is all over the field and has a strike mentality when he finishes tackles.”

He committed this summer to Northwestern, which is a return to his Midwest roots since he was born in Michigan before moving to California when he was 5.

Always a good time training with @richfroning in the barn!

320# clean and jerk

Felt good to be back with the @CrossFitMayhem crew! pic.twitter.com/HEgVYIuuBA — Braydon Brus (@BraydonBrus) July 7, 2021

He played varsity at Glendora as a 14-year-old freshman. This fall, Rohrer has plans to deploy Brus in a variety of roles, whether at quarterback in a wildcat formation, using his speed at running back or blitz him on defense.

“I’ll play wherever the team needs me to play,” Brus said. “I just love football.”

Brus remembers his first game of football in the second grade. Kids were trying to tackle each other. Some were worried about getting hurt, but not Brus.

“I love tackling,” he said. “It’s probably my favorite part of the game.”

He approaches playing linebacker with a simple mentality.

“It’s see ball, hit ball and don’t let anything get in the way or prevent you from seeing the ball and hitting the ball,” he said. “As a linebacker, your goal is to make every tackle.”

Advertisement

Brus said getting the chance to have a five-game spring season was important for his college recruitment. He said the day after his fifth game Northwestern finalized a scholarship offer after evaluating his film.

“They liked my speed, my ability to take on blocks and run sideline to sideline, and that I could be an athlete,” he said.

His 4.0 grade-point average during the 2020-21 school year didn’t hurt either, showing he could focus on his education from home during distance learning.

“I’m grateful my coaches put me in position to succeed,” he said. “I just decided to trust in our own high school football team. There’s something special playing on a high school team. The culture is different. You want to play with your buddies.”

Advertisement

Monday: Rodrick Pleasant, Gardena Serra defensive back.

Linebackers to watch

David Bailey, Mater Dei, 6-3, 220, Sr. When healthy, no one is better.

Delamonte Barnes, Birmingham, 5-9, 200, Sr. Four-year starter is relentless tackler.

Braydon Brus, Glendora, 6-1, 215, Sr. Versatile with quickness, athleticism.

Advertisement

Owen Chambliss, Corona Centennial, 6-3, 205, Jr. Has agility, athleticism.

Malachi Hannah, Simi Valley, 6-3, 225, Sr. Has speed to chase down ballcarriers.

Kevonte Henry, Leuzinger, 6-4, 225, Sr. Committed to Michigan.

Sterling Lane, Oaks Christian, 6-4, 235, Sr. Outside linebacker/defensive end with pass rushing skills.

Advertisement

Austin Logan, Norco, 5-11, 215, Sr. Had 15 tackles vs. Corona Centennial.

Leviticus Su’a, Mater Dei, 6-1, 205, Jr. Led team in tackles during spring.

Jalen Woods, St.. John Bosco, 6-0, 210, Sr. UCLA commit has made major progress.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The mere presence of Nneka Ogwumike on the court Sunday was a big lift for the Sparks, who welcomed their six-time All-Star and leader back with a 75-70 victory over the Indiana Fever in a battle of last-place teams at Staples Center.

The resilient 31-year-old power forward savored every moment on the floor and logged 14:43 of court time in the first half alone as the Sparks built a 12-point lead before cooling off and settling for a 49-46 edge at intermission.

Ogwumike finished with 12 points and seven rebounds in 31 minutes in her first game back from a Grade 2 knee sprain that sidelined her for more than a month. Add in the Olympic break (she was left off the Team USA roster for the third time, then was denied an exemption to play for Nigeria) and the WNBA veteran had not played in 10 weeks.

Although she showed subtle signs of rust, the WNBPA president and 2016 league MVP made an impact far beyond the stat sheet.

Advertisement

“It feels great to be back,” said Ogwumike, who capped her performance with a transition layup at the final buzzer.

“Not having played in a long time my mindset was to have fun and help my team win. This is the longest I’ve sat out due to injury. I’ve been doing a lot of lifting. I’m not as swift as I’d like to be but what never dropped off was my communication with my team. It’s nice to put words to action.”

Sports Sparks’ Nneka Ogwumike determined to rise after injury, Olympic snub Sparks leader Nneka Ogwumike has fought off self-doubt and worked through an injury in hopes of helping herself and the team “rise from the ashes.”

Brittney Sykes drained a three-pointer for the first basket of the game and wound up with a team-high 16 points, center Amanda Zahui B had 13 points and point guard Erica Wheeler added 12 for the Sparks, who entered the contest sixth in the Western Conference but only two and a half games out of a playoff spot. The result snapped a six-game losing streak for Los Angeles (7-13), which last saw action July 10 against Minnesota at the L.A. Convention Center.

Ogwumike was averaging 16.4 points and seven rebounds per game before her injury.

“For her, that was rusty, but to play 31 minutes and get to the paint as many times as she did and not go to the free-throw line is strange,” Sparks coach Derek Fisher said. “She’s not like any player I’ve seen. Defensively, she was great … rebounding, passing and starting plays, which was nice to see.”

Kelsey Mitchell (20 points) paced the Fever (4-17), who began the day in the Eastern Conference cellar and dropped to 1-9 on the road. The Sparks won the teams’ prior meeting 98-63 on June 3.

Jasmine Walker and Chiney Ogwumike (Nneka’s younger sister) both sat out the game with right knee injuries. Maria Vadeeva was also inactive for L.A.

Advertisement

“I love playing with Nneka — she’s one of the best players on this earth and an even better person,” Zahui B said. “To share the floor with her is a blessing. We’re a different team with her. The ball is on the way to Nneka and she already has three people on her, which opens up shots for everyone else.”

The Sparks have won 16 consecutive home games at Staples Center.

“This is home … Staples is where it’s at for us,” Ogwumike said. “I didn’t have any expectations, just be in the moment. That last play … getting that basket was symbolic of me finishing things out. I wanted to put my stamp on that game and I was able to do that.”

The Sparks are back in action Tuesday night against the Atlanta Dream at Staples Center.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@LAFC was on the wrong end of a big day for Atlanta United star Josef Martínez, who scored his third goal in his last three appearances during a 1-0 win on Sunday.

Martínez, on a breakaway, ran onto a low cross Ezequiel Barco and put away a one-touch finish from the center of the area in the 47th minute. It was the latest breakthrough performance for the elite goal scorer who suffered a torn anterior cruciate ligament in the 2020 season opener. Ten months later, he had to have three surgeries in five days due to scar tissue complications and an infection in the knee.

He made the most of a scoring opportunity against a struggling LAFC (6-8-5) side that has lost three in a row and has extended its franchise record winless streak to six games.

LAFC generated chances and came close to an equalizer, but Atlanta goalkeeper Brad Guzan had three saves during his fourth shutout of the season.

Advertisement

Gonzalo Pineda, who had been an assistant coach for the Seattle Sounders, was named Atlanta’s head coach on Thursday, though interim coach Rob Valentino will keep that tag through the team’s match against Toronto FC on Wednesday.

Atlanta (4-6-9) has won back-to-back games following a 12-game winless streak that was snapped with a 3-2 win at Columbus on Aug. 7.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Justin Frye won’t try to fool anyone. The UCLA offensive coordinator and offensive line coach doesn’t mind if everyone knows he wants to run the ball on third-and-short. He’s putting faith in his players to deliver anyway.

“If you really have presence, then Zoe Rose Frye, my 9-year-old daughter, needs to be sitting up in her seat saying, ‘They’re gonna run the ball right there,’ ” Frye said. “And we don’t care, we just do it. We get the job done.”

With a senior quarterback in his third year as the full-time starter, veteran receivers and tight ends and a deep group of running backs, the Bruins are primed to break out as one of the elite offenses in the Pac-12.

But the group that sets the tone is the offensive line. It returns every player who appeared in a game last season, and as the Bruins approach their season opener, the group of unsung heroes has a message that’s not flashy, just effective.

Advertisement

“It’s all about accountability,” senior Jon Gaines II said. “Doing your job, executing when your number’s called, just honestly, the way football’s played. It’s executing every play and I think that’s something we really want to set the standard for the offensive line.”

Along with the five starters who finished the 2020 season, the Bruins return junior Duke Clemens, who started three games at right guard last year. Center Sam Marrazzo is still working back from an injury that kept him out of spring practice and Gaines has been taking starting center snaps during training camp periods with reporters present. Clemens slots back in at right guard.

The depth to plug in different players without missing a beat was a nearly unimaginable luxury when coach Chip Kelly took over in 2018. Reeling from a string of recruiting misses under the previous coaching staff, the Bruins had 15 offensive linemen in Kelly’s first year. Just two had significant playing experience at UCLA.

Now they have 22 on their roster. Six players have starting experience with several more rotating in off the bench.

“We’ve tried to build it through the vision from the top down with Chip and bringing in the right kids and bringing in the right players,” Frye said. “Whatever we inherited, we take and we coach them really hard. The guys who want to be here and the guys that stayed, they buy in.”

The result is a room of players fully invested in each other and the coaching staff and a coaching staff that returns the sentiment.

“It’s almost kind of fun to go out there and run plays when you have a bond with the guy to the left and to the right,” left tackle Sean Rhyan said. “It’s a little bit fun because you know what to do and you just knock it off and you know it’s going to work. … There isn’t too much guessing going on between the players.”

Advertisement

With so many veteran players on offense, Kelly said the Bruins breezed through initial installs. Something that used to take five days took three this year. Remaining time was spent fine-tuning existing plays and strategically introducing more that don’t dilute the best qualities of the offense. Led by the more experienced players, the No. 1 offense runs the full playbook in practice while newer players start out more slowly on the second and third strings.

The bolstered offensive line can keep up with three unique groups. Starters get short breaks to recover in time to make the most of each repetition. Young players have more opportunities to watch and learn before executing during their turns. There’s more tape to pour over.

The tape is critical. It helps develop the presence Frye wants to see from his offensive line. He’s not looking for stats or even loud, vocal leadership from his linemen. He just wants them to be “felt” on the field. The abstract-sounding goal shows up on film, even if it doesn’t appear in stat sheets.

Advertisement

“It’s not magical, it’s not cosmic,” Frye said, “it’s just that’s what happens when you do your job and you do it at a high level.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Making UCLA’s football schedule isn’t exactly a day at the beach, unless it involves a game at Hawaii.

Even then, a once-a-century pandemic might come along and wipe out those plans like the tide surging over a sandcastle moat. That’s when Josh Rebholz can find himself soothing grumpy fans who want to know when they can rebook their trip to Honolulu.

Rebholz is widely known as “The Money Guy” in UCLA’s athletic department, a senior associate athletic director for external relations who has helped set all sorts of fundraising records. That’s only a fraction of his responsibilities. Among other things, he’s also in charge of the Bruins’ football schedule, meaning he must find nonconference games palatable to fans, administrators and coaches, not to mention the players competing.

“Nothing is changing the fact that the student-athlete experience is still of the absolute utmost of importance for us, the chance to obviously compete against high-level opponents and the opportunity to win games,” Rebholz said.

Advertisement

It’s a process that can be a decade in the making, UCLA’s future schedules extending to a game against Wisconsin in 2030 at Camp Randall Stadium.

Fortunately, there are some parameters that help guide Rebholz through a maze of possibilities. The Bruins like to play a majority of their nonconference games at the Rose Bowl while traveling to areas that are both attractive destinations (hello, San Diego, in 2023) and can strengthen their recruiting foothold in talent-rich portions of the country (greetings, Baton Rouge, La., in 2024).

Generally, UCLA doesn’t want to overload its schedule with two Power Five conference opponents in the same season, something it last did in 2014 by playing Virginia and Texas (though maybe it should reconsider given the Bruins won both games).

To entice fans, the school has traditionally tried to schedule a heavyweight nonconference home game in years when it faces USC at the Coliseum. That will be the case again this season when Louisiana State, less than two years removed from a national championship, comes to the Rose Bowl on Sept. 4 as part of a schedule in which the Bruins will face the Trojans at the Coliseum on Nov. 20.

UCLA’s seven-game home schedule also includes Hawaii on Aug. 28 and Fresno State on Sept. 18 before the start of Pac-12 Conference play. The Bruins will pay the Bulldogs $1.1 million plus 2,000 complimentary tickets as part of a so-called guarantee game; the Rainbow Warriors will be compensated by UCLA playing in Hawaii at a date to be determined after the 2020 game at Aloha Stadium was canceled because of COVID-19 concerns.

That makeup game probably won’t be played until 2028 at the earliest because UCLA’s nonconference slots are filled through 2026, and Hawaii is already on the schedule for a 2027 game scheduled to be played at the Rose Bowl.

The Bruins’ game at San Diego State in 2023 is a makeup game from the one canceled in 2020, and Rebholz is also working to reschedule the New Mexico State game that was canceled last fall.

Advertisement

Games can fall off the schedule just as easily as they’re added. Michigan backed out of games set for 2022 at Michigan Stadium and 2023 at the Rose Bowl in favor of softer scheduling; they’re now playing Hawaii and East Carolina.

UCLA used those openings to make history: The Bruins will play Alabama State in 2022 and North Carolina Central in 2023, the first time the school has scheduled historically Black universities as part of an arrangement in which they will also bring their nationally renowned bands to the Rose Bowl.

Auburn quarterback Bo Nix scrambles against Texas A&M on Dec. 5, 2020. UCLA will play Auburn in 2027 and 2028. (Butch Dill / Associated Press)

It’s the first time UCLA will play opponents outside of the Football Bowl Subdivision, leaving USC and Notre Dame as the only major college teams never to face counterparts from the Football Championship Subdivision. Rebholz said the concerns of purists were considered as well as the possibility of those games putting the Bruins at a competitive disadvantage when it came to winning the Pac-12 or recruiting top players.

Advertisement

“None of those things are true,” Rebholz said, “so we were able to say, ‘You know what, let’s do something different.’ ”

In another first, UCLA will play Auburn at the Rose Bowl in 2027 before traveling to Jordan-Hare Stadium in 2028. Those who want to play the Bruins must get in line given that Rebholz’s office fields at least one or two calls per week from opponents interested in playing UCLA.

“Our brand is very powerful across the country and around the world, and so I think it’s one of those things where we know that we’re very sought-after, but we also want to be very strategic in who we play,” Rebholz said. “A lot of people like the idea of playing UCLA, a lot of people like the idea of playing at the Rose Bowl.”

More people apparently also like the idea of watching UCLA play at the Rose Bowl. The Bruins have sold 2,500 new season tickets despite five consecutive losing seasons and paltry attendance in 2019, the last season that fans were allowed inside the Rose Bowl. The team averaged 43,849 fans that season, UCLA’s lowest home attendance since making the Rose Bowl home in 1982.

Advertisement

“I’ve been here a few years now,” said Rebholz, who arrived at UCLA in 2011, “and this is as much anticipation for ticket sales as I’ve seen, and I think a lot is related to people thinking that this team is going to be really good.”

Fans should resist the urge to blame the Bruins when it comes to most of the usual schedule gripes. Starts pushing bedtime are dictated by television, and back-to-back Pac-12 road games are set by conference headquarters.

UCLA’s relatively new tradition of no longer finishing its season with USC is attributable to several factors, including the Pac-12’s accommodating a Trojans or a Stanford home game against Notre Dame on Thanksgiving weekend followed by the conference championship, coupled with the desire to avoid having any school play 12 consecutive weeks.

Advertisement

All might be forgiven if Rebholz can find a way to reschedule that game in Hawaii.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Roger Federer said Sunday that he will undergo additional surgery on his troublesome right knee, leaving him unable to compete at the U.S. Open this year. Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic are tied for the most career men’s Grand Slam singles titles at 20 each following Djokovic’s sweep of the first three Grand Slam events this year.

Federer, who turned 40 on Aug. 8, said in a video released on Instagram that he will be on crutches “for many weeks and then also out of the game for many months.” He said while the process will be difficult, “I know it’s the right thing to do because I want to be healthy, I want to be running later as well again, and I want to give myself a glimmer of hope also to return to the tour in some shape or form.”

He also thanked his fans in advance for their good wishes and promised to update them with the progress of his rehabilitation.

This year’s U.S. Open will be played from Aug. 30-Sept. 12 at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in New York. Organizers have announced that fans will not be allowed to watch the qualifying tournament, but plans are still in place for them to be admitted to the tournament. Fans were barred from the 2020 tournament because of COVID-19 concerns and protocols.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I quote Dylan Hernandez regarding the Olympics ."There were no stars. U.S had Biles, Rapinoe and Durant and that’s about it.” Did he really watch? Dressel, Ledecky, Mu, McLaughlin, Lee, Felix and Crouser among others did amazing things. What does it take to be a star to Dylan? Winning and setting world records are not enough? Does he need controversy?

Bert Bergen

La Cañada

::

When Dylan Hernandez criticizes Michael Norman’s performance at the Olympics it’s puzzling. With a chance to select a story of humanity, he chooses to diss a young athlete for a disappointing performance. Norman is an outstanding young man who unfortunately was not able to run his best race in his first shot at an Olympic medal. It’s a shame Dylan couldn’t write something more purposeful. Some say Dylan choked.

Advertisement

Rich Tilton

Burbank

::

I was shocked by some of the affrontive statements columnist Dylan Hernandez made about Olympic sprinter Michael Norman when he failed to [medal in] the 400-meter finals.

To call him “the most disappointing athlete on the most underachieving American sprint team in recent history” was shocking and shameful.

And to say that he is defined by that one race until he posts a different result on a similar stage is a rigid, narrow-minded and inaccurate assessment — especially when his whole history and body of work say otherwise. One race does not define a person.

Janet Spaulding

Montclair

::

Will The Times please put Dylan Hernandez out of his misery and stop making him cover sports?

Advertisement

Biles battling back to win a bronze medal wasn’t enough for him? It’s easy to root against the soulless IOC. Yes, they planned arguably the largest multi-national event in a no-win situation of a global pandemic. But tell the athletes who sacrificed and competed, like the ones pictured right below his morose piece. Tell the immigrant family of Suni Lee or the whole state of Alaska cheering on Lydia Jacoby.

Hernandez would find a glass of water in the desert and complain it wasn’t cold enough. Yes, money plays too big a role in all of sports. Rather than focus on the negative implications of that, can’t we celebrate the joyous moments it gives us?

Jeff Heister

Chatsworth

Well done, NBC

Contrary to some letters posted last week, I found NBC’s Olympic coverage superb. Isaiah Jewett and many others displayed levels of sportsmanship rarely seen in pro athletics.

Advertisement

The celebrations of family and friendship made athletic success more real and meaningful. And as we rooted for Americans of many races and backgrounds, our divisions disappeared for 2½ weeks.

Thank you, NBC.

Larry Walker

U.S. Olympic team member 1976 and ’80

Canoga Park

::

Advertisement

For as long as I can remember, I’ve looked forward to immersing myself in Olympic television coverage every four years. The more stations … the bigger the variety of sports … and the most hours on air, the better. I’d give NBC a gold medal for delivering all three with an unparalleled collection of events, back stories on the athletes and the best collection of announcers I can remember.

Michael Roth

Sherman Oaks

(Note: Roth is vice president of communications for AEG)

Sitting protest

In Monday’s sports section, you state that the soaring popularity of virtual games could prompt the IOC to consider them soon. Imagine a “sport” where the competitors never leave their chairs to compete. If esports makes it into the Olympics, what would be next — tiddlywinks, checkers, chess?

Mike Clark

Los Angeles

Advertisement

::

Tricia Sugita, CEO of Flyquest Sports, says that gamers are athletes because of the skill and time they put in. That would make me an athlete from my typing skills in 1957.

Can I be up for future medals? Or given one from the past?

Bernadine Bednarz

Los Angeles

Advertisement

Lion-hearted

While there may have been doubts about Jared Goff’s arm, and Anthony Lynn’s clock management, there can be no doubt about the strength of both men’s character. They handled the end of their tenures in Los Angeles with grace and class. They will form a formidable duo in Detroit, and Sam Farmer’s article on Thursday was a generous tribute.

John Finch

Pasadena

Ohtani is good, but not AL MVP

I think Shohei Ohtani is definitely the MVP for the Angels. For the American League, not a chance. He may be the Player of the Year, and if you want to change the league’s MVP Award to Player of the Year, that’s fine with me. The MVP should be a player who makes a difference in getting his team into the playoffs. A .500 hitter with 100 home runs, 200 RBIs, 300 hits and 100 stolen bases, with a .999 fielding average, should not be the MVP if he is on a .500 team. Period.

Richard Peterson

Camarillo

Advertisement

::

As noted in the beginning of Bill Shaikin’s column, the Angels need pitching and have needed it desperately for more than half a decade. So why would he and others think that shelling out $200 million plus of Moreno’s money fixes the pitching?

The absolute last thing the Angels need is to sign another big-ticket position player, especially one coming off an injury! Money would be spent much wiser rebuilding the bullpen rather than spending on high-priced position players.

Michael DiFiore

Long Beach

Advertisement

Dollars and sense

I don’t know who Dennis Schroder’s agent is but it’s very obvious his financial advisor is Jody Reed.

Erik Schuman

Fountain Valley

::

The Los Angeles Times welcomes expressions of all views. Letters should be brief and become the property of The Times. They may be edited and republished in any format. Each must include a valid mailing address and telephone number. Pseudonyms will not be used.

Advertisement

Email:

sports@latimes.com
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@