Tracking severe weather

Loading interactive map ... X Category

Category Projected path

Projected path Traveled path Loading data ...

Track the latest weather stories and share your comments with the CNN Weather team on Facebook and Twitter.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Peter Bregman, CEO of Bregman Partners, is an executive coach, bestselling author and host of the Bregman Leadership Podcast. Howard Jacobson is an executive and health coach and director of coach training at Bregman Partners. Their upcoming book is You CAN Change Other People . Follow them on twitter @peterbregman and @askhowie . The opinions expressed here are their own. Read more opinion at CNN.

(CNN) Many vaccinated people are angry at those who aren't. If you've had your Covid shots, you may agree with Gov. Kay Ivey of Alabama, who said recently : "Folks supposed to have common sense, but it's time to start blaming the unvaccinated folks, not the regular folks. It's the unvaccinated folks that are letting us down."

And it's not just the masses who are letting us down but people close to us: our coworkers, friends, family members. You may be furious at what you see as the selfishness and ignorance and lack of civic responsibility in the people in your life who refuse to get the jab.

And you're not alone -- social media is rife with posts that attempt to convince people to get vaccinated by explaining how wrongheaded they are. It's human nature. You might be doing the same kind of browbeating yourself.

But here's a question: How's that strategy working for you? After you lay into the anti-vaxxers and the vaccine-hesitant, are they thanking you for setting them straight and rushing to make appointments?

Our guess is, that's not what's happening.

Instead, those conversations get heated, things get said that can't be unsaid and you both leave feeling angry, frustrated and resentful. In the moment, it can feel good to indulge our emotions and let them have it. But the cost is high: We damage the relationship and they don't get vaccinated. Even when we present them with clear, seemingly convincing facts.

And if arguing with facts backfires, you know what backfires even more? Criticizing, blaming and shaming them for being thoughtless, selfish, stupid, ignorant or psychopathic. You can check this yourself: When was the last time you changed your behavior in response to someone blaming or shaming you?

We want to say that we feel your pain. We're both vaccinated. We're disappointed that the Delta variant, combined with widespread vaccine hesitancy, is prolonging the pandemic and necessitating continued mask mandates and lockdowns to control its spread. And we're mortified at the resulting unnecessary suffering and loss of life. We're angry too.

Like Gov. Ivey, we also feel the urge to convince them to change by giving them the facts, arguing with them and criticizing and shaming them for their selfish disregard for others.

The truth is, we care deeply about the issue. And we also care deeply about our relationships. When the two collide, it feels like we have to choose. Do I risk getting a breakthrough infection by spending time in a confined space with my unvaccinated family member, or do I risk the relationship by refusing to be in her presence, or demand that she wear a mask, or try to convince her to do the right thing?

The power of empathy

How do we balance risk and relationship?

We'd like to share a process that reduces risk through relationship. While it isn't guaranteed to get the unvaccinated people in your life to drop everything and make an appointment for the shot, we think it will significantly increase your odds of success.

Our approach hinges on your willingness to give up control; to acknowledge that the person you're trying to change has autonomy and will make their own decision. Of course, what you're giving up isn't control; it's the illusion of control. The person you're talking to is always free to get vaccinated -- or not. You don't get to choose for them. That's why you're trying so hard to convince them.

So when we can't persuade with facts or criticism, what can we lead with instead?

Two things: empathy and curiosity.

When we demonstrate empathy, we show the other person that we believe they have valid needs and concerns. Even if we disagree with their position, we acknowledge that it makes sense to them.

How do you show empathy to someone who doesn't want to get the vaccine? Let's make this real: Think about someone you want to convince. First, be OK with your own feelings. Are you furious at them? Disappointed? Terrified? Do you look down upon them?

Feel those feelings, own them, and don't beat yourself up for having them. Instead, have empathy for yourself. Your motivations are good. You want to reduce suffering, save lives and allow people to congregate freely again without fear of infection. You care deeply, and because of that you feel strongly about the topic.

But now don't act on those emotions either. Instead, extend your empathy to the other person. What do they care deeply about? Here's what we've heard from the vaccine hesitant people in our lives:

"I don't want to put unknown chemicals in my body."

"I don't trust pharmaceutical companies."

"I don't want to be told what to do about my body."

"These vaccines have been rushed through without enough research, and they aren't even fully approved by the FDA."

"My chances of getting harmed by the vaccine are much higher than my risk of dying of Covid."

I know you can argue with these statements. You might be doing it in your head right now. But can you empathize with them as well?

Does it make sense that someone would want to avoid putting unknown chemicals in their body? Is it reasonable not to fully trust the pharmaceutical industry? It doesn't take a lot of Googling to find lawsuits and settlements of billions of dollars involving harms, false claims and withheld information by drug companies. Isn't it true that we have only short-term data on the effects and side effects of the vaccines, if only because the trials began less than two years ago?

In practice, empathy is about validating the other person's perspective without agreeing or disagreeing with them. It's making true statements that show the other person that you understand them to their satisfaction. For example:

"It sounds like you're fearful of the possible side effects of the vaccine. And that makes sense."

"It seems like you don't trust the pharmaceutical companies that are producing the vaccines. I understand that"

"You're worried that we don't have long-term data on the effectiveness and safety of the vaccines. I get that."

Can we talk?

And then, encourage them to talk. That's where curiosity comes in. Ask questions, not to trap them in logical inconsistencies, but because you are truly curious about their answers. How do they compare the relative risks of vaccines and Covid? What data are they looking at? What makes them doubt the safety of the vaccine? What have they seen and heard?

Once they feel like you care about their opinion so you can learn from it -- and them -- rather than demolish it -- or them -- you're in a real conversation. Now you can get to the important questions: What do they want? For themselves, for their loved ones, for their country, for the world? Chances are, this is where you can find common ground.

We all want people to be well, to be free from harm, to be free from coercion. We all want the economy to flourish -- even though we may have very different visions of what that entails. We all want to be respected.

Get our free weekly newsletter Sign up for CNN Opinion's new newsletter. Join us on Twitter and Facebook

From this place, you can begin to explore your differences with curiosity and compassion. "It sounds like you and I want people to be both healthy and free from coercion. And this virus is sort of pitting those values against each other, and I'm coming down more strongly on the side of health, and you appear to value freedom more. But I hear your concerns about your health as well. And actually, I'm in favor of vaccination because I think it will give us all more freedom."

That was the approach we used with one of our vaccine hesitant friends. After a conversation full of respectful questions and discussion, she told us, "You know, I think I'm going to get the vaccine." Instead of trying to change her, we created an environment in which she felt safe enough to change on her own.

We're not guaranteeing that outcome. We don't know how your conversations will go. But when you don't have actual power over someone, it's only through a caring and respectful relationship that you can influence them to change. If you want a loved one to get vaccinated, approach them with empathy and curiosity, to communicate your caring and respect. It's your best shot at helping them get theirs.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) US health officials are warning people not to eat raw cake batter as they investigate a multistate outbreak of E. coli linked to cake mix.

The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says that as of July 27, 16 people in 12 states have been reported to have been infected with the same strain of the E. coli bacteria.

They range in age from 2 to 73-years-old and 75% of them are children under 18, the CDC said.

Seven people had to be hospitalized, the CDC said, including one who developed hemolytic uremic syndrome, a type of kidney failure. No deaths have been reported.

All of the sick people are women, the CDC said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) As covid-19 resurges across the country, driven by the highly infectious delta variant, experts are extending our understanding of the pandemic's toll on older adults — the age group hit hardest by the pandemic.

New research offers unexpected insights. Older adults living in their own homes and apartments had a significantly heightened risk of dying from covid last year — more than previously understood, it shows. Though deaths in nursing homes received enormous attention, far more older adults who perished from covid lived outside of institutions.

The research addresses essential questions: Which conditions appear to put seniors at the highest risk of dying from covid? How many seniors in the community and in long-term care institutions might have died without the pandemic? And how many "excess deaths" in the older population can be attributed to covid?

Of course, it's already known that older adults suffered disproportionately. As of Aug. 4, more than 480,000 people age 65 and older perished from Covid-19 — 79% of more than 606,000 deaths in the U.S. overall, according to the latest data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (This is likely an undercount because it relies on death certificate data that may not be up-to-date or accurately reflect the true toll of the virus.)

Still, new information about older adults' vulnerabilities is useful as covid cases climb again and unvaccinated people remain at risk. Some key results from studies published over the past few months:

Death rates varied among groups of seniors. In In a study published in Health Affairs in June, experts from the Department of Health and Human Services analyzed data for more than 28 million people with traditional Medicare coverage from February 2020 (the approximate start of the pandemic) to September 2020. (Excluded were about 24 million people in Medicare Advantage plans because data crucial to the study wasn't available.) The researchers compared data for this period with previous years, dating to 2015.

The study examines deaths among individuals with covid and reaffirms headlines that have trumpeted the toll among older Americans. Medicare members diagnosed with covid had a death rate of 17.5% — more than six times the death rate of 2.9% for Medicare members who evaded the virus.

A notable finding in the study: Medicare members with dementia were especially vulnerable. If diagnosed with covid, their death rate was 32%, compared with nearly 14% for those with dementia who weren't infected. Also at substantially increased risk of death from covid were older adults with serious and chronic kidney disease, immune deficiencies, severe neurological conditions and multiple medical conditions.

Most of the seniors who died of covid lived outside of nursing homes. The HHS experts' study reported 110,990 "excess deaths" due to covid during the eight-month period it examined — most likely an undercount because many older adults who died may not have been tested or treated for the virus. The term "excess deaths" refers to a death count higher than the number expected based on historical data. It is a core measure of the pandemic's impact.

Of the excess deaths HHS experts documented, 40% occurred in nursing homes but a larger portion, nearly 60%, were seniors living in other settings.

Other studies suggest far more excess deaths. Estimates of excess deaths in the older population vary widely depending on the period studied, the data sources used and the type of analysis conducted. . Estimates of excess deaths in the older population vary widely depending on the period studied, the data sources used and the type of analysis conducted. Another study, published in May in the BMJ (formerly known as the British Medical Journal), calculated 458,000 "excess deaths" in 2020 in the United States. About 72% were people 65 and older, according to the British and American authors.

About two-thirds of these deaths can probably be attributed directly to covid, the authors noted. Others might be due to acute medical care that was delayed during the pandemic, poor management of chronic medical conditions, the effects of isolation and other factors.

Assisted living residents were significantly affected. Data about the impact of the pandemic on assisted living residents has been scarce, in part because these facilities are regulated by states, not the federal government. A . Data about the impact of the pandemic on assisted living residents has been scarce, in part because these facilities are regulated by states, not the federal government. A study out in June in JAMA Network Open found the death rate for assisted living residents in 2020 — as the pandemic unfolded — was 17% higher than in 2019. In the 10 states with the greatest community spread of covid, the death rate for assisted living residents rose by 24%.

"Efforts must be made to support assisted living communities as they work to address infection prevention and control to keep their residents safe," said Kali Thomas, a study co-author and associate professor of health services, policy and practice at Brown University."

Underlying medical conditions played a major role. A . A study by researchers from the Cleveland Clinic and the Health Data Analytics Institute in Dedham, Massachusetts, is one of the first to suggest how many older adults who caught covid would have died from underlying medical conditions even if the pandemic had not been underway. It, too, examined 28 million people with traditional Medicare coverage from the approximate start of the pandemic (the end of February) through November 2020. (Of 28 million people in the study, more than 2.4 % had a confirmed covid diagnosis and 10% had a "probable covid" diagnosis.)

Other studies estimate excess deaths by looking at population-wide data. This study looked at individual data, using a highly complex methodology to calculate a preexisting risk of death for each person based on his or her age, sex, medical conditions and other demographic characteristics. Actual deaths in 2020 were then compared with expected deaths based on those preexisting risks. The report has been published as a preprint without peer review.

About 4% of Medicare members with confirmed or probable covid who were living in the community, in their own homes and apartments, would have died anyway from underlying medical issues, the authors estimated. With covid, the actual death rate climbed to 7.5%.

In nursing homes and other long-term care facilities, 20.3% of residents diagnosed with confirmed or probable covid would have died due to underlying medical issues; with covid, that rose to 24.6%, the authors calculated.

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

"This is a more accurate picture of the true toll of covid," said Dr. Daniel Sessler, chair of the department of outcomes research at the Cleveland Clinic. "As it turns out, the greatest increase in deaths [from the virus], in terms of both raw numbers and an increased risk of dying, was in the community, not in long-term care residents."

The bottom line. About 80% of people 65 and older have been fully vaccinated, leaving millions of seniors still at risk of covid. Special attention should be paid to older adults with dementia and other serious neurological conditions, kidney disease and multiple medical conditions. Older adults, especially the eldest groups, who are frail and who live alone or with little support in areas where the virus is spreading rapidly also deserve special outreach and attention.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) A new study shows the Delta Covid-19 variant produced similar amounts of virus in vaccinated and unvaccinated people if they get infected -- illustrating a key motivation behind the federal guidance that now recommends most fully vaccinated Americans wear masks indoors.

Experts say that vaccination makes it less likely that you'll catch Covid-19 in the first place -- but for those who do, this data suggests they could have a similar tendency to spread it as unvaccinated folks.

"High viral loads suggest an increased risk of transmission and raised concern that, unlike with other variants, vaccinated people infected with Delta can transmit the virus," Dr. Rochelle Walensky, director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in a statement Friday.

The study , published by CDC Friday, describes 469 Massachusetts residents who were infected in a July outbreak in Barnstable County, which includes the summer vacation destination Provincetown. No deaths were reported among them.

About 74% -- or 346 cases -- had been fully vaccinated. Of those cases, 79% reported symptoms. Genetically sequenced cases revealed the Delta variant as the main culprit.

The researchers found evidence that viral loads were similar among 127 fully vaccinated people and 84 others who were unvaccinated, partially vaccinated or whose vaccination status was unknown. Viral load is a proxy for how likely someone might be to transmit the virus to others.

In a new report, the CDC shares details from a Covid-19 outbreak around Provincetown, Massachusetts, shown here in 2020.

On Tuesday, Walensky previewed these findings while unveiling guidance that people in areas with "high" or "substantial" Covid-19 transmission should resume wearing masks indoors. Over 75% of the US population live in these areas.

The finding that the Delta variant resulted in similar viral loads "was a pivotal discovery leading to CDC's updated mask recommendation," Walensky said Friday.

"The masking recommendation was updated to ensure the vaccinated public would not unknowingly transmit virus to others, including their unvaccinated or immunocompromised loved ones."

Questions remain

Prior to Delta, vaccination was known to impact factors that likely influence transmission. Not only did vaccinated people tend to have lower viral loads, but they also had milder symptoms and were sick for less time.

But research has shown that Delta spreads more aggressively. Earlier this month, for example, Chinese scientists described viral loads that were about roughly 1,000 times higher with Delta than earlier strains.

On Thursday, a CDC internal document said the Delta variant was roughly as transmissible as as chickenpox, whereas an early strain was closer to the common cold. This means that, under certain conditions, an infected person may have transmitted to two or three people, on average, early in the outbreak. But now, with Delta, that number could be five to nine.

"It's one of the most transmissible viruses we know about. Measles, chickenpox, this -- they're all up there," Walensky told CNN late Thursday.

The CDC document also cited reports indicating the variant might cause more severe disease, as well.

But even with similar viral loads, it's not a foregone conclusion that vaccinated people are necessarily as contagious as unvaccinated people.

"This is intriguing data, it's important, but I'm not positive that you're equally as infectious if you're vaccinated," said Dr. Monica Gandhi, an infectious disease specialist at University of California, San Francisco, who was not involved in the research.

Gandhi said there are multiple parts to the immune system -- including antibodies and T cells -- that raise important questions around using viral load, which is measured by PCR tests, as a proxy for how contagious someone is.

The new report says that "microbiological studies are required to confirm these findings" of similar viral loads among breakthrough infections. It also notes that "asymptomatic breakthrough infections might be underrepresented" because they are less likely to be detected.

Earlier this week, Walensky said that ongoing outbreak investigations will help uncover more about what happens when these breakthrough infections do occur.

"We are now continuing to follow those clusters to understand the impact of forward transmission of those vaccinated people," she said. "But again, I want to reiterate, we believe the vast majority of transmission is occurring in unvaccinated people and through unvaccinated people."

Even more reason to get vaccinated

Even with Delta, Covid-19 vaccines still reduce the spread of the virus. Moreover, vaccinated people are far less likely to end up in the hospital.

The CDC internal document estimated that vaccines reduce the risk of severe disease or death 10-fold or greater, and they reduce the risk of infection three-fold.

"Getting vaccinated continues to prevent severe illness, hospitalization and death -- even with Delta," Walensky said this week.

Among the Massachusetts residents in the latest study, none died and only five were hospitalized.

Of those five, one person was unvaccinated and had underlying medical conditions, and four were vaccinated. Among the vaccinated group, one had received the Pfizer vaccine, and the remaining three had received Johnson & Johnson. The vaccinated individuals ranged in age from 20 to 70, and two had underlying health conditions.

Additional infections were identified among visitors from at least 22 other states who visited the area from July 3 through 17. Thousands gathered for summer festivities, and infected people reported going to "densely packed indoor and outdoor events at venues that included bars, restaurants, guest houses, and rental homes," the study says.

Although these findings motivated CDC to update its guidance for areas with higher levels of viral transmission, the study notes that Barnstable County was not one of those areas until the outbreak. Between July 3 and 17, daily new cases rose from a 14-day average of 0 to 177 cases per 100,000 residents.

The study suggests that "even jurisdictions without substantial or high COVID-19 transmission might consider expanding prevention strategies, including masking in indoor public settings regardless of vaccination status."

"The measures we need to get this under control -- they're extreme. The measures you need are extreme," Walensky told CNN late Thursday.

The study also notes that breakthrough infections are expected, especially as the slice of the population that's vaccinated grows larger. "As population-level vaccination coverage increases, vaccinated persons are likely to represent a larger proportion of COVID-19 cases," the authors wrote.

CNN previously reported on the outbreak connected to Provincetown. In total, at least 882 cases have been linked to the cluster so far, about 60% of whom were Massachusetts residents, according to local officials.

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

The town manager of Provincetown, Alex Morse, told CNN Friday that the town appeared to be taking a favorable turn -- with an indoor mask mandate in place and a test positivity rate that's on the decline.

"We think we're heading in the right direction, but obviously concerned about what's happened here in the last few weeks," Morse told CNN's John Berman.

A source familiar with the CDC's decision to update its recommendations previously told CNN that, in addition to the viral load findings, the overall prevalence of Delta and lower-than-hoped vaccine uptake played key roles in the latest iteration of the guidance.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued new guidance on Tuesday that recommended a return to indoor masking, even for vaccinated people, in parts of the country with high and substantial coronavirus spread . The agency also urged that schools require masks for all students, teachers and visitors.

One reason for the change in guidance is growing evidence that vaccinated people may also be able to infect others with the Delta variant of the coronavirus. Therefore, CDC officials advised people who live at home with unvaccinated children or immunocompromised family members to take particular caution and mask in indoor spaces.

Many people have questions about what this CDC guidance means for families. Who should be masking and under what circumstances? What if parents have to go to work -- do they need to be wearing masks around their kids? Can grandparents still safely see their grandchildren? Should extended family get tested for Covid-19 prior to getting together -- even those who are vaccinated?

To help us make sense of all of this in the midst of changing guidance, we turned to CNN Medical Analyst Dr. Leana Wen. Wen is an emergency physician and visiting professor of health policy and management at the George Washington University Milken Institute School of Public Health. She's also author of a new book, "Lifelines: A Doctor's Journey in the Fight for Public Health."

CNN: What does the new CDC guidance mean in terms of who should be wearing masks and when?

Dr. Leana Wen: The way I understand the new CDC guidance is that there is one group that needs to take particular care in a way that's different from previous guidance.

Previously, the CDC said that vaccinated people are well protected from severe illness and are not likely to spread the virus to others. Therefore, prior guidance indicated they don't need to be wearing masks. On the other hand, the unvaccinated are not protected. Especially with the more contagious Delta variant circulating, unvaccinated people are at high risk for contracting Covid-19 and transmitting the virus. They should be wearing masks when indoors.

This remains true with the new guidance. The CDC is now saying that people who are vaccinated should wear masks indoors, too, particularly if they live at home with people who are unvaccinated or immunocompromised.

My takeaway from this guidance is that these people -- and I am one of them, with two children under the age of 12 who are not yet eligible for the vaccine -- are at elevated risk because of the possibility of passing along Covid-19 to those we live with. We are still well protected ourselves from severe outcomes of coronavirus, but we want to reduce our risk by masking indoors to protect the vulnerable people in our family.

CNN: A lot of grandparents are now wondering if they need to be extra careful to avoid infecting their grandkids. Can grandparents still safely see their unvaccinated grandchildren?

Wen: Yes -- though I think it's a good idea for people who will be around vulnerable, unvaccinated individuals to be cautious and to try to reduce their risk, especially if they are in an area of high coronavirus transmission. That means wearing masks, limiting time in crowded, indoor settings, and recognizing that risk is additive -- meaning that if you choose to engage in one high-risk activity, such as going to a large wedding with unvaccinated guests, you should try to reduce other high-risk exposures to cut your overall risk.

I want to clarify that the vaccines are still very effective, but they are not 100%. An analogy I like is that the vaccines are a great raincoat. They'll protect you in a drizzle and even in a moderate rainstorm. But if you are in daily thunderstorms, at some point, you will get wet.

There are parts of the country that are in a drizzle. The level of vaccination in the community is high and infection rate is low. The chance of your encountering an asymptomatic, infected person is low, and if you're vaccinated, the risk of you contracting Covid-19 and then being infectious to your grandchildren is very low. If you live in such an area, you can probably go about your normal daily activities without much worry that you could somehow bring coronavirus to your family.

That's different if you're in a community that's undergoing a major surge of cases. Where vaccination rates are low and infections are high, you have a higher likelihood of coming in contact with infected people. In those circumstances, the raincoat may not be enough -- maybe you need an umbrella, too. Think of the mask as that umbrella -- that additional layer of protection.

You may also want to reduce your exposure to other high-risk activities. I probably wouldn't be going to indoor bars and crowded gyms where other people around me are maskless. Reducing your risk of exposure will also reduce your likelihood of being an asymptomatic carrier who could bring Covid-19 to your unvaccinated grandkids.

CNN: What about parents who work in jobs where they are exposed to unvaccinated, unmasked people? Should they wear a mask at home?

Wen: This is a tough situation. I hope that workplaces implement procedures to keep employees safe. Ideally, they should require proof of vaccination or at least regular testing. If not, they should still be implementing masking and physical distancing.

If you are in a situation where your workplace does not have these protocols, you can still try to keep yourself safe. That includes wearing an N95 or KN95 mask when indoors and in close quarters with others of unknown vaccination status. Try to avoid maskless gatherings when possible -- for example, eat lunch at your desk instead of around others. If possible, raise your concerns with your supervisor and see if you could be reassigned a workspace away from others or if you could at least try to avoid crowded conference rooms.

I think it's really hard for parents to continuously wear masks in their own homes around their children -- except in very specific, time-limited situations, like if they have symptoms or are awaiting a coronavirus test. The best thing to do is to try to reduce risk at work as much as possible.

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

CNN: If an extended family is getting together, what's safe? Let's say that some are vaccinated, and some are not.

Wen: The safest thing to do is to get together outdoors only. In that case, no one needs to be masked or get tested.

If indoor get-togethers are planned with a group of mixed vaccination status, ideally everyone should quarantine and then get tested. With the Delta variant surging, this is the safest option to help keep families safe.

There is a lot changing with the CDC guidance. We need to do our best to reduce our risk while also resuming parts of our lives that are the most important. Vaccination remains the best way to protect ourselves and our loved ones.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) Two leading organizations that represent obstetricians and gynecologists recommended Friday that anyone who is pregnant should be vaccinated against Covid-19.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine ( SMFM ) said their recommendation is based on evidence from thousands of people who were pregnant that the vaccines are safe to be used during pregnancy. The associations also cite the country's low vaccination rate and the recent increase in cases.

The associations are also strongly recommending their members "enthusiastically recommend vaccination" to their patients.

"It is clear that pregnant people need to feel confident in the decision to choose vaccination, and a strong recommendation from their obstetrician--gynecologist could make a meaningful difference for many pregnant people," said Dr. J. Martin Tucker, the president of ACOG. "Pregnant individuals should feel confident that choosing COVID-19 vaccination not only protects them, but also protects their families and communities."

The groups had previously said Covid-19 vaccines "should not be withheld" from someone because they are pregnant, but did not recommend they get one. Now, there is a growing body of research that shows the vaccines are safe and effective.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) For his two-dose Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine, Ted Rall crossed state lines back in February and March. Appointments in New York City were impossible to come by, but his friend told him about a federal facility in New Jersey with no residency requirements and so he drove there twice.

The Covid-19 shot Rall had at the end of July -- his third -- was a lot easier to get his hands on and far more convenient, he says, even though the US Food and Drug Administration and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention don't currently recommend Covid-19 vaccine boosters for anyone.

Rall, 57, simply walked into a CVS pharmacy in Manhattan, no appointment needed, and told the pharmacist he wanted to get a Covid-19 vaccine. He pretended it was his first dose.

Rall, a political cartoonist and writer, says he has asthma and a history of serious respiratory disease including swine flu and pneumonia. He suspects he had Covid-19 early in the pandemic, though his antibody tests were negative. He isn't interested in taking any chances now that the more transmissible Delta variant is ravaging the country and more than 98% of the US population lives in counties considered to have "high" or "substantial" Covid-19 transmission, according to the CDC.

"I want to stay protected, you know, and I think it's also pretty obvious that this is going to be the norm, and it might just be like in a month or two," Rall told CNN. "Everyone's going to be doing it, so why wait until it's hard to get appointments again?"

Rall could be right about the timeline. A Biden administration official told CNN last week that internal discussions at the FDA are looking at early September to lay out a strategy on Covid-19 booster shots. A decision for those who are immunocompromised and face greater risk from the virus is expected sooner, the official said.

Vaccine advisers to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will meet Friday to discuss boosters and additional doses for immunocompromised people.

And the FDA is already considering full approval of the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine, a decision that some say could occur in a matter of weeks. All of the Covid-19 vaccines are currently available in the US under emergency use authorization. Full approval could mean that the fully vaccinated could get an additional vaccine -- well before any recommendation for boosters -- if a doctor thinks it's warranted.

The available vaccines provide strong protection for most people, but studies have shown that people who are immocompromised don't build up sufficient protection from the standard doses of Covid-19 vaccines. Recent research also suggests that some protection from mRNA vaccines wanes for everyone over time.

Dr. Eric Topol, a cardiologist and professor of molecular medicine at Scripps Research, told CNN he predicts that an FDA approval, plus a direct message that boosting is necessary -- even if it's strictly for immunocompromised people and the elderly -- will create a sort of "booster mania" in the US.

He said an FDA approval "opens up everything for people who are concerned to get a doctor's prescription. So that just adds to the chaos."

'We're not there yet' on boosters

Rall's own decision to seek out a booster was driven by all of the research he's read about, including data from the Israeli Health Ministry released last month that suggests that overall efficacy of the Pfizer vaccine against all Covid-19 infections has dropped to just 39% in those who were vaccinated earlier in the year, although their data show the vaccine is still 91.4% effective in preventing severe disease.

Other data released by both Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna suggest that both vaccines see waning levels of antibodies over time.

But that doesn't mean protection ends, and boosters aren't yet recommended for anyone.

On Sunday, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told CNN's Fareed Zakaria that there's still limited data on how long vaccine durability lasts.

"The bottom line of it all is that we are following very carefully the durability of protection," Fauci said. "And when you follow it, you look and see what is the percentage of protection that you get as you go month for month."

When data shows protection goes below a certain threshold, he said, health officials will recommend boosters for the general population.

Dr. Paul Offit, director of the Vaccine Education Center at Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania, said Tuesday during a conversation hosted by Brown University that he thinks "we will cross the line, where we know we need a booster dose, when people who are vaccinated, fully vaccinated, nonetheless, are hospitalized or in the ICU or dying.

"We're not there yet."

So far, the vaccines are working: A CNN analysis of CDC data suggests more than 99.9% of fully vaccinated people have not had a severe breakthrough infection.

It's also not clear what risks could come with an additional shot. Topol says it's best to sit it out a few more weeks and he cautions that people who just want to go out for a booster should consider the potential side effects.

"We don't know the boosters are going to protect. These boosters are directed against the original strain, the same problem we have with a vaccine," Topol says. "They're going to raise neutralizing antibodies in people over weeks and they will help to some extent, but we don't know how much, because they're not directed to Delta."

Rall, who recently wrote for the Wall Street Journal about his experience getting a booster shot, says he wasn't worried about the potential risks at all.

"If you told me this vaccine would kill me in 10 years, I would go and take it right now because it's that or this horrible Delta variant going around, and I don't think I would survive that," he said.

And it wasn't hard for him to get a booster -- Rall says the pharmacy didn't ask him a single question, nor did it look up his immunization records.

When asked how CVS determines whether someone who comes to one of the pharmacies or MinuteClinics to get a Covid-19 vaccine hasn't been vaccinated already, a spokesperson for the company said that "patients who have been fully vaccinated at a CVS Pharmacy, or who inform us that they were fully vaccinated by another provider, will not receive another vaccine under the current CDC guidelines. In certain cases, pharmacists may also be able to check a patient's vaccination status with a state's vaccine registry."

CVS wouldn't have been able to figure out Rall had already been fully vaccinated in New Jersey because immunization registries are managed by the state and he got his third shot in New York.

Rebecca Coyle, executive director of the American Immunization Registry Association, said states are currently backlogged with larger-than-normal amounts of immunization information -- and it's up to states to make agreements to share immunization data with each other.

"Not to point out a loophole, but we do not have good data exchange across state lines at this point," she said.

Booster plans in progress

While some individuals are seeking out boosters, some places are making plans to boost vaccines for certain people.

The city of San Francisco is accommodating people who received the one-shot Johnson & Johnson coronavirus vaccine and would like to receive a supplemental dose of either the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines. Officials in the city's Department of Public Health said last week that the department is making an "accommodation" for those who have consulted with a physician, and it is not recommending extra doses or a policy change.

In an email to CNN, Dr. Peter Hotez, dean of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine, said he believes the US will move to third mRNA and possibly second J&J shots relatively soon for people having immunosuppressive therapy, especially solid organ transplant recipients, and the next question will be what other immunocompromised conditions will also be included. After, the next question will be if the US wants to add boosters for people over age 60 -- as Israel has just announced it plans to do.

Germany, the United Kingdom and France also announced booster programs for their most vulnerable populations, even though the World Health Organization last week called for a moratorium on booster shots through at least September until vaccines can be distributed more equitably worldwide.

That's a great irony to Rall, who says that he wouldn't have considered seeking out a third shot if it weren't clear that a lot are going unused by vaccine hesitant populations, particularly in the South.

"But even locally here in New York when I talked to local physicians and pharmacists, they all have lots of unused vaccines, and I thought, well this is ridiculous."

Rall says since sharing his experience with others he's heard from physicians that say they have quietly used vaccine doses as boosters that were set to expire on themselves and for their family members, and that they've been doing so for months. "There's an underground there, there's a lot of doctors who have access to these doses, and they're using them rather than throwing them away."

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

Those close to Rall weren't all that surprised by his decision to get a booster shot. "Friends kind of know that I'm an independent thinker, I kind of don't really care about or have much respect for sort of one's 'official conclusions' coming from policymakers because. I know that the policymakers are trying to save as many people as possible, as low cost as possible. That's their job."

"I, first and foremost, care about me, so I have a different calculus."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) The kids are not all right, a new analysis suggests.

During the Covid-19 pandemic, depression and anxiety in youth doubled compared to pre-pandemic levels, according to the research. One in 4 adolescents globally are "experiencing clinically elevated depression symptoms, while 1 in 5 youth are experiencing clinically elevated anxiety symptoms."

"Results from this analysis suggest that the pandemic has likely instigated a global mental health crisis in youth," said study author Sheri Madigan, an associate professor of clinical psychology and Canada research chair in determinants of child development at the University of Calgary.

As the months went by, these negative impacts on youth only got worse, the study found. This surprised Madigan, who said she thought "they would be more resilient and malleable to the challenges of the pandemic" as it persisted.

This cumulative toll could be due to the persistent social isolation, missed milestones, family financial problems and extended school disruptions, according to the analysis. Further studies following children for a longer period of time should be conducted, the study noted, to monitor the ongoing effects.

The meta-analysis, published Monday in JAMA Pediatrics, reviewed 29 studies with a total of more than 80,000 participants globally, ranging from age 4 to 17 with a mean age of 13. The included studies, which used empirical clinical data on depression and anxiety, were conducted in East Asia, Europe, North America, the Middle East, and Central and South America.

'Extraordinary disruption and stress'

Youth mental health had already been declining prior to the pandemic. More than 1 in 3 high school students reported having persistent feelings of sadness or hopelessness in 2019, a 40% increase from 2009, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The pandemic created conditions that might have exacerbated these negative feelings. With school closures and remote learning, children experienced the loss of peer interactions, greater social isolation, and less interaction with other supportive adults like teachers and coaches. These changes may have contributed to increased symptoms of depression, such as feelings of sadness, loss of interest in activities, and disruption to appetite and sleep, according to the study.

Additionally, the general uncertainty and disruptions of daily routines caused by the pandemic likely increased symptoms of generalized anxiety in youth, including fear, uncontrollable worry and hyperarousal, the study noted. Worry for the health of family and friends as Covid-19 spread also likely contributed to children's heightened anxiety, according to the research.

"Children and youth have experienced extraordinary disruption and stress during the pandemic, and it's taken a toll on their mental health," Madigan said. "When mental health problems persist and aren't properly addressed, they can have lasting consequences."

The study's findings are consistent with what Jenna Glover, a child clinical psychologist and director of psychology training at Children's Hospital Colorado, said she is seeing on the ground. She was not involved in the study.

"The disruption to their routines and consistency is very damaging for a child's mental health," Glover said. "They thrive on predictability, which has been absent for over a year."

The chronic stress and instability children are experiencing can lead to feelings of hopelessness, which is one of the top predictors of suicide ideation, she added.

In addition to the general increase in youth mental illness, the study also found that older children were impacted more severely than younger ones, possibly due to puberty and hormonal changes on top of the loss of social interaction.

Girls showed greater prevalence of depression and anxiety, too, which, according to the study, is in line with research prior to the pandemic. While this is a well-known phenomenon, it often gets glossed over in conversations about mental health, Glover said.

"This is not good for youth, but it is especially bad for females," she said. "Thinking about real targeted interventions and screenings based on knowing those things I think is an important takeaway from this study."

How to move forward

Researchers should continue to monitor the youth mental health situation as the pandemic continues and examine ways to address this crisis, Madigan said.

"This is a critical time. When we talk about children and youth being the future of our societies, this couldn't be more real or truthful," Madigan said. "If youth grow through this pandemic with increasing levels of stress and mental health challenges, society could be in for some real challenges as youth age into adulthood."

Keeping regular routines is integral to young people's well-being, emphasized Brae Anne McArthur, a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of Calgary and a clinical child psychologist who was also involved in the study.

"Knowing that children and youth thrive in the context of clear routines, it is important that children and youth remain in school and extracurricular activities," McArthur said.

That's why schools should be kept open as much as safely possible, Madigan said.

"Schools can be a refuge for many youths, but also, up to 80% of youth rely on school-based services and resources to address their mental health needs," she said. "If schools are closed, many youths who need help may feel they have nowhere to turn to get it, which could have drastic consequences."

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

Glover echoed that schools should be kept open to the extent possible. Parents also can take action by checking in with their kids and monitoring their sleeping and eating habits as well as their mood, she said.

McArthur said although the situation is dire, we still have time to turn it around.

"It (the study) does not suggest that we cannot recover from this mental health crisis," she said. "If we can come together as parents, researchers, clinicians and policy-makers to develop clear and actionable ways to move forward to support child and youth mental health, we can re-write this story in another year's time."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) It was far from a quiet Monday for infectious disease specialist Dr. Adriana Cadilla who had to meet with patients, many of them just out of the hospital after being treated for Covid-19 at Nemours Children's Hospital in Orlando.

"Clinics were packed," Cadilla said. Her hospital has seen a significant increase in the number of children with Covid-19. They're also managing an earlier than usual surge in other respiratory illnesses. Kids aren't sicker with Covid-19, necessarily, there are just more of them, Cadilla said.

"We know how to treat a lot of these things, including Covid," Cadilla said. "But this is a public health crisis because when you overload the system, we can't do a lot of things well."

It's frustrating, she said, because while they can provide supportive care for children, treatments like monoclonal antibodies aren't authorized for children under the age of 12, and neither are vaccines.

What's even more frustrating to her is that some families of her patients tell her that they won't get vaccinated, or they won't get everyone vaccinated until after their child has been hospitalized.

"I saw one today who got the sibling vaccinated who was eligible, but it's just a hard way to learn that vaccines work by having to see a loved one hospitalized," Cadilla said. These hospital admissions, she said, are totally preventable.

With school starting, Cadilla is concerned if more people don't get vaccinated, her hospital will get a lot busier.

"We are trying to prepare for the unimaginable," Cadilla said.

Across the country, Covid-19 cases among children have been on the rise since early July after months of decline. Almost 94,000 cases among children were added in the past week, the American Academy of Pediatrics said in what the group described as a "continuing substantial increase."

The vast majority of cases don't end up in the hospital. Generally, the cumulative hospitalization rate for children with Covid-19 has remained steady at around 1% since December, according to the AAP, meaning hospitalization is still uncommon compared to the number of adults who have been hospitalized. Nearly 189,000 adults have been hospitalized since the start of the pandemic, according to the CDC

Yet, as of Saturday, the number of children who were hospitalized increased week-over-week, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Specifically, there was an average of 203 children with Covid-19 admitted to US hospitals every day over the past week, CDC data shows . That's a more than 21% increase from the previous week in daily new hospitalizations among Covid-19 patients ages 0 to 17.

"I think most areas, we are nearing or exceeding pediatric intensive care capacity," said Mark Wietecha, the CEO of the Children's Hospital Association , an association that represents more than 220 children's hospitals. Hot spots for child cases are pretty much everywhere the adult Covid-19 hotspots are, he said.

Wietecha said hospitals are also stretched thin managing other diseases, including respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) cases, which he said this year are much higher and much more "wicked." He said these hospitals have also been managing severe spikes in pediatric behavioral health or mental health cases throughout the pandemic. That will likely increase too, as it usually does, when school starts back up.

"It's been quite a few things adding up that have added all this pressure on beds," Wietcha said. "We don't have a great national surge capacity in pediatrics."

"It's a big problem and an immediate one."

As of Monday, there have also been at least 542 pediatric deaths related to Covid-19, according to the CDC. Deaths among children are still considered rare, and seven states in the US have had no reported child deaths. While that might not sound like a lot, given the more than 614,000 deaths in the US overall, the death of a child from any disease is typically incredibly rare.

When asked if children really should get vaccines, CDC director Dr. Rochelle Walensky put these deaths in perspective in a hearing for the US Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions at the end of July.

"One thing just I want to note with the children is: I think we fall into this flawed thinking of saying that only 400 of these 600,000 deaths from COVID-19 have been in children. Children are not supposed to die, so 400 is a huge amount," Walensky said.

'Things are moving a little bit too quickly'

Justin Senior, the CEO of Safety Net Hospital Alliance of Florida, which represents several children's hospitals in Florida, said they are seeing about a 1 to 2% overall hospitalization among pediatric patients and that's been pretty consistent throughout the pandemic. Nicklaus Children's Hospital in Miami has 24 patients, with seven in the ICU, for a total of 39 patients. At Johns Hopkins All Children's in the Tampa Bay area there are 15 children in the ICU.

"These recent surges are a really dark cloud, just very, very bad," said Senior. "But at the same time there are a couple of silver linings and one is that this virus -- knock on wood -- still does not seem to impact children anywhere near to the extent that it impacts adults and that's a good thing."

In the Miami area, Dr. Aileen Marty, an infectious disease expert at Florida International University said the children's hospitals there have been overwhelmed.

"Our pediatricians, the nursing, the staff are exhausted. And the children are suffering," Marty said. "It is absolutely devastating ... We've never seen numbers like this before."

Experts say it's still not clear if the Delta variant is causing more severe disease with kids, though it is more transmissible.

Dr. Amy Edwards, an infectious disease specialist at UH Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital in Cleveland, said it's clear from the data that Covid-19 is now sending more children to the hospital.

What's unclear, she said, is whether that's because more kids are catching the virus, or the virus is somehow making the kids who do catch it more ill than before, requiring treatment at a hospital.

"Things are moving a little bit too quickly, and we know perfectly well that, especially with children, we're not testing enough to really understand exactly what's going on," she said.

Edwards said her hospital is not inundated yet, but she expects they'll see more cases in a few weeks. Children's National Hospital in Washington, D.C. may be on the same trajectory. It has seen a slight increase in children testing positive for Covid-19, but said this increase has not yet impacted much the number of hospital admissions. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago is also watching the cases closely.

"We expect Covid-19 activity to increase over the next several weeks," said Dr. Larry Kociolek, the associate medical director of infection prevention and control at Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago.

Wietecha, with the Children's Hospital Association, said people need to be careful in their thinking that children have escaped Covid-19.

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

"I think the idea that kids are pretty much healthy and fine is a unicorn," Wietecha said.

Kids are not immortal, he said, and it should be very rare that a child would ever need to go to the hospital. The fact that even a few hundred have, is too many.

"I think a lot of parents view that their kids are kind of safe and unfortunately, we're finding out otherwise," Wietecha said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) Pfizer's Covid-19 vaccine is currently only authorized for emergency use in the United States, but its full approval by the US Food and Drug Administration could happen within weeks .

The ramifications could alter the course of the pandemic in several ways.

First, full approval of a Covid-19 vaccine could persuade more people to get vaccinated.

More than 30% of the eligible population in the United States still hasn't gotten a vaccine.

To qualify for emergency use authorization, Covid-19 vaccine makers submitted about three months of clinical trial data. This included at least 2 months of safety data on fully vaccinated participants, since most vaccine side effects occur 2-3 months after the vaccination.

For some Americans, that hasn't been enough data to convince them to get the shot.

Full approval of a Covid-19 vaccine requires much more data, including safety and efficacy data generated in the real-world, outside of a clinical trial. The CDC has been tracking real-world data on the vaccines and more than 165 million people in the US are now vaccinated against the virus.

The extra data may help convince more people that the vaccines are not dangerous.

"For some, getting a full FDA approval will help allay that fear. Even if it's just a relatively small number of people. Every little bit helps against this virus," Dr. David Dowdy , an associate professor in the division of infectious disease epidemiology at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, said.

Three in ten unvaccinated adults said they would be more likely to get vaccinated if one of the vaccines moves to full approval, according to a survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation

However, Kaiser cautioned that some people it surveyed were confused about the shots. Two-thirds thought the vaccines already had full approval or they were unsure about it. This finding may just mean that full approval "is a proxy for general safety concerns."

Dr. Michael Wolf , the associate vice chair for Research, Department of Medicine at Northwestern Feinberg School of Medicine expects approval would get about 5-10% more individuals worried about safety to get vaccinated.

The FDA is currently "working around the clock" on approval of the Covid-19 vaccine, according to Dr. Paul Offit, a prominent member of the FDA's vaccine advisory committee and director of the Vaccine Education Center at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

"I think from the standpoint of the public, it really shouldn't matter," Offit said. "It's been given to half of the American population . We have more than 300 million doses out there. This is far from experimental. We have a tremendous safety and efficacy portfolio on these vaccines -- I mean, it's more than most licensed products that are out there now."

And yet he recognized that, at least for some, it does matter. He said the FDA knows that, too.

"I think they realize that at least there's a psychological issue with how these vaccines are viewed, in terms of whether they're a licensed product or just approved through EUA," Offit said.

'Carrots' and 'sticks' will encourage vaccination

Full approval of a Covid-19 vaccine could also make workplace mandates easier. Many unvaccinated people would face a financial reason to get one; they'll need it to keep their jobs.

"FDA approval alone is not going to make many individuals run out and get it now, but you're going to start seeing health systems and employers feel more emboldened to require them," Wolf said. "There's precedent for mandatory vaccinations and immunizations."

Workplaces already have the legal authority to mandate the Covid-19 vaccine, according to the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. But full approval could give any legal challenge less potency.

"FDA approval is the gold standard. The world's regulators look to our FDA as the beacon when it comes to such issues as this," George Karavetsos , a legal expert who had worked at the FDA and now provides strategic advice to FDA regulated companies as an attorney at Buchanan Ingersoll Rooney, said. "I can assure you, they're going to make sure they got this right."

Erik Nisbet , the Owen L. Coon endowed professor of policy analysis and communication and director of the Center for Communication & Public Policy in the School of Communication at Northwestern University, agreed.

"If you ever want to get beyond 70% threshold of people who have gotten a vaccination so far, you need to have carrots and you have to have sticks," Nisbet said. "The only way to do that is the mandate. Authorization takes out one of the impediments to more widespread mandates."

A little political cover

Full approval may also provide political cover to get more people vaccinated. On Wednesday, Louisiana's Governor John Bel Edwards said he would not consider requiring the vaccine for state employees "unless and until the FDA grants full licensure to one of more of the Covid vaccines." The state has the highest per capita number of cases of any state and one of the lowest vaccination rates.

San Francisco announced that it would require all city employees to be vaccinated no later than 10 weeks after FDA full approval.

Full approval may even be able to override laws like the one in Ohio that bans vaccine mandates under emergency use authorization, according to Nisbet.

"Approval kicks that out of the way," he said.

A potential booster bonus?

Full approval may also mean that the fully vaccinated could get an additional vaccine, even before boosters are approved.

"Approval will make it easier for physicians to give the vaccine off label," Dowdy explained. "If people can convince their doctor they need one."

Many scientists hope people won't do that. While a number of clinical trials are underway, boosters are not yet recommended by the FDA and the CDC.

Trials have shown immunocompromised people may not respond as well to the vaccines and may need a booster. There is an effort to make boosters for that population available "very soon," Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institutes for Allergies and Infectious Diseases, said on Tuesday.

"Right now, what we really want to do is get the patient population here in the US to at least get one shot and not get ahead of the data," said Melissa Tice , program director of regulatory affairs and assistant professor of clinical research and leadership at George Washington University School of Medicine & Health Sciences. "Hopefully, approval will at least get more people to get their first dose."

What does approval mean for kids?

It remains unclear how having a fully licensed coronavirus vaccine may impact the timeline of authorizing or approving the coronavirus vaccines for children younger than 12 -- if at all, Offit said.

The Pfizer/BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine is currently authorized for ages 12 and older, whereas the Moderna and Johnson & Johnson vaccines are authorized only for adults 18 and older.

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

"Does getting full approval for an adult vaccine, does that matter in terms of speeding up the process for approval for the childhood vaccines? I think the answer to that question is probably no," Offit told CNN on Friday.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) As the coronavirus pandemic continues, infections caused by the Lambda variant have been emerging in the United States, including in Texas, where Houston Methodist Hospital last month reported its first case.

Genomic sequencing has identified 1,060 cases of Covid-19 caused by the Lambda variant in the United States so far, according to the independent data-sharing initiative GISAID . While that number is a far cry from the surge in cases caused by the Delta variant -- representing about 83% of new cases in the US -- infectious disease experts have said that Lambda is a variant they are watching closely.

The Lambda variant was first identified in Peru in December. The World Health Organization designates Delta as a "variant of concern." Lambda is designated a degree lower as a "variant of interest."

"I think any time a variant is identified and demonstrates the capacity to rapidly spread in a population, you have to be concerned," Dr. Gregory Poland, a professor of medicine and director of the Vaccine Research Group at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, told CNN on Friday.

"There are variants arising every day -- if a variant can be defined as new mutations," he said. "The question is, do those mutations give the virus some sort of advantage, which of course is to human disadvantage? The answer in Lambda is yes."

What is known about Lambda

There is a lot left to learn about Lambda.

The variant is not nearly as worrisome as the Delta variant in the US, which has been driving a rise in cases nationwide, but early studies suggest that it has mutations that make it more transmissible than the original strain of the coronavirus.

"Lambda has mutations that are concerning but this variant remains quite rare in the US despite being around for several months," Dr. Preeti Malani, chief health officer in the division of infectious diseases at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, wrote in an email on Friday.

"It's difficult to know for certain how transmissible Lambda is and how well vaccines work. So far, it seems that Lambda is more transmissible than the original SARS-CoV-2 virus," which is similar to Delta and other variants, wrote Malani, an expert with the Infectious Diseases Society of America. SARS-CoV-2 is the name of the coronavirus that causes Covid-19.

"Thankfully studies suggest that the currently available vaccines remain protective. We have learned during the pandemic that things can change quickly, so controlling spread of COVID-19 in general will help manage Lambda," Malani wrote. "As long as there is uncontrolled spread of SARS-CoV-2, we will see more variants in the future. The only way out is widespread vaccination to control spread and prevent further mutation of SARS-CoV-2. It's a race between getting enough of the world vaccinated and the development of new variants that are less responsive to counter measures."

So far, data remain split on how well vaccines protect against the Lambda variant, and scientists say they need to study this more.

In July, researchers wrote in a lab study that they found some evidence that people who got the single-dose Johnson & Johnson Covid-19 vaccine might benefit from a booster dose to better protect them from new variants of the coronavirus, including the Lambda variant. The study was done in the lab and does not reflect real-world effects of the vaccine -- and it's published online as a preprint to the server biorxiv.org, meaning it was not subject to careful peer review.

Nathaniel Landau of the New York University Grossman School of Medicine and colleagues said their tests of blood taken from vaccinated volunteers shows that at least some of the newly emerging variants may evade the protection offered by a single dose of Johnson & Johnson's Janssen vaccine. A boost of a second dose of J&J vaccine, or even with Moderna's or Pfizer's, might help, the researchers reported.

In the study, the variants Beta, Delta, Delta plus and Lambda showed only "modest" resistance against antibodies elicited by the Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna coronavirus vaccines, suggesting the vaccines still work.

separate pre-print paper , posted last week to the online server biorxiv.org, found in lab experiments that three mutations -- called the RSYLTPGD246-253N, 260 L452Q and F490S -- found in the spike protein of the Lambda variant may confer resistance to immunity induced by vaccines, but more research is needed. The paper, authored by scientists in Japan, has not been published yet in a peer-reviewed journal.

"Two additional mutations, T76I and L452Q, help make Lambda highly infectious. Currently, the Lambda variant has been flagged as a 'Variant of Interest' by the WHO. We do not know yet whether this variant is more concerning than the Delta variant," pharmacist and epidemiologists Dr. Ravina Kullar , who is an expert with the Infectious Diseases Society of America, wrote in an email on Friday.

"There needs to be extensive genomic surveillance studies that are done to assess how the vaccines' efficacy is affected by the Lambda variant," Kullar wrote. Until Covid-19 cases overall decrease, "the best way to prevent the emergence of more variants is getting fully vaccinated, not traveling internationally, and following strict infection prevention measures including wearing a face mask, physically distancing from others, and not attending large social gatherings."

A game of 'Russian roulette'

Vaccines are vital to counter new coronavirus variants, such as Lambda, which might remain rare in the US but is associated with "substantive rates of community transmission in multiple" countries in the region, according to the WHO

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

Overall, Poland, the Mayo Clinic professor, warned that the more people don't wear masks and remain unvaccinated, the more likely additional variants will emerge in the future -- including one that might evade vaccines completely. Because as the coronavirus continues to jump from person to person, with each new infection, it changes a little bit -- just like any virus does -- and those changes or mutations could either be benign, or make it more easily transmissible and dangerous.

Poland called it playing "Russian roulette" to allow a virus to spread freely with no mitigations, such as wearing masks or getting vaccinated.

"We will continue to develop more and more variants, and eventually, one or more of these variants will learn how to evade vaccine-induced immunity," Poland said. "And if that's true, we will start all over again."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) Vaccine advisers to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention voted unanimously on Friday to recommend an extra dose of Covid-19 vaccine for some immunocompromised people, and the CDC director signed off on the recommendation almost immediately.

The US Food and Drug Administration gave emergency use authorization Thursday night for a third dose in certain patients who are likely to have had a poor immune response to two doses of either Pfizer's or Moderna's vaccine. There's not enough data to discuss the possibility for an extra dose of Johnson & Johnson's one-shot Covid-19 vaccine, the FDA said.

That brought the question to the CDC and its Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices to decide whether to recommend that people actually get these extra doses.

"Yes, I agree ...that the benefits are tremendous and the potential negative impacts are minimal and so I agree that we should recommend," ACIP member Dr. Katherine Poehling, a professor of pediatrics and epidemiology at Wake Forest School of Medicine, said during the meeting.

CDC Dr. Rochelle Walensky quickly endorsed the vote, which means people can begin getting third doses right away.

Read More
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) Covid-19 hospitalizations in the United States have been growing for more than a month, and at the current pace -- more than 2,500 patients added each day over the past week, according to data from the US Department of Health and Human Services -- the US will surpass January's record high in about a month.

Florida and Louisiana are now reporting a record number of Covid-19 hospital admissions, and other states are close. In Mississippi and Arkansas, daily admissions are at more than 87% of their earlier peak, and in Oregon, Alabama and Washington, daily admissions are at more than 75% of their peak.

But patients hospitalized with Covid-19 this summer tend to be younger than in earlier surges. And with vaccines widely available, they're mostly preventable, too.

Mercy Hospital in Joplin, Missouri, has surpassed its record number of Covid-19 patients more than once in the past two weeks, according to hospital president Jeremy Drinkwitz.

Things are very different from last time, he says.

"As far as the very distinct differences -- the age of patients for us," Drinkwitz told CNN. The hospital recently had three patients between 30 and 40, multiple patients in their 40s and some in their 50s and 60s on ventilators, he said.

"In November, when we had our first big spike, we didn't," Drinkwitz said. "We didn't have that younger population; it was more of the elderly population."

Now, he said, there are fewer elderly patients. "We're just not seeing that many. We have a few, but it's not anywhere close to the younger population," Drinkwitz said.

Seniors still have the highest per capita rate of hospitalizations, but the gap is smaller than it's been.

The recent hospitalization rate among seniors age 70 and older is about a quarter of what it was in January, according to data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. But hospitalization rates among younger adults are about as high as they were in January.

In fact, the hospitalization rate among adults age 30 to 39 is the highest it's ever been, CDC data shows.

Children also account for a larger share of hospitalizations now than they did in January, as hospitalization rates among those under the age of 18 hover right around the record high.

In a few states -- including Georgia, Tennessee, South Carolina and Louisiana -- the number of children hospitalized with Covid-19 more than doubled over the past week, federal data shows.

But with every 12 and older eligible to be vaccinated against Covid-19, experts have different concerns about this new wave of hospitalizations.

Early in the pandemic, there weren't enough tools to care for patients and doctors didn't know if what they were doing for their patients was the right thing, Dr. O'Neil Pyke, chief medical officer of Jackson North Medical Center, Jackson Health System in Florida, told CNN. As a critical care and internal medicine doctor, he cared for patients himself during the early stages of the pandemic, from March to October of last year.

"Now, my biggest concern is that we have a very, very good tool, right, we have the vaccine, and the vaccine has been proven now to be remarkably efficacious as it pertains to preventing severe illness and death," he said. "It doesn't necessarily prevent getting the virus, but it certainly does prevent severe illness requiring hospitalization and death. And the concern is that the community still has that hesitancy."

While Pyke said he understands this hesitancy to a degree, the best way to look at it is as though the vaccine is a dam.

"We have this deluge of flooding going on, and what we're doing in terms of trying with the medicines that we're trying over the months is basically scooping out cups of water from this flood," he said. "But the vaccine is like a dam, and the vaccine can do so much more in preventing the flooding that we're seeing right now. And that's the very essence of it."

Florida has the highest hospitalization rate in the country, according to the latest data from HHS. More than 65 people are hospitalized with Covid-19 for every 100,000 people in Florida, about one out of every 1,500 state residents. That's more than triple the national rate.

Every state with a higher than average hospitalization rate has a lower than average vaccination rate, including Florida, according to a CNN analysis of data from the CDC and HHS.

And it's taking a toll on a health care system that has been operating at full strength for a year and a half, Pyke says.

"We thought we turned the corner a bit on this, and here we are going back up," he said. "Obviously whatever we are feeling pales in comparison to what patients are feeling and their families, but it's overwhelming to the staff to be caring for patients with the same disease we thought we just, we might be seeing the end of."

In Arkansas, the Covid-19 hospitalization rate is more than double the national rate and the fifth highest in the country. Hospitalization rates among children are higher than they've ever been in the state. But so, too, are hospitalization rates among young adults under 30, who have been eligible to be vaccinated for months.

Dr. Stephen Mette, CEO of UAMS Health in Arkansas, said that low vaccination rate is the "first and foremost" contributing factor to the latest increase in hospitalizations.

Like Mercy Hospital in Joplin, UAMS has recently surpassed its record high number of hospitalizations in the pandemic. The majority of patients hospitalized with Covid at UAMS are either not vaccinated at all or not fully vaccinated, Mette said. And vaccinated patients have, so far, had a significant underlying medical condition.

"We knew we would have another wave, but we were maybe lulled into that false sense of security that we would have a large enough number of Americans, or Arkansans, vaccinated so that we would not have a very high wave," Mette said. "So, we were prepared, but not for this degree of the manifestation of this wave."

Other major contributing factors, Mette said, include different characteristics of the Delta variant, the relaxation of public health measures and the public's general pandemic fatigue.

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

Vaccination rates in the US have ticked up over recent weeks, a trend that experts say needs to continue to curb the current surge of Covid-19 cases and hospitalizations.

"We love our community, we love our neighbors and our friends here and our community, and we're here to serve them, and because of that we're fighting like hell to save their lives. Thirty year olds and 40 year olds should have a chance to live a full life and so we're trying to do everything we can to help them after they have gotten this virus," Drinkwitz said.

But the medical professionals need the help of the community.

"I'm asking people actually to open their eyes and realize what's happening. That there are hospitals and healthcare is being challenged, there's capacity issues in communities, and that we have to do something," Drinkwitz said. "We need help on the other side. We need people to be vaccinated. And if they just can't get their minds wrapped around that, then please wear a mask, social distance, those things we know to do."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) Moderna's Covid-19 vaccine protects people for at least six months and likely longer -- even against new variants, researchers reported Thursday.

Protection against the Delta variant, now dominant across the US, barely waned, the National Institutes of Health-led team found. The team will continue to look for evidence of protection beyond six months.

"High levels of binding antibodies recognizing all tested variants, including B.1.351 (Beta) and B.1.617.2 (Delta), were maintained in all subjects over this time period," immunologist Nicole Doria-Rose and colleagues at the NIH's National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases wrote in their report, published in the journal Science.

They tested blood from 24 fully vaccinated volunteers at several time points -- four weeks after the first dose of the Moderna vaccine, and then at three points after they were considered fully vaccinated with two doses -- up to six months out.

"At the peak of response to the second vaccine dose, all individuals had responses to all variants," the team wrote. Two weeks after the second dose of Moderna's vaccine, all the blood samples neutralized all of the variants, they found.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) As coronavirus case numbers spike, the US has seen a 1,200% increase in orders for monoclonal antibody treatments in the past month, the US Health and Human Services Department told CNN Thursday. About 75% of the orders are coming from regions of the US that have low vaccination rates.

HHS said it has also seen a recent increase in the number of doctors using the treatments, also known as mAbs. Earlier in the year, the federal government had sent thousands of doses to states, but many sat on the shelf due to the complicated logistics of how doctors administer the treatments.

HHS said as of August 6, the latest date they have figures for, nearly half of the distributed supply has been used. The treatments have been used at new sites and at locations that were until recently inactive.

"At this time, there is plenty of product available for existing and new sites," a spokesperson for HHS told CNN. "They are able to order product as needed and we are encouraging sites to order as much as they think they'll need, based on two-week utilization."

Between July 1st and August 5th, more than 203,000 patient courses have been ordered nationally. States in Region 4, which includes Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Tennessee, North Carolina and South Carolina, have ordered nearly 81,000 patient courses. States in Region 6, which includes Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma, and New Mexico, ordered almost 77,000.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) As schools start classes across the United States, public health experts warn that the politics around masks could hinder the nation's fight against Covid-19.

But the real-life evidence about masks leaves little doubt that they work.

In some places where schools have been open for a while now, such as Georgia and Hawaii , public health experts notice what happens when schools follow the science: classes go on without disruption as long staff and students wear masks.

But when staff and students do not wear masks, Covid-19 can spread, forcing people to stay home to quarantine and classes returning to virtual learning.

In just this week schools have closed, at least temporarily, in Georgia, Indiana and Mississippi due to cluster outbreaks among students and staff.

Atlanta, fifth graders were sent home for virtual learning due to high numbers of Covid-19 cases, according to a school district email sent to parents and obtained by CNN. Masks are optional for students and staff at the school, On Wednesday, in an elementary school in Cobb County in the suburbs ofAtlanta, fifth graders were sent home for virtual learning due to high numbers of Covid-19 cases, according to a school district email sent to parents and obtained by CNN. Masks are optional for students and staff at the school, according to the district's website , but there is social distancing in classrooms when possible.

"This morning, based on our district protocols and at the guidance of the Department of Public Health in coordination with district leaders, we've had to make the difficult decision to have our 5th-grade classes move to virtual learning due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and high positive case numbers," the email from East Side Elementary reads.

Students will be in virtual learning until Friday, August 20, and return to their classrooms the following Monday.

The Glascock County Consolidated School in Gibson, Georgia is also in virtual classes until at least August 20. Within the first week of school nine students and four staff members tested positive and 99 students and 11 staff had to quarantine.

In Indiana, the Scott County School District 1 told parents on Tuesday that "due to the high rate of positive cases and extremely high rate of student in quarantine" it would switch to virtual learning starting Wednesday.

Several schools in Lamar County, Mississippi switched to virtual learning before the school board voted to maintain a hybrid teaching model. During a board meeting on Monday, Superintendent Steven Hampton said while he believes face-to-face learning is best, a hybrid model would help avoid having all of the schools go virtual.

Politics, but no masks, in the classroom

The National Education Association, the largest teachers' union in the United States, has been watching the reopening of schools closely.

"In places where the schools have highly communicative, collaborative relationships with educators and parents and community members, and they have an ongoing almost constant system of communication about the factors around their safety plans and reopening, things are going better," Kim Anderson, executive director of the National Education Association, told CNN.

"In places where they're not communicating well and in places where politicians are trying to strip the ability of communities to try to protect themselves, things are not going well."

Implementing mask requirements in schools has become a politicized topic of debate in some states across the country. As of last week, at least seven states -- Arkansas, Arizona, Iowa, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Texas, and Utah -- prohibit districts from requiring masks in schools.

But there have been some efforts to fight back.

In Arkansas , a county circuit judge has temporarily blocked the enforcement of the state's law banning mask mandates in schools, in response to lawsuits filed by a school district and parents. In Texas , Gov. Greg Abbott prohibits mask mandates, but two judges there have issued restraining orders temporarily blocking the enforcement of Abbott's order.

JUST WATCHED 'It terrifies me': Mother of student sues DeSantis over mask rules Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH 'It terrifies me': Mother of student sues DeSantis over mask rules 01:37

Public health officials have been urging schools and parents to keep politics out of the classroom. Dr. Francis Collins, director of the US National Institutes of Health, implored parents on Sunday to see masks for what they really are.

"This is not a political statement or invasion of your liberties. This is a life-saving medical device, and asking kids to wear a mask is uncomfortable, but kids are pretty resilient," Collins told ABC's George Stephanopoulos on This Week

"If we don't have masks in schools, this virus will spread more widely. It will probably result in outbreaks in schools and kids will have to go back to remote learning, which is the one thing we really want to prevent," Collins said.

Follow the science, end up in the classroom

Dr. Rochelle Walensky, director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said last week during a town hall event in Boston that officials are following every jurisdiction and tracking outbreaks that occur in camps and schools.

"The places that are having a problem, the places that are having disease that is transmitted in the schools, are the places that are not taking prevention strategies -- the places that aren't masking," Walensky said. "The places where you see kids in the hospital, the places where you see footage of kids in the hospital, are all places that are not taking mitigation strategies to keep our children safe."

'Like adding gasoline to an already lit fire'

Dr. Andrew Pavia, chief of the division of pediatric infectious diseases at the University of Utah and an expert with the Infectious Diseases Society of America, told CNN it's still not possible right now to make predictions about how the school year will turn out.

"We expect that for school systems that are not using universal masking and are in communities with high levels of transmission can anticipate spread in schools. It may take several weeks to judge to full impact," Pavia wrote in an email to CNN.

"Predictions are challenging, but we expect that school districts that employ layered strategies as recommended by the CDC will have a relatively successful school year."

Dr. Bayo Curry-Winchell, regional medical director and family physician at Carbon Health in Reno, Nevada, anticipates that more school districts will require masking, Covid-19 testing and other mitigation efforts in the next month or so.

"The Dallas and Austin Independent School Districts are even defying Texas Governor Greg Abbott's mask mandate ban and requiring all students, staff and visitors to wear masks," she said. "In regions where state or city officials aren't implementing mask mandates, school districts will need to take the lead."

Experts are calling for these prevention measures now in order to avoid more rises in Covid-19 cases and hospitalizations among children later.

As of Tuesday, an average of 203 children with Covid-19 were admitted to US hospitals every day over the past week, CDC data shows . That's a more than 21% increase from the previous week in daily new hospitalizations among Covid-19 patients up to age 17.

In late July, an internal CDC document noted that the Delta coronavirus variant surging across the United States appears to cause more severe illness and can spread as easily as chickenpox -- detailing that one person infected with the Delta variant could spread the virus to five to eight other people on average. With chickenpox, each infected person, on average, can infect eight or nine others.

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team.

Schools that haven't opened yet, but are preparing to in the coming weeks, should realize children are at risk of getting sick, Dr. Purvi Parikh an allergist and immunologist at NYU Langone Health in New York and a spokesperson for the Allergy and Asthma Network , told CNN.

"Schools should be very concerned as children are not only getting infected but are also sick enough to fill up children's hospitals. Further, many children still aren't vaccinated," Parikh wrote, adding that she would encourage vaccinations for all who are eligible and recommend masking and physical distancing in classrooms.

"We will see more cases and outbreaks. Even before the pandemic we saw an increase in viral infections and hospitalizations when schools reopened due to flu, RSV, and other viruses. Now with a highly contagious variant in a pandemic it is like adding gasoline to an already lit fire," Parikh wrote. "Children need in person learning, let's help them get it safely."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@