Written by Oscar Holland, CNN

Homesteads dotting a pastoral landscape, families living by lamplight and men in straw hats riding horse-drawn carriages -- the scenes in Jake Michaels' photographs could easily depict bygone times in the American Midwest. But not only do his pictures hail from the digital age, they were taken hundreds of miles away in Belize.

The tiny Central American country is home to around 12,000 of the world's most conservative Mennonites, a group of Christians that live in closed communities and shun modern technology including, in some cases, electricity. Dating back to 16th-century Europe, the Protestant sect's members have since moved around the world in search of isolated farmland, and to escape persecution or attempts to integrate them into wider society.

Belize's colonies date back to the late 1950s, when a group of over 3,000 Canadian Mennonites immigrated there from Mexico. Their arrival followed an agreement with the Belizean government, which offered them land, religious freedom and exemption from certain taxes (and, as committed pacifists, from military service).

In return, the country has enjoyed the fruits of their agriculture. Today, Mennonites dominate Belize's domestic poultry and dairy markets, despite representing less 4% of the population.

A husband and wife stand outside their home, with only the lush vegetation hinting at the photo's surprising location: Belize. "Seventy-five percent of the images could be presented in a way where you would never know it's the tropics," said photographer Jake Michaels. Credit: Jake Michaels/Courtesy Setanta Books

Hoping to document their traditional way of life, Michaels visited three Mennonite colonies in Belize's north -- Indian Creek, Shipyard and Little Belize. And despite the communities' apparent aversion to outsiders, he found them surprisingly receptive.

"People were far more hospitable than I expected, and everyone was very understanding, even though my Spanish is not that great," he said in a phone interview, explaining that the group's mother tongue is Plautdietsch (or Mennonite Low German), though many also speak Belizean Spanish.

"A lot of time was spent without a camera in my hands. It was more about interacting, socializing and getting to know people before (the photography) even happens."

Stuck in time

Spending time in Mennonites' family homes and expansive farmland, Michaels discovered a world frozen in time (an idea alluded to by the title of his new book , "c.1950"). But beyond the obvious anachronisms of technology-free homes and women dressed in bonnets, the resulting photographs hint at an idyllic life centered on family -- and free from the trappings of modernity.

"My whole practice shifted as the days like went on. My mind slowed down, and I was more present in the surroundings," he said, adding: "I'm not trying to say that their lives are simple, but I think it, for me, it just allowed me to slow down and be more present."

Belize's Mennonites still travel by horse and cart. Credit: Jake Michaels/Courtesy Setanta Books

But the photographer was also wary of romanticizing this remote way of life.

Permitted to run their own schools, Belize's Mennonites have literacy rates significantly lower than the country's other ethnic groups, with just 5% completing formal secondary education. The communities are mostly reliant on commercial agriculture, with colonies organized not only around family and religion, but also labor.

Michaels' photographs detail these economic realities. They depict Mennonites sorting beans in a dimly-lit room or in plastic aprons at a papaya-packing factory. Other images show men attending a nearby auction and smoke rising into a bright blue sky as land is cleared for farming.

"Their world intersects far more now with the modern world than it did before," Michaels said. "There are several Mennonites who work in tandem with Belizean people, so they're aware of the outside world and what's going on.

Mennonites, pictured here sorting beans, rely on commercial agriculture, despite their isolation from wider Belizean society. Credit: Jake Michaels/Courtesy Setanta Books

"There are good aspects to life, and there are hard aspects to life," the photographer added. "At the end of the day, people are still making a living ... people still have jobs. So, I think it was important to show the whole spectrum of life."

Picture of contrasts

Like Mennonites elsewhere, Belize's colonies have both conservative and progressive members, resulting in differing attitudes towards technology. Somewhat unexpectedly, electronic gadgets like cellphones and cameras make occasional appearances in some of Michaels' pictures.

It is a contrast he exploits to powerful effect. Take the image of a young woman in traditional clothing pointing a small digital camera towards Michaels' own lens, a photo he described as "one of my favorites from the whole trip."

"Everything about it seems as if it's a photo from like the 1950s, but then there's a modern camera in her hand," he said, adding that the gradual creep of technology was not necessarily perceived as a threat. "They're far away in the rolling hills of Belize, so it's not like there are (competing lifestyles nearby)."

Consumer electronics make occasional appearances in Michaels' photographs. "Technology exists there," he said. "It's not a complete bubble." Credit: Jake Michaels/Courtesy Setanta Books

And although the experience has not prompted Michaels to forgo technology himself, it has left a lasting impression on his photography.

"It definitely impacted the way that I shoot going forward," he added. "It made me more interactive and more social with people rather, than just taking photos."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Megan C. Hills, CNN

The days of stadium concerts may feel like a distant memory, but singer-turned-photographer Bryan Adams is recreating the touring lifestyle with the likes of Iggy Pop, Jennifer Hudson and Grimes for this year's Pirelli calendar.

The 2022 edition of the star-studded calendar, themed "On the Road," will see the Canadian rock star reimagining backstage moments with a cast of celebrity musicians.

Although the final images will not be unveiled until November, new behind-the-scenes photographs show Rita Ora kicking her legs up in a bathtub and Cher dragging red lipstick across a bright dressing room mirror.

Rita Ora lies in a bathtub as photographer Bryan Adams shoots her from afar. Credit: Alessandro Scotti

Adams, who has worked as a professional photographer for over a decade, joins a roll call of high-profile names -- including Annie Leibovitz and Peter Lindbergh -- asked to shoot the annual calendar. Fresh off a photo shoot with rapper Saweetie, he said that being a musician himself put him on "equal ground" with the celebrities being photographed.

"There's an almost instant understanding when we meet each other, even if we've never met each other before -- the fact that you're a musician and I'm a musician," he told CNN, adding he portrays people "in the best possible light."

Bryan Adams behind-the-scenes of shooting the 2022 Pirelli Calendar. Credit: Alessandro Scotti

Drawing on his own four-decade experience of touring, Adams will detail the journey from an initial spark of inspiration to arriving at the final show. While he had an overall creative direction on the shoots, he said he drew on the star cast's talent and energy.

"You know, I can only do so much as a photographer," he explained. "I can only set the scenario, and after then it's up to the subject to make it work. And I will say that the more people give, then the better the photographs."

Although he is best known for hits like "Summer of '69" and "(Everything I Do) I Do It for You," Adams has had his photography displayed at institutions like the Saatchi Gallery, and featured in magazines including British Vogue and Harper's Bazaar. He has published several books of his images, including portraits of Afghanistan war veterans and homeless street vendors.

Kali Uchis reclining as she poses for the 2022 Pirelli Calendar. Credit: Alessandro Scotti

'Very sexy, without being overtly sexy'

Adams announced he was shooting the calendar in June, when he posted a voice note to social media saying he was "proud" to be involved with the project. With last year's calendar canceled due to the pandemic, the 2022 edition was shot in Los Angeles and on the Italian island of Capri over the course of just three days in June and July.

LA's Palace Theatre and celebrity hangout Chateau Marmont were among the backdrops for stars including Grimes and Normani, while Saweetie took to Hotel La Scalinatella's sprawling terrace in Italy for a sun-drenched shoot.

First published in 1964 and known for its sensual images of women, the Pirelli calendar has attempted to reinvent itself in the post-#MeToo era. Recent editions have focused on female empowerment and included an increasingly diverse cast of models.

Adams, however, has taken the calendar in another new direction -- by including several men.

Singer Iggy Pop covered in silver paint, as he poses for photographer Bryan Adams. Credit: Alessandro Scotti

One of the most striking images shows Iggy Pop entirely covered in silver paint as he restages an after-show celebration. Adams said the 74-year-old was "right into the idea" and received a standing ovation from the crew, setting the tone for the whole shoot. Asian American rapper Bohan Phoenix, meanwhile, is seen smoldering as he stands shirtless in a spotlight.

While Adams isn't the first photographer to include men in the Pirelli calendar (the late Karl Lagerfeld, for instance, cast model Baptiste Giaocomini to play a nearly nude Apollo in his Greek-themed 2011 calendar), the rock star said he would be "remiss to not include some men in an equal opportunity way."

St Vincent sits in a chair as photographer Bryan Adams captures her portrait. Credit: Alessandro Scotti

"Let's face it, us men needed to be objectified as much as women (are)," he said, while stating that he doesn't "follow that old-school way" of sexualizing women through photography.

His images are, instead, intended to be "very sexy, without being overtly sexy."

"This is the new world," he added.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hwang Hyo-kyun deceives people for a living. The more his audience notices his work, the worse job he's done.

"The fact that we can get an audience to be convinced by its realism and focus on the story ... (that's) what makes special effects so cool," he said.

Hwang is the founder and CEO of Technical ART Studio CELL or "CELL," South Korea's leading special effects and makeup company, which he started in 2003.

He has worked on the special effects, props and makeup for hundreds of films and television shows. This includes many of South Korea's most notable films, like the zombies of blockbusters "Train to Busan" and 2020 sequel "Peninsula," as well as the props and makeup in Bong Joon-ho's films "Okja" and Oscar-winner "Parasite."

Striving for perfection

Hwang's latest effects will appear in the next installment of Netflix's popular South Korean zombie series "Kingdom" -- a show he believes launched him and his CELL team to special effects fame. This special episode, airing July 23 and titled "Kingdom: Ashin of the North," stars Jun Ji-hyun, one of the country's best-known actors.

The series premiered in early 2019 and follows a historical narrative, mixing in elements of horror and politics. In it, a mysterious "resurrection" plant turns the people of Joseon-era (late 14th - early 20th century) Korea into zombies.

A scene from Kingdom's first season showing Korean period zombies. Credit: Juhan Noh/Netflix

Hwang and the CELL team have provided the special effects since the start and worked closely with the show's creators to come up with a bespoke concept for a Korean period zombie. He factored many different elements into his creative thinking, including the zombies' social statuses when they were alive. "Commoners would have farmed a lot, making their skin tanned," Hwang said. "The king or court ladies who worked in the palace would see the sun less, making their skin lighter."

He said his team tested many zombie looks and styles; many didn't make the final cut. "There was a zombie that had died in the winter, so we painted the tip of the zombie's nose and ears black to make it seem like they had frostbite," said Hwang. "However ... the zombie unintentionally looked rather comical instead of real."

Hwang strives for perfection and for him, the beauty is in the details -- from the blood around the zombies' mouths, to the seeds of the resurrection plant stuck on their gums. "I remember we made fake teeth and the seeds and pasted each one on set," Hwang recalled. "Whenever zombies opened their mouths big to attack people, you can see, if you look closely, the seeds. It might not have been so obvious on camera, but the director focused on every single detail of how the zombie looked."

That level of detail means more time in the makeup room, especially for the zombies requiring more closeup shots. For example, a team of 10 people worked on the king's makeup for around three hours every day. For more "average" zombies, requiring just the addition of wounds and rotting skin, it took the team about an hour.

Actor Jin Seon-kyu runs from a horde of zombies in season 2 of "Kingdom." Credit: Juhan Noh/Netflix

Across all the episodes of "Kingdom," Hwang said that his team worked on around 3,000 zombies in total -- 10 to 100 zombies on an average day for 150 shoot days. According to Hwang, they used the most effective, time-saving method they knew: an assembly line.

"Two or three people worked on the skin tone, while others were in charge of fake skin and wounds," he explained. "Another team drew in the veins, while another added the blood and finished the look." Throughout the production, he estimates he used more than one ton of fake blood.

Beyond the undead

Although audiences outside Asia may know his work from hit zombie movies "Train to Busan" and "Peninsula," Hwang's work extends beyond the undead. For nearly two decades, he's created some of the most innovative visual effects in the South Korean film industry, using prosthetics, makeup, dummies, props and animatronics.

His team's creativity isn't always meant to be obvious on screen. For example, in "Parasite," they created a peach from scratch, making the fruit fuzzier so it could be captured more easily on camera and to accentuate its symbolism in the film.

Hwang and his CELL special effects team created this peach from scratch for the Oscar winning film "Parasite." Credit: Barunson E&A / CJ Entertainment

For the 2008 film, "The Good, The Bad, The Weird," Hwang said his team developed animatronic horses for the first time in South Korea. "It's a moving horse without legs and actors look like they are riding," he explains. "I feel proud that I was able to contribute to a safer filming environment by developing this."

The Netflix horror series "Sweet Home" mixed CELL's terrifying creations with CGI to create scenes of monsters wreaking havoc on the world. "We had to make creatures that we have never seen in Korea with (huge) tentacles," said Hwang. "We wondered, 'How can we do this? Don't we need CGI for this?' When we finally watched what we thought we couldn't do ... or found frustrating to do at first... we (felt) proud."

CELL created the monsters featured in the webtoon turned post-apocalyptic horror series, "Sweet Home." Credit: Netflix

There's pressure though, according to Hwang. As televisions get larger and resolutions get higher, for him, even the smallest mistakes become more obvious. He gives the example of attaching artificial skin: "If you can see the edge of it, then it shows that it's fake and it will distract the audience," he said. "We always carry the burden ... to make it perfect."

Realizing his dream

Hwang's next project has his sights set on a new frontier: creating a realistic portrayal of life in outer space for upcoming Netflix original series "The Silent Sea." With actor and director Jung Woo-sung as its executive producer, the space thriller stars Bae Doo-na, Gong Yoo and Lee Joon. For Hwang, it's yet another new genre to tackle.

CELL is creating the space suits and equipment for the series "The Silent Sea," which tells the story of a team visiting a research base on the moon. Credit: Netflix

While Hwang once dreamed of working in Hollywood, he said that is no longer the case. Because his projects have now been watched globally -- and by his special effects peers in other countries -- he feels that his hard work and attention to detail has paid off.

"Now when I tell people that I was on the special effects makeup team for 'Train to Busan' and 'Kingdom,' I don't feel the need to work for Hollywood movies to realize my dream anymore," he said. "I feel rewarded."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Leah Dolan, CNN

Teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg has been unveiled as the cover star of Vogue Scandinavia's first issue. Shot by Swedish photography and conservationist duo Alexandrov Klum, the whimsical cover shows Thunberg wearing a billowing upcycled trench coat while sitting with an Icelandic horse called Gandalf in a woodland outside of Stockholm.

"For this debut issue, I am so incredibly proud to feature Greta Thunberg on the cover," said the magazine's editor-in-chief, Martina Bonnier, in the issue's editor's letter . "Not only is she a singular Scandinavian figure and force of change, she also embodies the love of nature, pursuit of sustainability and unabashed fearlessness that is at the core of our vision."

Greta Thunberg on the cover of Vogue Scandinavia. Credit: Alexandrov Klum/Vogue Scandinavia

Thunberg first garnered global attention in 2018 when she skipped school at 15 years old to protest outside Swedish Parliament, demanding the government lower its carbon emissions. She soon catalyzed a movement of youth climate strikes , and now, at 18, Thunberg is one of the world's most visible environmental activists. She has been nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize three years running.

In an accompanying profile in Vogue Scandinavia, Thunberg spotlighted the role of fast fashion -- the mass production of inexpensive, on-trend clothing that maintains low pricing through labor exploitation and poor quality -- in the worsening climate crisis.

"If you are buying fast fashion then you are contributing to that industry and encouraging them to expand and encouraging them to continue their harmful process," she told the magazine. "Of course I understand that for some people fashion is a big part of how they want to express themselves and their identity."

While sharing the Vogue cover on her social media accounts, Thunberg also called out the industry for greenwashing -- or promoting an eco-conscious image without making meaningful change -- with tokenistic and ambiguous gestures regarding sustainability.

"Many make it look as if the fashion industry is starting to take responsibility, spending fantasy amounts on campaigns portraying themselves as 'sustainable,' 'ethical,' 'green,' 'climate neutral' or 'fair,'" she wrote on Twitter . "But let's be clear: This is almost never anything but pure greenwash."

Thunberg and Gandalf, the Icelandic horse. Credit: Alexandrov Klum/Vogue Scandinavia

In 2018, 2.31 billion tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions came from the fashion industry, accounting for 4% of the global total

The inaugural Vogue Scandinavia issue, which is available to order online and focuses on a central theme of nature, coincides with the release of a landmark new IPCC climate change report, in which the United Nations (UN) called a " code red for humanity ." The report concludes that "widespread and rapid changes" to the world's climate have already occurred, some of which are irreversible at this stage, and that it is "unequivocal" that humans are the cause.

The voice of a generation

The message of Thunberg's first "School Strike for Climate" campaign ricocheted across the globe in 2018, inspiring tens of thousands of other young people to organize their own calls to action. The following year, she set sail over the Atlantic Ocean in a widely publicized journey to New York City to attend the UN Climate Action Summit. And she has continually castigated global power players for fostering complacency instead of urgency.

"I want you to act as you would in a crisis. I want you to act as if our house is on fire. Because it is," Thunberg said at the World Economic Forum in 2019

But Thunberg's straight-talking approach to tackling global warming has not been welcomed by all. Elsewhere in the new Vogue interview, she addressed her critics -- most notably former US President Donald Trump, who in 2019 tweeted that Thunberg had an "anger management problem."

Thunberg's oversized trench coat is made from a variery of upcycled coats. Credit: Alexandrov Klum/Vogue Scandinavia

"You have to see it from a larger perspective," she told Vogue. "Why are they writing these kinds of things? It's because they feel that we are being too loud and they want to silence us, whether it's by scaring us or intimidating us or to spread doubt...So that's, in a way, a very positive sign we are having an impact."

She added, "They are not evil, they just don't know better. At least that's what I am trying to think."

She also reflected on the disruptive impact the climate crisis has had on her most formative years. "The ideal thing would be to just return to school and finish education and not have to worry about the climate," she said in the interview. "But as long as there is a need for activists I will probably be an activist."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Keeping you in the know, Culture Queue is an ongoing series of recommendations for timely books to read, films to watch, and podcasts and music to listen to.

Famed ancient Greek ruler and military mastermind Alexander the Great had a passion for fragrances. France's King Louis XIV sported glittering heels and made voluminous wigs fashionable. Vikings, often remembered for their rugged masculinity, had extensive hair grooming routines.

Interest in men's beauty was socially acceptable before it became taboo, and, as David Yi notes in his new book "Pretty Boys," it is now reemerging after a long hiatus. Modern, Western ideas of masculinity took root in Enlightenment-era Europe and continued across the pond in America, Yi recounts, and interests in cosmetics, fashion and grooming became increasingly aligned with femininity, queerness and immorality -- and even criminalized for men in some cases.

Now, the pendulum is swinging back again.

'Pretty Boys' author David Yi. Credit: Sarah Yun

"When it comes to men's beauty, attitudes of masculinity have shifted," Yi said in an email interview, pointing to stars like Bad Bunny, Harry Styles, Frank Ocean or boy band BTS. "No longer do we subscribe to the idea that men have to be stoic, or hypermasculine to survive in our capitalistic, Western world. Rather, men and their masculinities can be expansive."

Yi is the founder of gender-inclusive beauty media brand Very Good Light, and "Pretty Boys" is one-half comprehensive history of masculine beauty -- including ancient Egyptian ruler Ramses the Great and the "queen of queens" RuPaul -- and one-half tips and techniques for how to get their looks.

Looking back at famous men throughout history, Yi said, "Often times, it's their brute force or physical strength that's celebrated in history books and not their beauty that is amplified. I've questioned why this is and it has everything to do with historians being afraid to tell stories of powerful men and their 'softer' sides as if that makes them have any less agency."

"I wanted to put the facetious term, 'pretty boy' on its head and celebrate men who channeled their inner and outer beauties to change the world," he added. "They prove that truly, pretty is pretty powerful!"

Yi offered the following list of his favorite things to listen to, read and watch to celebrate boy beauty.

Add to queue: Redefining masculinity

This South Korean flick about a Joseon-era king who falls in love with a court jester became a box office sensation and an adapted play. "The themes of love, longing, and homosexuality made this (movie) a conversation starter," Yi said. "It was the first modern film (in Korea) to discuss masculinity outside the confines of Korean hypermachoism, providing a glimpse into more liberal themes for a very conservative South Korea in the mid-aughts."

Yi also recommends Troye Sivan's 2018 single about a same-sex relationship coming to a close. "The slow, synth-pop song normalizes young love while also hitting upon themes of loss and a relationship's end," Yi said. "The song went viral in Asia thanks to BTS's leader, RM, writing how it was one of his favorite songs that year."

The documentary follows three skater boys in Illinois who bond over skateboarding as they "navigate their painful teenage years," Yi said. "Each has to confront the masculinity that's been forced upon them, and the documentary ultimately showcases how young men are conditioned to be a certain way by their environments."

Read: "Girl" from the book " : "Girl" from the book " How to Write an Autobiographical Novel " by Alexander Chee (2018)

This essay, by Korean American writer Alexander Chee in his debut anthology, explores "the thrill and euphoria that goes into dressing up in femme attire," Yi said. "'Girl' is about the freedom that comes with a young queer person owning their femininity and the power that comes with it."

The single -- and accompanying music video -- "Montero" was an immediate hit for its queer and hell-raising spirit. "Unabashedly gay, Lil Nas X's devilish and delicious single explores masculinity, manhood, and lots of sex," Yi said. "The Gen Z artist bares himself in this catchy, addictive mass pop song that's out, proud, and loud."

Baldwin penned this essay for a 1985 issue of Playboy, discussing "American manhood, misguided masculinity, and all topics we as a culture are just coming around to in 2021," Yi explained. "The late writer was and is the blueprint when it comes to delving into modern American masculinity."

In redefining masculinity, Yi says "Gen Z is already ahead of the curve." He points to this Netflix dramedy, about a teenager who becomes an accidental (and unliscensed) sex therapist at his high school, as the perfect example. "In (the show), young men explore their sexualities in such a healthy, normalized fashion that's compelling, real, and inspiring," Yi said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Megan C. Hills, CNN

As Olympic sprinter Dina Asher-Smith sailed over the finish line in the women's 100 meter semifinals, photos captured her vibrant blue nails as she celebrated. It may have seemed like just another of Asher-Smith's stylish competition looks, but zooming in on her manicure revealed a meticulous recreation of a Japanese masterpiece: Hokusai's " The Great Wave off Kanagawa ."

The nail artist behind the manicure, Emily Gilmour, said the British athlete was "very involved" in the design process. The nails intentionally "celebrated" the Olympics' host country, she explained over email, adding, "She wanted a nod to Japanese culture."

Dina Asher-Smith's Great Wave off Kanegawa nails by Emily Gilmour, seen at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics. Credit: Andrej Isakovic/ AFP/Getty Images

With every Olympic Games, professional athletes are expected to act as spokespeople for their nations on the global stage. The public scrutiny goes beyond sporting prowess to encompass their social media presence and physical appearance -- nail art included.

Over the years, Olympic manicures have become a tournament ritual for some, and a form of soft diplomacy for others, whether that means following Asher-Smith's lead by honoring the host country or proudly sport gel nail flags in a show of patriotism.

Clemilda Fernandes Silva of Brazil at the 2016 Rio Olympic Games. Credit: Patrick Smith/Getty Images

Gilmour believes bold manicures have become popular among athletes as they're "eye-catching" and a way to "express themselves, while their uniforms all match each other." While showy manicures typically take a more playful or patriotic approach, Swedish high jumper Emma Green Tregaro used hers politically at the 2013 World Athletics Championships in Moscow, where she sported rainbow nails in protest against a Russian ban on so-called gay "propaganda". After being informed she was in breach of the rules (the sport's governing body warned that Tregaro may have violated the event's code of conduct) she repainted them red.

Manicures have become an increasingly common sight at the Games, with some organizing committees now arranging for nail salons to be set up in the Olympic Villages where athletes live throughout the event. Despite coronavirus restrictions, a nail salon has still been set up for participants in in Tokyo this year, and athletes including US volleyball player Kelsey Robinson have shared tours of the space on TikTok.

Speaking to CNN Style over email from Tokyo, Robinson said the Olympic Village nail salons were incredibly popular. She added, "Sometimes it can be hard to get a reservation for the day."

A close up of the press-on gel nails Emily Gilmour made for Team GB's Dina Asher-Smith, inspired by Hokusai's "Great Wave off Kanegawa." Credit: Emily Gilmour @emilysmakeupandnails

Olympic ritual

The Olympic nail tradition arguably began when Florence 'Flo-Jo' Griffith Joyner , a Team USA sprinter and the mother of show-stopping manicures, brought her experience as a former nail technician to the track. Her legendary performance at the 1988 Seoul Olympics, which saw her break multiple records, also featured a manicure that has gone down in history: a crystal-embellished set of nails in red, white, blue and gold. They paired well with the three gold medals she won that year and may have inspired future Olympians to follow in her footsteps.

Speaking to CNN in 2012, more than a decade after Joyner's death, her husband Al said , "Every time you see a woman in the 100 or 200 meters with make-up and nails, that's Florence. She did it with style and she did it with speed."

Since then, nail art appears to have grown in popularity among Olympians. "It's a way for athletes to express themselves beyond just their performances," Robinson said,

In the case of Hong Kong Olympic swimmer Camille Cheng, it is also a way of standing out beyond your uniform. "As swimmers, we race in pretty standard caps, goggles and suits," she said over email from Tokyo. "I feel that getting my nails done adds a bit of my personality."

The French flag-inspired manicure of shooter Melanie Couzy during the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. Credit: Tauseef Mustafa/AFP/Getty Images

Cheng's hand-painted soft gel manicure featured the Olympic rings, the Japanese flag and bauhinia flower that appears on Hong Kong's flag. Nail artist Nana Chan, from the Hong Kong salon Tinted, also created miniature swimmers battling the waves, which were made up of blue swirls and negative space.

"For this Olympics, I wanted to have Hong Kong represented, Japan (as it's being hosted in Tokyo), the Olympic Rings and something water or swimming related," explained Cheng, who also competed at the 2016 Rio Olympics. "We are proud to represent our country on the biggest sporting stage and we reflect that in our nails."

Tinted founder Carroll Lee, called it an "honor" to work with Cheng, while nail artist Chan said: "It was almost like Camille was bringing my spirit with her to participate at the Olympics."

Plenty of other athletes have taken a patriotic approach at this year's Games, including Swiss tennis player Belinda Bencic, who referenced her country's flag with a red manicure , complete with a white cross on two accent nails , and 13-year-old Brazilian skateboarder Rayssa Leal, who painted each nail a shade from her national flag

Others have also gone for subtler tributes: In an apparent reference to Japan's flag, Naomi Osaka painted her tips red and white, while French shooter Melanie Couzy wore a gray manicure accented with stripes of red, white and blue.

Details of another design by Emily Gilmour for Dina Asher-Smith Credit: Emily Gilmour @emilysmakeupandnails

'Good luck talismans'

Other athletes willed on Olympic successes through their nail art, with some, including British taekwondo athlete Jade Jones , painting gold medals and Olympic rings onto their tips and toes. It certainly paid off for Filipina weightlifter Hidilyn Diaz, who also had a gold medal painted onto her nails as she won the Philippines' first ever Olympic gold last week.

Gilmour and Asher-Smith went down a similar route for the sprinter's second set of nails, which featured Japanese cranes set against a backdrop of pagodas, waves and cherry blossoms. Gilmour pitched the idea to Asher-Smith after discovering the bird was a symbol of good fortune.

"I do believe that nails can be a form of good luck," Gilmour said. "For me, nails are no different than having a good luck necklace or other form of talisman."

Camille Cheng's nails, co-created with Hong Kong nail salon Tinted. Credit: Courtesy Tinted

Making sure the talismans stay in place is another issue, however. For Asher-Smith's elaborate designs, Gilmour created a set of press-ons "easily applied with nail glue," as they were best-suited to high intensity sports where "nails may incur pressure." ManiMe, a company specializing in stick-on gel nails that take just 15 minutes to apply, has also provided similar products to the US women's rowing team in the recent past, with founder Jooyeon Song saying over email that the athletes "were looking for a nail solution that could withstand their grueling aquatic training schedule."

For others, like Cheng, manicures have become a "pre-race ritual" and form of self-care amid intense training. "We work hard during the season and for me, the fun part is getting to race," she said, adding: "I feel that getting my nails done is like a pampering session (and a way to) treat yourself for the hard work."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Rebecca Cairns, CNN

Growing up in South Africa in the 1950s and '60s, it was inevitable that Penny Siopis' work would be political.

The multimedia artist was born during apartheid, South Africa's period of legislated segregation, and began her career in the 1980s when anti-apartheid activist (and later president) Nelson Mandela was imprisoned. The "momentous changes of the country" fundamentally shaped her art, said Siopis.

"You're not just painting or making work about the empirical changes that you witness, but actually the psychological changes," she said.

Siopis expressed some of those psychological changes in her series "Shame." Comprising 165 paintings created over three years between 2002 and 2005, Siopis said the series was a response to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission -- a government body established to investigate human rights violations that took place during apartheid -- that explored the "questions around culpability, vulnerability and shame that the Commission raised."

"Shame" (2002-2005) comprises 165 small, tile-size paintings exploring themes of guilt, trauma and grief. Credit: Mario Todeschini

Now, nearly two decades after starting on the series, Siopis revisited "Shame" earlier this year in a digital art work, examining gender-based violence in South Africa.

The psychology of shame

Dynamic, abstract figures dominate the paintings in shades of orange and red, contrasted against the sharp white background. Siopis used lacquer and oil paint to create a "distressed" and "agitated" look, along with phrases from rubber stamps she found in a children's craft store.

Shame is a universal emotion that plays out both privately and publicly, said Siopis. It's that dichotomy that she delves into in each tile-sized painting. Examining the "complicity" of the individual in apartheid South Africa, Siopis tries to give form to the mental and emotional turmoil of the period -- and the scars it left behind.

Artist Penny Siopis (pictured) explores trauma and feelings of shame through her paintings. Credit: CNN

"I think people in the larger world are very interested in South Africa being a kind of microcosm of social-political experiences across the globe, but they often don't have the sense of what it is: the psychological complexity of what it might mean to have lived in a society like ours, and still live in a society like ours," said Siopis.

Shame revisited

Revisiting the topic earlier this year, Siopis zeroed in on the "psychosexual" element of shame. " Shadow Shame Again " is a six-minute digital film created during the coronavirus pandemic, as South Africa reckons with what its president Cyril Ramaphosa calls " another pandemic ": violence against women. Gender-based violence has been on the rise in South Africa in the past year , with the country already having one of the highest rates of rape in the world.

Siopis used lacquer, glue, varnish, oil and watercolor paint, as well as an assortment of "found" objects, including stick-on eyes and rubber stamps from a children's craft store. Credit: Mario Todeschini

Using "found footage" -- fragments of 8mm and 16mm film Siopis bought at flea markets -- the film was commissioned by the Peltz Gallery in the School of Arts at Birkbeck, University of London.

Splicing together home video footage of women and girls against words and music, the video is dedicated to Tshegofatso Pule, a 28-year-old pregnant woman whose murder in June 2020 started national protests. "The mental image became a rallying cry in protest, and a locus of national shame," Siopis writes in the film.

While shame is a "toxic" feeling, Siopis believes it is also the foundation of empathy. "(People) find in these artworks a space to imagine what it might have been like, and what it might be like in South Africa, rather than just to take the given media narrative," she said.

Taking the viewer "beyond the empirical or statistical," Siopis hopes her art can spark conversations and create a new story for South Africa.

"We're often afraid of change," she said. "It always amazed me when people said under apartheid, 'Oh, we can't change overnight.' Well, what the pandemic has said is yes, you change overnight: you can, we all do, it's possible. And this is the global change. I embrace change, and I think my medium, the way I work with the medium, somehow gives a physical form to that embrace."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Reuters

British coronavirus vaccine developer Sarah Gilbert has many science accolades to her credit but now shares an honor with Beyoncé, Marilyn Monroe and Eleanor Roosevelt : a Barbie doll in her likeness.

Gilbert, a 59-year-old professor at Oxford University and co-developer of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, is one of six women in the Covid-19 fight who have new Barbies modeled after them.

Toy maker Mattel Inc is recognizing them with a line of Barbie "role model" dolls.

Gilbert's Barbie shares her long auburn hair and oversized black glasses, and she wears a sensible navy blue pantsuit and white blouse.

Vaccinologist Sarah Gilbert with her own Barbie doll at the History of Science Museum, University of Oxford, UK. Credit: Andy Paradise/Shutterstock

"It's a very strange concept having a Barbie doll created in my likeness," Gilbert said in an interview for Mattel.

"I hope it will be part of making it more normal for girls to think about careers in science."

Among the honorees are emergency room nurse Amy O'Sullivan who treated the first Covid-19 patient at the Wycoff Hospital in Brooklyn, New York, and Audrey Cruz, frontline doctor in Las Vegas who fought discrimination, according to Mattel.

Other dolls include Chika Stacy Oriuwa, a Canadian psychiatry resident at the University of Toronto who battled systemic racism in healthcare, and Brazilian biomedical researcher Jaqueline Goes de Jesus, who led sequencing of the genome of a Covid-19 variant in Brazil, the company said.

Lastly a doll honors Kirby White, an Australian doctor who pioneered a surgical gown that can be washed and reused by frontline workers during the pandemic.

Gilbert chose nonprofit organization WISE (Women in Science & Engineering), dedicated to inspiring girls to consider a career in STEM, to receive a financial donation from the toy maker.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rebecca Cairns , CNN Written by

Paint, or pixels? That's the question that Prince Gyasi wants you to ask when you see his work.

"You should be confused whether it's a painting or a photograph," he said. "If you're not confused, it means I failed."

Manipulating his photos digitally to enhance or change colors, the 26-year-old Ghanaian visual artist straddles a line between artistic styles that makes him hard to label. Clashing, vibrant colours create fantastical worlds of everyday scenes in Gyasi's work, bringing to life an alternative vision of Accra, his home city.

Still early in his career, Gyasi has already worked on campaigns with Apple, shot magazine covers of supermodel Naomi Campbell and Nigerian musician Burna Boy, and was listed as one of the most in-demand artists of 2020 by online art marketplace Artsy.

Gyasi's swift rise to fame is all the more impressive given the camera that launched his career: an iPhone.

"When I started, I couldn't afford a camera, so I was using what I had," said Gyasi.

He began taking photos with a disposable camera as a child, before getting his first smartphone, a Blackberry, in high school -- and finally, saving up enough to get an iPhone in 2012. Now, he uses a range of photographic equipment depending on the shoot, including film cameras, but he still has his iPhone for the right occasion.

Visual artist Prince Gyasi (pictured) has worked with brands such as Apple, and shot big names including Naomi Campbell and Burna Boy. Credit: Prince Gyasi

"It's not about the tool, it's your mind. It's about the story that you want to tell," Gyasi said.

"Color therapy"

Creating emotive experiences through the color of his images comes naturally to Gyasi, who has synesthesia , a condition that creates unconventional overlap between the senses -- for example, experiencing color as a sound, or associating colors with specific words or letters. It's involuntary and unique to the individual, with an estimated 2-4% of the population experiencing some kind of synesthesia.

As a result, Gyasi has his own internal color code that creates layered narratives within his work. "If I'm doing a project on 'hope', I already know I see 'hope' as pink, so I think about how to push this color into the work for it to make sense," he said.

"It's not about the tool, it's your mind. It's about the story that you want to tell." Prince Gyasi, visual artist

Paying attention to the interaction between colors and the associations we have with them, Gyasi tries to ensure his work has a positive effect on its viewer, calling it "color therapy."

"Even if you don't see the (photo) subject smiling, you'll already feel joy and happiness: you will feel this good energy from it," he said.

A turning point for Gyasi's career was a shoot on iPhone with a close friend, British actor Michaela Coel, in 2018. Gyasi described the shoot as a "stepping stone" which helped him find a larger audience. "Michaela was very supportive of me and my work, and I met so many people through that who are working with me now," he added.

Shot on iPhone, "La Pureté" ("The Purity") contrasts bold colors to empower is subjects. Credit: Prince Gyasi

Empowerment and education

A larger platform wasn't just good for Gyasi's art career: it allowed him to invest more in his non-profit, Boxed Kids.

Launched in 2017 with co-founder Kuukua Eshun, Boxed Kids supports children in Jamestown, one of the oldest districts of Ghana's capital, Accra-- and also one of the city's poorest. Lack of education and opportunities leave children here stuck in a cycle of poverty, said Gyasi, who knows the struggle first-hand: his mother, Abena Serwaa Ophelia , was born in Jamestown, and dropped out of school at a young age, before finding success as a gospel singer and fashion designer.

"I feel I'm one of the lucky ones, because I could have been on the streets like most of the kids in Jamestown," said Gyasi. "I'm very privileged that my mom actually knew how to work with her talent (for singing) and made sure I made it to school."

Now, Gyasi is determined to help others break the cycle, too. He donates part of his earnings to the charity, which he said has so far put 12 children through school. As a result, education is one of the key themes in Gyasi's work. His recent series, "Treasure Trove," shows young people taking control of their education.

Rewriting the narrative about young people in Ghana is central to Gyasi's work. "I want artists in Africa to stop painting sad stories about our kids," he said. "We should do better, by inspiring and impacting people."

Gyasi has synesthesia, a condition that overlaps the senses in unusual ways — for example, he associates the color pink with "hope." Credit: Prince Gyasi

"Exploding" interest in African artists

In 2020, interest in Gyasi skyrocketed : inquiries for his work more than doubled at art fairs hosted by Artsy, which describes itself as the world's largest online marketplace for fine art. The same year, Gyasi jumped from 54th place on Artsy's most in-demand photographers list to number two.

The young artist's rising popularity comes at a time when interest in contemporary African artists is "exploding," said Everette Taylor, chief marketing officer for Artsy. Ethiopian-born artist Julie Mehretu broke the platform's online auction record with the recent $6.5 million sale of her painting "Dissident Score," while paintings by Ghanaian artist Amoako Boafo had more inquiries from collectors than those by any other artist. South African photographer Zanele Muholi joined Gyasi among the top five most in-demand photographers on Artsy.

"I want artists in Africa to stop painting sad stories about our kids. We should do better, by inspiring and impacting people." Prince Gyasi, visual artist

For artists like Gyasi, the move away from brick-and-mortar galleries to online auctions has helped expose his work to the global art market says Taylor, adding that online platforms like Artsy are "democratizing" the marketplace and creating more opportunities for collectors to find up-and-coming artists around the world.

The surge of interest in his work doesn't faze Gyasi, though. "I always act like I'm starting out new every day because it helps me push harder. I don't want to get content," he said.

And Gyasi shows no signs of slowing down. After a recent collaboration with Virgil Abloh's "Off White" fashion label, he is eager to explore design-focused visual art and creative intersections with film and music. In November, Gyasi will be one of the artists at Paris Photo, the largest international photography art fair, and he's been selected as the leading artist for next year's Kyoto Photo Festival.

From iPhone snaps to a visual artist on the world stage, Gyasi's unique style isn't bound to one form, medium or mode. "I'm creating my own world, rather than letting the world create me," he said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thomas Page ; video by Stefanie Blendis, CNN Written by

Except the planet will only bend so much. At some point it must break. Salgado, who spent much of his first act as a photographer recording the tail end of a global industrial revolution, has devoted his second to capturing what could yet be lost should urbanization, rampant consumption, climate change and societal indifference go unchecked.

Deep into his seventies, Salgado is not letting up, turning his lens on his nation's greatest treasure: Amazonia. According to his publisher it may well be the final project of this scale the venerable Brazilian undertakes.

If Salgado's last book, "Genesis," was a quest to document places on Earth unblemished by humans, his latest volume " Amazônia " speaks to the idea that humans can live on this planet in a sustainable way, through profiling the forest's indigenous communities, and offering fresh perspectives on the forest itself.

"We are presenting a different Amazonia," he tells CNN. "There are no fires, no destruction -- the Amazonia that must stay there forever."

Salgado has ventured into the Amazon since the 1980s, fostering relationships with some of its tribes, of which there are 188 in Brazil alone, he writes in the book. Some, like the Yanomami, he has returned to over decades, while he has enjoyed privileged access to others, becoming the first non-indigenous person to visit every village of the Zo'é people, Salgado says. For "Amazonia" he spent nine years and 48 trips disappearing into the forest for weeks, sometimes months at a time, returning with new stories and feelings of communality. "When we come to work with these tribes, we come home," he says.

Salgado's journeys to meet them comprises part of the new book. His passages upriver, by boat then sometimes canoe, are documented briefly. However, taking to the air proved a revelation. From his flights on military helicopters and airplanes Salgado returned with photographs of mountains breaching the forest basin and skies wreathed in clouds -- "aerial rivers," as he describes them, that carry billions of tons of water from the forest each day and deposit it as rain across South America. It's a reminder that what happens in the forest -- and to the forest -- has far-reaching consequences.

Sebastião Salgado's Amazonian odyssey

Even if the Amazon in his photographs appears pristine, Salgado rues the rainforest already lost. "For a long time, we've built our society based on natural resources. We've destroyed," he says. "We must protect what we didn't destroy. We must be smart enough to survive."

The people of Amazonia "live in total communion, total peace, with the environment," Salgado says. They might also offer lessons: Though he describes the tribes as "the prehistory of humanity," he also describes each as a potential "future" for the planet.

"We cannot build our future -- the future of humanity -- based only on technology," he adds. "We must look at our past; we must take into consideration anything that we did in our history. Human beings have a huge opportunity: the prehistory of humanity is in Amazonia now."

When it comes to environmentalism, Salgado cannot be accused of empty talk. For years he has practiced what he preached through the Instituto Terra, a center he founded with wife Lélia. The site in the Atlantic Forest, southeast Brazil, was once his parents' cattle farm, and as pasture had become an ecological "desert," he admits. Since 1999, the couple and a growing team of staff have planted more than 3 million trees covering 300 species, and watched the wildlife flood in. "It was a kind of miracle," he says. "With the trees, the insects, the mammals, every kind of bird, every kind of life was coming back."

Over 700 hectares has been entirely reforested and the institute's work is helping the recovery of close to 2,000 springs in the Atlantic Forest. Salgado says the model is as relevant to Brazil as it is drought-hit California: "We must rebuild the source of water; one way is to plant trees."

"We can rebuild the planet that we destroyed, and we must," he adds.

Money from "Amazonia" will find its way back to the institute, he says. "I'm not a rich person, I'm just a photographer," he demurs. And yet his prestige has its advantages. A partnership with Swiss insurance firm Zurich will see a further 1 million trees planted.

But despite all the positives that come from his photography, Salgado remains ambivalent as to its power. "I don't believe that pictures can change anything," he says. "The picture alone is just something to see." However, he says in the case of Amazonia, combining them with the work of environmental institutions can "incite a movement."

The moment is one of great urgency. In his introduction to the book, the photographer communicates his sincere wish that "in 50 years' time this book will not resemble a record of a lost world."

Through its publication, in more than one way, he's doing all he can to ensure that doesn't come to pass.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Matthew Ponsford, CNN

Photographer Poulomi Basu hopes that her images of a bloody, under reported war in India won't just raise awareness -- she wants the pictures, which intentionally blur the line between truth and fiction, to push viewers to take action for racial, gender and environmental justice.

"I don't really take pretty pictures," Basu said. "I mean, I'm sure they can be poetic. But ... I like in my work for the lightness to go with the darkness."

Although Basu is based in the UK, her family comes from the Indian state of West Bengal, the birthplace of the communist Naxalite-Maoist guerrilla movement . She's one of four photographers shortlisted for the prestigious Deutsche Börse Photography Foundation Prize, with the finalists' work currently on display at London's Photographers Gallery through September.

Basu's project "Centralia" began when she discovered a box of her late father's photographs and documents detailing his arrest for sympathizing with the Naxalite left-wing guerillas, who India's government consider to be terrorists. Her findings prompted a ten-year journey that took the photographer to conflict zones in central and eastern India to shine a light on the people fighting -- many of them women -- and living amid a half-century-long conflict in which tens of thousands of people have died, according to India's Ministry of Home Affairs

Basu set out to explore the maxim that "In war, truth is the first casualty" by juxtaposing photojournalistic images revealing violence and death from the heart of the conflict, with staged portraits, cinematic double-exposures, and testimonies from people caught in the fighting that employ novelistic styles. It all comes together to create a work of "docu-fiction," explained Basu, that questions how conflicts like this are portrayed and misrepresented, especially in Western news media.

Poulomi Basu, "Centralia," 2020 Credit: Poulomi Basu/Courtesy of the artist

This year's Deutsche Börse shortlist and exhibition, which also includes leading artists from China, Algeria and Mexico, reflect four very different approaches. But each entrant sought to mix photography with other art forms, according to curator Anna Dannemann.

"This year, the idea is to have created four completely distinct artist's rooms," she said. "Each of these artists is not just a photographer, they're really multimedia artists. They're using photography but they're using installations, film, objects, documents, in a really particular and really interesting way. And they all create very multi-layered bodies of work that are tackling themes that are so relevant right now."

Chinese artist Cao Fei's room centers on a feature-length fictional film, "Nova," which tells the story of its subject's retreat from a physical city into a digital world -- an idea that feels especially relevant since Covid-19 lockdowns forced many to retreat inside and in front of screens.

Meanwhile, French Algerian artist Zineb Sedira's installation "Standing Here Wondering Which Way to Go," presents visitors with a recreation of her living room, and invites them to explore objects, memorabilia and images from her family's cross-cultural history. And finally, Alejandro Cartagena's "A Small Guide to Homeownership" documents the sprawl of US-exported cookie-cutter suburban development across his native Mexico.























1 / 12 Cao Fei, "Nova," 2019 Credit: Cao Fei/Courtesy of artist/Vitamin Creative Space/Sprüth Magers

The winner of the £30,000 ($42,000) prize, whose past winners include world-renowned photographers including Susan Meiselas and Juergen Teller, will be announced in September.

Complex subjects

Dannemann said Basu's work is emblematic of the layered complexity found in this year's shortlist. Her work spotlights both the people affected by the conflict and the environments -- including scorched forests and burning iron ore mines -- where it has played out. The project addresses themes of natural destruction, gender-based violence and the plight of one of the country's most marginalized communities.

One uncaptioned image (as seen above) shows two women fleeing half-dressed from an unseen threat, which Basu explains was taken as a military truck approached. According to Basu, many of the women guerillas she met joined the fight after witnessing or experienced sexual violence at the hands of security forces.

The Naxalite-Maoist insurgency documented in "Centralia" has been taking place since the 1960s but the conflict was reignited in the early 2000s, following the expansion of mining activities in the resource-rich states of Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand, resulting in farmers and Indian tribes losing land on which they had been living for decades.

Many of the guerrilla fighters Basu met are from the indigenous Adivasi communities, and belong to one of the most marginalized group in the caste system, the Dalits. At the Deutsche Börse exhibition, the photographer included stories of woman fighters killed in the insurgency alongside a science-fiction film tying it to similar environmental conflicts in Brazil, the Philippines and Colombia, as well as protests over racial equality in the US and UK.

Poulomi Basu, "Centralia," 2020 Credit: Poulomi Basu/Courtesy of the artist

"Indigenous people, and the tribal groups in India are very marginalized communities," said Basu. "The Dalit justice and Adivasi Lives Matter (movements are) very similar to Black racial justice in America."

While Basu says neither she nor the exhibition's visitors are likely to halt the violence in this long-running conflict, she hopes audiences come away understanding the insurgency as being both a feminist conflict against sexual violence and an environmental battle to preserve Indigenous people's connection with the land and nature.

"I want people to understand that this struggle in feminism is still going on, and I want to understand that it is connected to environmental justice," Basu said. "It's a war zone. I can't expect to change laws there overnight. But you can protest more, fight more."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Keeping you in the know, Culture Queue is an ongoing series of recommendations for timely books to read, films to watch and podcasts and music to listen to.

A family of two dads and two young sons lay sprawled among white bed sheets, their hair mussed, pillows pushed aside during the reflexive movements of sleep. The boys take up most of the space despite their small frames; one child reaches his arm across his father's neck, their faces pressed together in a tender hug.

Such a photograph would have been extraordinarily rare just decades ago, but now it is one of many published in the book "Dads," a four-year visual archive of gay fatherhood across America that began in 2016. The dad responsible for the book is Bart Heynen, a Belgian portrait photographer who now lives in Brooklyn. And though the early morning photo he took of his own family sleeping was shot in Antwerp, he included it among the collection of images from New York, Utah, Alabama, Nebraska, Minnesota, California, and all the other states he visited to take portraits of fathers at home.

"I felt a little bit lonely as a gay dad -- although there are two of us -- but lonely in the sense that all the other families I knew were straight parents," Heynen said in a video call, explaining why he began photographing the series. "I also thought it was important for (my kids) to see other families with gay dads."

"Dads" is a four-year photo series of gay fathers around the country. Credit: Bart Heynen/powerHouse Books

Heynen has been with his partner Rob Heyvaert for 25 years after sharing an elevator ride in their building in Antwerp. When they began their relationship, same-sex marriage wasn't legal in in Belgium, and kids were far from Heynen's mind. Even in their progressive country, same-sex adoption wasn't legalized until 2003, and paid surrogacy is still banned.

When, a decade ago, Heynen and Heyvaert wanted to start a family, they decided to look for an egg donor and surrogate far from home, in California -- a state with more progressive and inclusive laws. (In the US, while same-sex parents have fought for their rights since the 1960s and 1970s, the laws for paid surrogacy remain patchwork by state.)

Now they have their 10-year-old twins, Ethan and Noah, who often joined Heynen on his shoots. Heynen recalled that Ethan, fascinated by other two-father families, loved to ask them, "Who's the papa and who's the daddy?"

The spectrum of fatherhood

"Dads" seeks to show the full spectrum of fatherhood in the US: married couples, single fathers and widowers; families in the cities and the suburbs; men of different races, ethnicities and religion; and family units that include close relationships to surrogates.

And the book is publishing at a time when their rights are still being contested at the country's highest court. This week, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a Roman Catholic foster agency that lost its contract with the city of Philadelphia for refusing to work with same-sex couples.

"For many people, the book will be an introduction to gay fatherhood. And so I wanted to walk a fine line between showing that our families are the same as any other straight family," he explained. "But at the same time, we have a lot of unique characteristics that are not found in straight families, starting with creating the family."

Heynen was often present for special moments, including the first hours of a newborn's life. Credit: Bart Heynen/powerHouse Books

Including some of the women who acted as surrogates for the family was particularly important. For Heynen, they represent additional love and care and help illustrate some of the decision-making that, though not exclusive to them, all gay fathers must contend with. Adoption or surrogacy? Who will be the biological parent? How much will they share with their kids? Will the surrogate be transactional in nature, or will someone close to the family carry the child to term?

In Heynen and Heyvaert's case, they met the birth mother in California only one month before Ethan and Noah were born due to the rules of the agency they used.

"We were extremely nervous...and then it was a wonderful (but) very intense moment," Heynen recalled. "I took photographs because I wanted to show my kids all of us together so they could see because they're not allowed to see their biological mom until they're 18."

Changing the image

Heynen's images often reveal these decisions and the hardships and joy they bring. In one instance, he photographed Mow and Chris cradling their newborn at a gas station during their 14-hour car ride from Tennessee back to their home in New York, as paid surrogacy was not allowed in New York until earlier this year. Another portrait shows the deep bonds of an entire extended family involved in a baby's birth: Elliot and Matthew are pictured in Omaha, Nebraska with their daughter, Uma, as well as Elliot's sister and Matthew's mother, who were Uma's egg donor and surrogate, respectively.

In Salt Lake City, Utah, Heynen spent the day with Bryce Abplanalp and Jeffrey Wright, their two children, and Julie, their surrogate. The couple, who met as adults, were raised Mormon, serving as missionaries before eventually leaving the church.

"We always knew that we wanted to have kids... (but) we really struggled to find a surrogate because we do live in Utah," Abplanalp said in a video call. "Most of the women are Mormon, and Mormons don't believe in gay marriage and gays having kids."

Heynen shows how much love can go into a single birth. Here, baby Uma is pictured with her parents, aunt (her egg donor) and grandmother (her birth mother). Credit: Bart Heynen/powerHouse Books

After a years-long process, they met Julie, who lives a half-hour away with her husband and two kids. They now see each other every couple of weeks, with and without their children, forming a lasting bond between the two families.

"I don't think we realized the type of relationship that we would have now," Abplanalp said. "I mean, we're really good friends."

Heynen, as well as the fathers he photographed, hope that the photographs in "Dads" will dispel some of the hurtful stereotypes that still linger around gay fatherhood.

DaRel and Charles Barksdale are raising their three-year-old adopted son Braeden in Mitchellville, Maryland. Charles recalled a time when a woman asked them in an airport, "What do you guys know about taking care of babies?"

"I think that this (book) is going to hopefully help change the image of fathering," said Charles Barksdale, pictured here with husband DaRel and son Braeden. Credit: Bart Heynen/powerHouse Books

"I've worked with children my whole life," Charles said, explaining that he works in schools as a speech pathologist. "I know a lot about taking care of babies. I think that this (book) is going to hopefully help change the image of fathering."

Abplanalp said he and Wright have never shied away from sharing their own experiences. Abplanalp never knew when he was younger that fatherhood would be possible for him as gay man. "We don't try to be role models or make ourselves any more important than we are," he said. "We're just trying to be as visible as we can to help somebody else who is in a dark place and doesn't know everything that's possible in the world."

Dads ," published by powerHouse Books, is available June 29.

Add to Queue: Papas and daddies

Hosted by West Hollywood couple Yan and Alex, the dads use each episode to chat parenting and relationships, and lately have been focusing each episode on the gay rights and fatherhood pathways by country, and inviting a gay father from each location on as a guest.

This black comedy-drama of the early aughts was genre-defying and barrier-breaking in many ways, but it has been particularly hailed for the onscreen romance of Michael C. Hall and Mathew St. Patrick, who played a interracial gay couple who eventually marry and adopt two children.

This YA coming-of-age novel follows high schooler Sal, who was adopted into a loving Mexican American family by his gay father, when he begins to question his identity and place in the world during his senior year.

This one-hour documentary followed the family lives of four gay families and the legal and cultural hurdles the men faced to become fathers. The director and producer is Johnny Symons, himself a gay father of an adopted son with his partner in the Bay Area.

Savage became an internationally recognized sex columnist and activist in the 1990s and '00s for his frank cultural insight into gay relationships and identity. This book, which became an Off-Broadway show a decade later, detailed the rollercoaster he and his boyfriend experienced in order to enter parenthood.

This story was updated to reflect the Supreme Court ruling in favor of a Catholic foster agency's refusal to work with same-sex couples in Philadelphia.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Rebecca Cairns, CNN

South African photographer Kristin-Lee Moolman has gained international recognition for her powerful portraits against surreal, bleached-out landscapes.

In 2020, she won the Rudin Prize for Emerging Photographers, and has worked with big names including Rihanna in a shoot for New York Times Style Magazine, and fashion houses including Dior and Burberry.

But her fashion shoots are about more than sleek silhouettes and couture design. Moolman is using her platform to challenge negative media portrayals of South Africa -- and counter the stereotypes perpetuated about her home country.

'Homecoming'

Moolman was born into a White Afrikaans family and grew up during the final years of apartheid , a system of legislated racial segregation in South Africa. Apartheid ended in the early 1990s when Nelson Mandela became the country's first Black president, after fighting against oppression for half a century. The political turmoil in South Africa had a profound effect on Moolman, and her sense of identity.

"I felt so much guilt by association of what my people did to other people," she said. "For a long time, I wanted to get away from being Afrikaans, being White, being South African."

In 2020, Moolman took part in a virtual photography show, "28 Hats for Lamu." The photos, featuring eccentric headpieces, celebrate the transformative power of creativity. Credit: Courtesy Kristin-Lee Moolman

Moolman began traveling abroad in the mid-2000s, working on commercial fashion shoots and advertising campaigns. "It was work that emulated what I thought people wanted. There was no soul there," she said. "I reached the conclusion that I couldn't make work that I didn't identify with."

This wasn't an overnight revelation, she said, but one that took years: a lengthy mental and emotional "homecoming" as Moolman changed her perspective on what it meant to be South African.

While Moolman describes her lifestyle as "nomadic" -- before returning to South Africa for the duration of the pandemic, she was based in Thailand for several months and used to fly frequently around the world for shoots -- she now feels at home in South Africa. The landscapes of her work are free of perspective lines, showing yawning desert dunes and stretches of endless sky, reflecting the small towns she grew up in. "Everything coalesced when I made this mental and physical move to be at home," she said.

Moolman shot non-binary DJ and model Caleb Nkosi for arts and culture magazine Document Journal. Credit: Courtesy Kristin-Lee Moolman

Creating a counter-narrative

Part of Moolman's struggle with her nationality was a product of what she says was a predominantly negative portrayal of South Africa in the media.

The prevalence of stories about poverty, violence, and lack of education in South Africa struck a nerve for Moolman -- while she acknowledges these problems exist, she is frustrated that so much of her country's "creativity and joy" is overlooked.

"There's this strength of character that people don't show," she said, a key part of the counter-narrative her work tries to highlight. Staring directly into the camera, Moolman's diverse subjects are powerful and sculptural against a dreamy, washed-out pastel landscape. This direct gaze helps to neutralize the "predatory voyeurism" inherent in photography, she said.

This is a still from the shoot for "Peau de Chagrin/Bleu de Nuit," a music video filmed with Belgian-Congolese rapper Baloji. Credit: Courtesy Kristin-Lee Moolman

Showcasing strong women

In recent years, Moolman says she is focused more on women and showcasing diversity. One of the trigger moments for this focus was Moolman's 2019 shoot with Rihanna, for the superstar's Fenty line. "Rihanna was one of the first ones (shoots) where I realized, you know what? Women are powerful."

"I have a tremendous amount of respect for Rihanna, because of her voice in terms of diversity, women, sexuality. I really like her ideology and her view on the world, so to be able to work with her was really cool," Moolman said.

One of Moolman's latest women-focused projects is " Banyoloyi A Bosigo " ("Ultimate Midnite Angels"). The short film showcases the Autumn/Winter 2021 collection of Moolman's frequent collaborator, South African fashion designer Thebe Magugu, and premiered virtually at Paris Fashion Week in March.

The 12-minute film, shot and written by Moolman, features an all-female cast in a story infused with African spirituality and queer characters. Moolman, who identifies as queer, is determined to highlight this often-overlooked part of South African identity.

The African photographers pushing visual boundaries

The film also marks Moolman's move towards filmmaking, an area that she's been exploring over the last few years. Using film to go deeper into women's stories, Moolman wants to go beyond the movie trope of female characters having to survive trauma such as rape or assault to be considered strong. "There's always a condition, a reason they became powerful," she said of the cinematic convention. "It's never shown that they're powerful to begin with."

As the medium for her creativity changes, Moolman says honesty is the most important aspect of her work. "You will never stop evolving, because everything you experience, you assimilate into what you do. So I think my work will continue to change and especially moving into filmmaking more, it's just a whole new world of things to explore."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Daniel Roseberry has had a few brushes with history since becoming the first American to lead a French couture house, including designing Lady Gaga's outfit for the US presidential inauguration.

For those who need convincing that fashion is a form of art, Daniel Roseberry's designs for Maison Schiaparelli offer a persuasive argument.

Take, for example, one look from his most recent haute couture collection: from a wool crepe dress extend two fabric "gazelle horns'' embroidered with gold lamé thread, gold pearls, gold cut beads, handmade gold pom-poms, Swarovski crystals and rhinestones. Above the horns is a matching headpiece, and below, a pair of nipple buttons in gilded brass.

This is not cookie-cutter fashion, as Roseberry calls it. This is something far more extraordinary.

Schiaparelli haute couture Autumn-Winter 2022. Credit: Courtesy of Schiaparelli

Schiaparelli haute couture Autumn-Winter 2022. Credit: Courtesy of Schiaparelli

Dresses are voluminous, shoulders are exaggerated, materials are lush and the detailing demands a closer look (signature jewelry items, the "bijou" as they're known, come shaped like eyeballs, noses, hands and lips). The creations are all the more beautiful for their Surrealist references and an almost perverse edge.

At first glance, it's hard to imagine these designs coming from an understated, born-and-raised Texan -- one who says, without a hint of irony, that he'd happily live in a cabin in Maine for most of the year and design clothes from there.

"My life. my personality and my emotional reality is in direct opposition to the work that I want to put out there," he says during an interview in his Parisian atelier , on Place Vendôme, days before his new collection is unveiled.

When the then-33-year-old Roseberry, from Plano, Texas, was appointed artistic director of Schiaparelli, he became the first -- and to date, only -- American to lead a French couture house. He was hardly a household name at the time. Trained at New York's Fashion School of Technology, and with 10 years at Thom Browne under his belt, he had the credentials, certainly, but no experience at the helm of a luxury fashion house, no formal training in haute couture and no spoken French.

Go behind-the-scenes with Daniel Roseberry at Schiaparelli. Credit: Win McNamee/Pool/AFP/Getty Images

He also had the looming legacy of the house's founder, Elsa Schiaparelli, to grapple with. A true renegade, she was perhaps the most important and influential designer between the two world wars, a title challenged only by Coco Chanel, her arch rival.

Born into an aristocratic Italian family, Schiaparelli rebelled from an early age by publishing a book of sexually-charged poetry titled "Arethusa," the name of a nymph from Greek mythology. She was sent away to a Swiss convent but left shortly after going on hunger strike. Married and divorced by the early 1920s, she moved to Paris with her daughter where she lived a bohemian lifestyle and acquired a circle of artist friends. In 1927, Schiaparelli launched a fashion business out of her apartment, quickly expanding it and becoming more prolific and inventive.

Ten years later, drawing on her relationship with Spanish artist Salvador Dalí, Schiaparelli created one of the most famous gowns in fashion history: the lobster dress . At the height of the Surrealist movement, the silk organza dress with a large lobster sketched onto the skirt was a symbol of the times -- and remarkably avant-garde.

Elsa Schiaparelli and Salvador Dalí in 1949. Credit: Archives Snark/Courtesy of Schiaparelli

But Schiaparelli's progressive designs didn't keep her out of the mainstream. In 1934, she became the first female fashion designer to feature on the cover of Time magazine, and later on she was even a special guest on the popular US game show, "What's My Line?"

After decades of success, Schiaparelli shuttered her business in 1954; it lay dormant until being revived by businessman Diego Della Valle in 2012.

So when Roseberry walked into the atelier some two months before he was due to present his first collection for the brand in 2019, he must have felt intimidated? "Ignorance is bliss," he says. "When I started, I had 63 days for the first collection and I honestly did not have time for anxiety. I didn't have time for a nervous breakdown. It was so intense."

Despite his baptism of fire, and two first years defined by the Covid-19 pandemic, the designer seems quietly confident. "You know it's funny," he says, "I could lose sleep about going to a dinner party that I feel intimidated to go to, but I'm not really losing sleep about my work. I feel really comfortable with what I do.

"Being an American gives me a sense of perspective," he adds, "maybe even more of a sense of freedom."

Roseberry has clearly spent time getting to know the house and the legacy of its founder. He's well versed in Schiaparelli's life, her contributions to the industry and her archive. He's respectful of the history but is also focused on building his own creative language -- the new "codes," as he calls them.

Former first lady Michelle Obama in Schiaparelli at the 2019 American Portrait Gala at Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery. Credit: Paul Morigi/Invision/AP

"I think people have this notion of couture, that it exists inside of a glass box," he says, in reference to the exclusive nature of high fashion. "And a lot of what I've tried to do over the past two years is shatter those glass walls and really expose the process."

Roseberry is a hands-on designer. From the early sketches to the final campaign shoot, he's present throughout the process, working intensely alongside his team. "You hear stories of designers who don't come in, or they come into the studio once a month. I just can't imagine that," he says.

During his debut runway show, Roseberry even planted himself on the catwalk. As the lights came up, the designer appeared sitting at his drawing table (a nod to his old studio in New York's Chinatown, where he sketched his first designs for the label). Models breezed past Roseberry, bringing his drawings to life while he continued to sketch live on stage.

According to the designer, sketching is one of his secret powers. All collections begin with images made by Roseberry -- he's been drawing since he was a child, taught by his mother from an early age, and it's become "the bedrock" of his creative process, he says.

Schiaparelli haute couture Spring-Summer 2021. Credit: Courtesy of Schiaparelli

When Roseberry got a call, some 10 days before the US presidential inauguration, asking him to design a look for Lady Gaga's performance of the national anthem, he began sketching almost immediately. He made 12 drawings for the singer's outfit that day.

The final look, a large red silk dress with fitted navy jacket and an oversized dove-shaped brooch, came together in a matter of days. "It's one of those moments that you don't really know the impact that it's going to have on your career, and also on the house, until much later," he reflects, calling it "an honor of a lifetime."

The dress was originally supposed to be all white, but after seeing the initial designs, it was Gaga herself who suggested the red and the blue -- and it was "so much stronger," Roseberry says.

Of course Gaga isn't the only celebrity to wear Roseberry's work. He's dressed Michelle Obama, Cardi B, Kim Kardashian and Beyoncé, who wore Schiaparelli to receive her 28th Grammy Award earlier this year. The off-the-shoulder leather mini dress with matching leather gloves (complete with metal nails) was from Schiaparelli's 2021 couture collection.

Beyoncé in Schiaparelli at the 2021 Grammy Awards. Credit: Kevin Winter/Getty Images

Almost immediately after the Grammys, in March, Roseberry started work on this season's couture garments. He spent 10 days in quarantine in his Paris apartment after coming back from the US, and he drew every day, creating hundreds of drawings and "working things out in mind," he says.

What emerged from the early sketches is "The Matador," his fourth collection comprising 26 different looks. In his show notes he writes that it is a "collection that honors Elsa's vision but isn't in thrall to it."

Schiaparelli haute couture Autumn-Winter 2022. Credit: Courtesy of Schiaparelli

Schiaparelli haute couture Autumn-Winter 2022. Credit: Courtesy of Schiaparelli

While last year he was designing for the end of the world, as he puts it, this year he's designing with joy in mind, reflecting on all the reasons that drove him to fashion originally.

"The world didn't end," he writes. "We're still here. Fashion is still here. Couture is still here. And not only is it still here, but in a world increasingly reliant on the easily replicable and the digitally disseminated, its power -- to stop you in your tracks -- is greater than ever."

Schiaparelli haute couture Autumn-Winter 2022. Credit: Courtesy of Schiaparelli

Last season, jewelry took center stage (he says this was a direct response to the pandemic, with striking accessories designed to grab people looking at his clothing on screens), this season was about embroidery. One look in particular -- a mini dress with "monstrous" barrel sleeves embroidered in pink silk taffeta flowers -- is, Roseberry believes, one of the more literal examples of how he applied his new codes to the iconic Elsa Schiaparelli archive. The dress is a tribute to a jacket she made in collaboration with French poet and artist Jean Cocteau in 1937.

The original piece features a sketch of a vase with pink flowers spilling out of it. "It's repurposed and repackaged in a way that feels definitely an homage," Roseberry offers, but it's a look that he says is in "full control of the language of today."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Leah Dolan, CNN Contributors Video: Angelica Pursley, CNN; Max Burnell, CNN

As Britain's longest-reigning monarch, the Queen is both a cherished and consistent part of public life -- her image synonymous with stability and tradition to the British people.

When masses gather and wait dutifully to catch a glimpse of Her Majesty, the color she steps out in is more important than you might think, too. Standing at 5 feet 3 inches, vivid hues like yellow, fuschia, purple, chartreuse and periwinkle make her easier to spot in large crowds. The Queen's bold wardrobe is so distinctive, it has spawned entire books dedicated to recording each beaming outfit. In "Our Rainbow Queen," Welsh journalist Sali Hughes notes Her Majesty's color wheel considerations: "(she) won't wear green to grassy venues, nor dark colours against dark upholstery."

The monarch's commitment to a vibrant color palette is a sign of respect for those who take the time to support her in person. "She needs to stand out for people to be able to say 'I saw the Queen,'" says Sophie Rhys-Jones, the Countess of Wessex, in the 2016 documentary "The Queen at 90."

The Queen's official 90th birthday at The Mall on June 11, 2016 in London, England. Credit: DZY/FilmMagic/Getty Images

There is an art to dressing one of the most photographed women in history. Over her 60 year reign the Queen has amassed an army of staffers, but few have been trusted with the task of royal dressmaker. British designers Norman Hartnell, Hardy Amies, Stewart Parvin and Angela Kelly have all helped develop her style -- steering clear of trend cycles that can quickly fall out of favor.

Kelly -- the Queen's sartorial adviser for almost three decades and a close confidante -- has created an air-tight formula that ensures every one of the her 300 annual engagements hits the mark. From fail-safe weighted hem-lines and wager-worthy hats, to extensively researched weather forecasts and local customs -- the Queen's outfits are nothing if not judicious.

The Queen during a visit to The Royal Australian Air Force Memorial on March 31, 2021 near Egham, England. Credit: Steve Reigate/WPA Pool/Getty Images

"Our role as her dressers is to ensure that Her Majesty is appropriately attired for each occasion," writes Angela Kelly in her 2019 monarch-approved memoir, "The Other Side of the Coin."

"I look for movement with soft light materials, and might even switch on a fan to see how they behave in a breeze...As the light changes, or when Her Majesty moves to an interior space, this will have an effect on the color and texture of the fabric, and this must be taken into account."

Her Majesty carrying her trusty Launer handbag while visiting Balmoral, Scotland in 1974. Credit: Anwar Hussein/Hulton Archive/Getty Images

Her monochromatic looks are typically decorated with a three-strand pearl necklace and a sparkling antique brooch set in either gold or silver, while a glossy Launer handbag can usually be found in the crook of her elbow. Not only do these mainstay accessories bring a sense of occasion to the Queen's ensembles, they are a kind of sartorial crest on-lookers have come to expect and dissect -- with many eager to unearth sentimental stories behind each item. Take, for example, the hand-painted Centenary Rose Brooch commissioned by the Queen as a 100th birthday gift for the Queen Mother, which she in turn wore during a Christmas broadcast less than a year later after her mother passed.

Her Majesty horse riding in Windsor Home Park over the UK's May bank holiday weekend. Credit: WPA Pool/Getty Images Europ

For languid afternoons spent walking the grounds of the Balmoral Estate in Scotland, the Queen is quick to switch out of her color block couture and into muted country wear made of tweed and tartan. Her off-duty attire is of equal importance, and often sets the mood for political arrangements. In 2016, when the Obamas arrived at Windsor Castle to meet Her Majesty for the third time, the Queen wore a silk scarf fastened under her chin (a defining feature of her more casual outfits), signaling familiarity and an informal tone.

The Queen wearing the Rose Centenary Brooch in 2008. Credit: Max Mumby/Indigo/Getty Images

Fashion statements

Poised, appropriate and always strategic -- the Queen's styling choices are as much a form of diplomacy as they are an expression of identity.

In 2011, Her Majesty became the first British monarch to visit the Republic of Ireland since its creation -- and the first to enter the country in a century.

The historic state visit was not taken lightly, with tactful considerations infusing every detail of the trip right down to the stitches on her garments. The Queen masterfully demonstrated the soft power potential of fashion, arriving in Dublin wearing a green coat and matching hat -- Ireland's de facto national color. Later in the visit, she donned a white, silk gown embellished with more than 2,000 hand-sewn embroidered shamrocks and an Irish harp brooch made from Swarovski crystals.

Even in her early career, the Queen was well versed in the value of image-making and optics. Coming to power (and of age) during World War II, the young princess quickly became a vision of hope and optimism in war-torn Britain. She stoked those fires anyway she could -- carefully constructing an image that conveyed authority, elegance and decorum. One of the most readily available sources was her wardrobe.

Her Majesty during her engagement to Prince Philip in 1947. Credit: Hulton Archive/Getty Images

In 1947, two years after the war had ended, the Queen used clothing ration coupons to purchase her wedding dress -- a common practice for brides at the time. It was a gesture of commonality, although Her Majesty did receive 200 extra coupons from the government to help cover the cost. The gown, made of ivory silk and duchess satin with a 15-foot train, was designed by Norman Hartnell.

Queen Elizabeth II watches as pallbearers carry the coffin of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh inside St George's Chapel in Windsor Castle on April 17, 2021. Credit: Yui Mok

At one of her more recent public engagements -- the funeral commemorating her beloved husband, the Duke of Edinburgh -- the Queen wore all black in line with a mourning tradition . Typically seen in bold colors, Her Majesty's somber outfit was all the more poignant for its rarity. Pinned to her coat was the Richmond Brooch, a diamond-encrusted wedding present gifted to Queen Mary in 1893. Her Majesty inherited the piece in 1953 and wore the flourish to Harry and Meghan's 2018 wedding, reinforcing its connection to marriage and coupledom.

Top image: The Queen during a visit to the Defense Science and Technology Laboratory near Salisbury, UK.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Xiaofei Xu, CNN Lorraine Poupon, CNN

New Yorkers have a surprise gift to look forward to for this Independence Day: a second Statue of Liberty sent by France. This new bronze statue, nicknamed the "little sister," is one-sixteenth the size of the world-famous one that stands on Liberty Island. On Monday, during a special ceremony, the smaller sibling was lifted and loaded into a special container at the National Museum of Arts and Crafts (CNAM) in central Paris, where it has been installed since 2011 in the museum's garden. It will be erected on Ellis Island, just across the water from the original, from July 1 to July 5.

The statue, over 450 kilograms (992 pounds) in weight and just shy of 10 feet tall, was first made in 2009. It is an exact replica of the original 1878 plaster model preserved by CNAM.

"The statue symbolizes freedom and the light around all the world," said Olivier Faron, general administrator of the CNAM. "We want to send a very simple message: Our friendship with the United States is very important, particularly at this moment. We have to conserve and defend our friendship."

The 9-foot, bronze statue will be displayed on Ellis Island on Independence Day. Credit: CMA CGM Group

The replica bears the same neoclassic design as its "big sister" in New York, who represents the Roman goddess Libertas and measures 151 feet tall atop the giant pedestal. She is imbued with symbolism: the crown with seven spikes, representing sun rays extending out to the world; a tablet inscribed with America's date of independence in Roman numerals; and broken chains and shackles lying at its left foot, signifying the abolition of slavery in the United States.

The date of the ceremony was symbolic as well, held just after the 77th anniversary of D-Day during World War II, when American and other Allied soldiers landed on French soil in 1944, marking the beginning of the liberation of Western Europe from Nazi occupation.

The iconic Statue of Liberty that arrived in New York in 1886 was also meant to strengthen the Franco-American friendship, at a time when Paris and Washington were slowly drifting apart, as French historian André Kaspi reminded in a speech during the ceremony.

After Independance Day, it will be installed outside the French Ambassador's residence in Washington, D.C. on Bastille Day -- July 14. Credit: CMA CGM Group

The original Lady Liberty

The Statue of Liberty was first proposed in 1865 by French historian Édouard de Laboulaye as a gift to the newly reunified United States following the Civil War. Laboulaye wanted to link the emancipation of slaves with the values of the French Enlightenment. France was undergoing its own shifts at the time, as the repressive Napoleon III ruled until 1870 and was then deposed during the Franco-Prussian War .

In 1871, under the new Third Republic, Frédéric-Auguste Bartholdi, the chosen sculptor, traveled across the Atlantic to sell the project to the American government and to scout for potential locations. US President and former Union General Ulysses S. Grant initially met his proposal with indifference, according to Kaspi.

Even though Bartholdi eyed the formerly named Bedloe's Island in New York Harbor as the ideal location for the future statue -- all inbound ships to New York passed by it at the time -- it wasn't until 1875 that Bartholdi made a formal request to Grant to use it as the official site. To pay for the statue, the two countries struck a deal: the French funded the statue, while the Americans funded the pedestal.

The value of freedom is central to the new Lady Liberty statue. Credit: CMA CGM Group

Bartholdi's sculpture of copper plates over an iron frame took nearly a decade to complete. The structure was conceptualized by engineer Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, but when he died in 1879, just four years into its creation, Alexandre-Gustave Eiffel, the French engineer best known for constructing the Eiffel Tower, finished the task. The 225-ton statue departed disassembled for New York in 1885, onboard a steamer, and was inaugurated in New York the following year by a new president, Grover Cleveland, who hailed Bartholdi as "the greatest man in America today."

Over a century later, Faron and the CNAM put forward the best of French craftsmanship through a local workshop to make sure the modern replica keeps this great heritage. A team of five at the art foundry Susse Fondeur in Malakoff spent four months to finish the statue. "It's made with all the conditions to respect the original model of Bartholdi," Faron said.

The journey for the "little sister" has just begun: Following the footsteps of the original statue, it will board a ship at the port city of Le Havre on June 19 and reach New York on July 1. Its final destination will be Washington, DC, where it will be on display for 10 years at the French ambassador's residence.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Nina Avramova, CNN London

While the global Coronavirus death toll continues to climb each day, some people are beginning to ask: how can we mark the colossal loss of life that has been experienced around the world?

A team of local creative workers in London are among those offering an answer. This week, a Covid-19 memorial garden has been unveiled in the capital's Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park. Made from reclaimed materials and featuring 33 newly planted blossoming trees, the London Blossom Garden is a tribute to key workers and a space for quiet reflection for anyone wishing to visit.

The newly inaugurated site is unique in that it joins a surprisingly short list of tributes to health crises, said art historian Aindrea Emelife.

According to Emelife, just over a century ago, the 1918 influenza pandemic claimed at least 50 million lives -- but, there are few public art installations marking this loss. The First World War by comparison, in which far fewer people died, is commemorated in most parts of the world with numerous statues, plinths and annual events, all reckoning with the human cost of the conflict. "Because the war is very much a man-made disaster, it's easier to commemorate, rather than something that was seen as unavoidable or natural," explained Emelife.

Community & advocacy

Historically, memorials have been a way to collectively mark the end of a devastating event. With the pandemic still ongoing, memorials installed now could serve a more immediate purpose. For, Paul Farber, a senior research scholar at the Weitzman school of design at the University of Pennsylvania, this means also advocating for change.

"What we've seen, especially from artists and grassroots organizers, is that the mourning also means fighting for survival. It means fighting for resources. It means addressing the inequities in the pandemic along lines of race and class and other social distinctions."

With this in mind idea, Farber would like to see a network of Covid-19 memorials installed, that would, crucially, come hand-in-hand with resources such as grief counseling or financial support for people who have lost their jobs. "That requires [...] creativity, that requires thinking across sector(s), but it also is part of a long process of moving through the pandemic," Farber said.

No community has been left untouched by the virus, said art historian Emelife, who is also a writer and curator.

"It's a big ask to find something that can symbolize all of that. And it might be that there'll be a number of different memorials to different things; memorials to social issues that have risen, memorials to key workers, or memorials to the every person, the every experience -- whether it's memorializing our times at home or the rise of technology," she suggested.

A nod to relatable moments like zoom birthday parties, or appreciation for key workers or people staying at home, would allow for reflection and help us to move on, Emelife said. Importantly, the community should be at the heart of any installation for it to truly resonate.

Interactions build meaning

Whether they be large, civic installations or personal altar offerings, acts of remembrance are all part of a "long process of coming to terms with loss," said Farber, who is also the director and co-founder of Monument Lab, a public art and history studio.

People's interaction with civic memorials can turn these sites into powerful and meaningful places. For example, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, in Washington DC, designed by Maya Lin, is one of the most visited installations in the US. According to Faber, this is because "it's become a site of offering that people interact with."

Veterans family members pay honor who died in the war one day after US President Joe Biden and First Lady Dr. Jill Biden visit Vietnam Memorial Wall, today on March 30, 2021 at National Mall in Washington DC, USA. (Photo by Lenin Nolly/NurPhoto via Getty Images) Credit: Lenin Nolly/NurPhoto/Getty Images

The memorial's long granite wall displays more than 58,000 names of servicemen and women who died in the conflict, or who are still missing. People have been leaving letters, flowers and other objects there ever since it first opened in 1982, making it a meeting place between the living and the deceased, explained Farber.

Lin's work is visited by thousands of people daily, while its layout also allows for solitude. Its inscription of names means that "while you're taking in this totality -- overwhelming totality of loss -- you can also put your fingers on one name at a time to grasp the meaning of that particular lost life," said Farber.

Deep emotional impact

Effective memorials can, knowingly or unknowingly, tap into human psychology said cognitive neuroscientist Colin Ellard.

Peter Eisenman's famous "Memorial To The Murdered Jews of Europe," situated in the heart of Berlin, is a striking open-air design made up of 2,711 imposing stone blocks of varying heights, arranged in a maze-like fashion across over 200,000 square feet. For Ellard, it's an example of how a physical space can have a powerful psychological impact. Walking through the stone monoliths is disorienting and leaves just enough space for people to forge their own path. "My hunch is that what (Eisenman) was trying to do was to put you into the mindset of one of the victims of the Holocaust, by giving you the feeling that here you've been stripped away from your family, your friends, your acquaintances, you're all alone, but every once in a while, you're absolutely penetrated by this surveillance -- these gazes from outside."

Peter Eisenman's Holocaust memorial in Berlin, Germany. Credit: Shutterstock

Nature sites, on the other hand, like the recently opened London Blossom Garden, can be healing spaces. "We are built to respond positively to nature," said Ellard, who also runs the Urban Realities Laboratory at the University of Waterloo. There is a wealth of research showing that being exposed to scenes of nature -- even in fairly modest ways -- improves physical and mental health. "It even changes things like the way that we pay attention to the world -- [...] it makes us kinder to one another."

A reference point for grief

Once a memorial exists in the public sphere, it can offer people a space and reference point for their grief, said Farber. "Memorials may not do away with grief, but they give us a space to process and potentially to gather with others [..] on the path to coping."

But countries, cities and artists should also consider the timing of a memorial's construction, said Emelife. There is the danger of tributes being seen as abrasive and painful if erected too soon after the devastating event they are marking.

She explained: "If it's going to be permanent, and it's going to be out there in the public realm for us to see every day, we need that distance and we need that sense of building up the society and building up our future so that we can look at it not with dismay, but with hope and with sort of pride as to what we've been through."

The new memorial garden in London will continue to develop and transform over the coming years as the young plants grow, perhaps, in poignant reference to society's evolving relationship with the memory of the pandemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Leah Dolan, CNN

Paris' former stock exchange, the Bourse de Commerce, will reopen its doors this week having undergone a $195 million transformation into a new landmark museum for contemporary art.

Three years in the making, the redesign was led by Japanese architect Tadao Ando and supported by a team of Parisian architects, including NeM Architects Agency. The expansive space, stretching over 10,000 square meters (more than 100,000 square feet), will house the contemporary art collection of French billionaire François Pinault.

An interior shot from inside the newly renovated and redesigned building. Credit: Patrick Tournebœuf/Bourse de Commerce - Pinault Collection

Pinault, who is the founder of luxury conglomerate Kering (parent company of fashion houses Gucci and Saint Laurent, among others), has spent 20 years working toward opening a private museum in Paris for his collection. "It began as a dream, a dream that seemed out of reach. Then this dream became an ambition," he said in a press statement.

"Today, that ambition has become reality. For years, I have longed to be able to show my collection in Paris, the city I love."

The museum's inaugural exhibition, titled "Ouverture," (in reference to the introductory symphonic piece sung at the beginning of an opera) will present works by a number of international artists, including Kerry James Marshall, Marlene Dumas, Luc Tuymans and Cindy Sherman.

Design work on the project began back in 2017. Credit: Patrick Tournebœuf/Bourse de Commerce - Pinault Collection

Pinault described the debut as a "manifesto of the values" he has long championed, namely, "the thirst for freedom, the rebuttal of injustice, the acceptance of diversity."

Situated walking distance from the Louvre, the protected building dates back to the 18th century and has undergone a number of renovations over the years. Its original circular shape was established in 1767, when it became a grains exchange for the city, a hub for the storage and sale of wheat.

Bourse de Commerce - Pinault Collection, Paris. Credit: Patrick Tournebœuf/Bourse de Commerce - Pinault Collection

Ando has added a central concrete cylinder to the inside of the museum, beneath the building's signature cupola, as "a hyphen to link the past and the present, to produce a vision of the future," he said.

The entire project has been "built on the idea of setting dialogues between the present of contemporary creation and the past," said Martin Bethenod, deputy chief executive officer of the Pinault Collection.

Harmony between heritage and modernity is built into every inch of the Bourse de Commerce's redesign, right through to the museum cafe. Even the menu of the eatery -- called the Halle aux Grains -- will pay homage to the building's past life, featuring modest ingredients like cereals, grains, seeds and pulses.

Watch the video above to see inside the impressive new space.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

The Olympic torch relay has been downgraded for the Tokyo 2020 Summer Games , with Covid-19 turning the flame's traditionally public journey from Olympia, Greece, into a largely private affair.

While past Olympic Games have seen the torch carried undersea by a diver or flown through the air by a ski jumper, this year's relay was instead composed of isolated ceremonies around Japan ahead of Friday's Opening Ceremony.

Yet, many of the rituals were preserved. As always, the flame first burst to life in Olympia using sunlight reflected off a parabolic mirror, representing the might of the sun god Apollo. Since March, it has been making its way to Tokyo via plane and road (though there were none of the camel or parachute journeys seen in adventurous relays of the past).

In a typical year, thousands of runners would pass the torch hand to hand, often past huge crowds, until it reaches the main stadium. And while this relay has been largely spectator-free, the flame's destination remains the same: the Olympic cauldron, which stays lit for the duration of the Games.

Over the decades, the torch's appearance has become an important part of the custom. Often a visual representation of the host country, recent designs have embodied the sleek architecture of the Sydney Opera House (in 2000); a folkloric phoenix feather, an omen of good fortune in Russia (Sochi's 2014 Winter Olympics); and the natural beauty of the Brazilian landscape (Rio 2016).

This year's "sakura pink" torch has a cherry blossom shape that merges five individual flames into one. It was created by designer Tokujin Yoshioka, who said over email that it is a symbol of hope and "emotional recovery" from the earthquake and tsunami that struck Japan a decade ago. The body of the torch is partly made from recycled aluminum used in the shelters that housed survivors following the disaster.

An uneasy history

Though the Olympic flame has ancient roots, the relay itself is a relatively modern affair.

"There wasn't a torch relay, in the way that we know it, for the ancient games (though) there might have been an altar burning," said sports historian and author of "The Story of the Olympic Torch," Philip Barker, in a video interview.

In fact, this symbol of international unity was in fact born out of nationalism -- it took place in Nazi Germany during the 1936 Summer Games.

Conceived by the Berlin Olympics' chief organizer Carl Diem, the first relay traveled over land from Olympia to the German capital via Athens, Sofia, Belgrade, Budapest, Vienna and Prague. Over the course of 12 days, the torch was passed along, hand by hand, for almost 2,000 miles.

The first torch relay was held in Berlin in 1936 under Nazi rule. Credit: Allsport/Hulton Archive/Getty Images

"It really did capture the imagination," Barker said. "In Greece, it was said that no one slept when the torch came by, because it went throughout the night, which doesn't happen nowadays."

The event was designed to showcase Nazi Germany's growing power, and a young, blonde-haired runner, Fritz Schilgen, was selected as the final torchbearer for his Aryan appearance. Footage of the event was also highly orchestrated, with parts of the relay restaged and re-shot after the Games for the 1938 propaganda film "Olympia."

"There (was) a lot of mythology, even from the start," Barker said.

Following a hiatus in the Games for World War II, the torch relay might not have continued. But organizers of the first post-war Olympics, in London, resurrected the event, securing its place as an ongoing tradition.

"People turned out to see it at 2 am, 3 am in the morning. It was a curiosity," Barker said of the 1948 relay. "When you consider that England was still rationing (food and supplies) at that time, to have the Olympics -- and to have something unusual like this taking place -- was a real boon. It really lifted people's spirits."

A unifying spirit

Over time, the relay's dark origin story has faded from memory, as each new host city makes it their own. The routes have taken everywhere from days to months to complete, with backup flames (also from the original source in Olympia) now kept in miner's lamps and carried alongside the torch.

Sometimes, plans are derailed by more than an extinguished flame: During the Tokyo 1964 Summer Games, a typhoon damaged the plane carrying the torch, and a backup plane was called in while a second flame was sent ahead to make up for lost time.

The torch designs, usually selected by the host city's organizing committee, have also evolved, and now usually come from esteemed designers and artists.

"It's a way of showcasing a national identity as well -- 'this is our torch,'" Barker said.

Some designs have echoed antiquity, like Rome's classical design in 1960. Others have taken creative risks, like Lillehammer's sleek birchwood handle and aluminum blade for 1994's Winter Olympics, or London's perforated gold design in 2012 that "became known as the cheese grater," Barker said.

In this highly unusual Olympic year , Yoshioka's cherry blossom vessel and its motto "Hope Lights Our Way," seem especially timely. The five flames join together, with each petal symbolizing "a wish for peace and for the world to come together as one," he said. The designer hopes the flame can be "a beacon of hope for everyone."

The flame holds that kind of power, said Barker, who described the Olympics a unifying force in the world -- and the torch relay emblematic of it.

"It does have that feeling of symbolism and connecting people," he said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN New York

Outside the historic Villa Lewaro mansion in Irvington, New York, Pyer Moss founder and creative director Kerby Jean-Raymond became the first ever Black American designer to show at Paris Haute Couture Week. In his highly anticipated show, "Wat U Iz," the designer sent models down a vivid blue runway in larger-than-life garments referencing everyday objects created by Black inventors.

The live-streamed showcase took place two days later than anticipated, after torrential downpours saw the first attempt called off. With a hasty 48 hours to restage months of work, Jean-Raymond finally showed his collection on Saturday. It comprised high-concept, meticulously fabricated clothing based on recognizable items, including a bicycle, traffic light, chessboard, fire escape, Super Soaker, refrigerator and mop.

Former Black Panther Party chairwoman Elaine Brown spoke ahead of the show, which also featured performances from Brooklyn rapper 22Gz and a live string orchestra. The grounds were part of the story, too. The idyllic 34-room Italianate mansion was once home to Black entrepreneur and activist Madam C.J. Walker, considered to be America's first female self-made millionaire. Born to formerly enslaved parents, Walker built a beauty empire from a single hair care product for Black women.

















































1 / 25 Pyer Moss' Haute Couture collection was inspired by Black inventors and their creations. Scroll through the gallery to see a selection of looks from the show. Credit: David X Prutting/BFA.com/Courtesy of Pyer Moss

"Wat U Iz" was a history lesson injected with a dose of Pop Art humor, from its silhouettes of peanut bar jars and cellphones to a meticulous cascade of hair rollers styled like an 18-century powdered wig. It was also a display of Black ingenuity -- something that "there's no shortage of," Jean-Raymond said in a video interview following the show.

"Oftentimes, though, among our community, we often berate and belittle people who are making money in their respective crafts," he added. "So much so that we've learned to undervalue our work and undervalue our time. I'm trying to flip that narrative, because I understand that that narrative is a trap."

Since Pyer Moss became a fashion week mainstay in 2015, the label's slick mens and womenswear collections, which meld street style and high fashion, have been worn by famous figures from Colin Kaepernick and Zendaya to US Vice President Kamala Harris.

Kerby Jean-Raymond walks the runway during Pyer Moss' Haute Couture Fall/Winter 2021/2022 show. Credit: Cindy Ord/WireImage/Getty Images

Speaking about his historic appearance on the Paris Haute Couture Week schedule, Jean-Raymond said he doesn't take the responsibility lightly. "I wanted to use the stage to share with other Black Americans who inspire me -- and Black people who inspired me. So I chose to make the collection a highlight reel, in a way, of many of the things we've contributed to society at large."

Layered storytelling

Couture may be new ground for Jean-Raymond, who founded Pyer Moss in 2013, but his collection's thoughtful reflections on Black history and culture continues the brand's longstanding commitment to storytelling. Describing his label as an "art project that operates in the fashion space," the Haitian-American designer told CNN Style in 2019: "It has to represent me. It has to be a representation of the people who made it, because who needs it? Who needs clothes at this point? You can get clothes anywhere."

A sandal-inspired look from Saturday's runway show. Credit: Cindy Ord/WireImage/Getty Images

There are always layers to peel back at Pyer Moss' shows. At the label's headline-grabbing debut at New York Fashion Week in 2015, the specter of police brutality was present in every look, from references to Eric Garner's haunting last words, "I can't breathe," to clothing tagged with spatters of mock blood during the show by artist Gregory Siff.

Pyer Moss then retold the American story in a three-part show, from 2018 to 2019, working with visual artist Derrick Adams on one of the collections to create powerful imagery of Black life, including a glittering crystal-embellished gown depicting a father holding his baby.

And Jean-Raymond's runway venues are, like Madame CJ Walker's estate, often steeped in history. Recent locations include Weeksville, Brooklyn, the site of one of America's first free Black communities, and the Kings Theater in nearby Flatbush, where Pyer Moss hired a 90-member gospel choir to celebrate the life of Sister Rosetta Tharpe, a Black musician often known as the godmother of rock'n'roll.

Black prosperity

For his latest show, however, Jean-Raymond had to define what couture means for Pyer Moss, a label that relies on direct-to-consumer sales for 70 percent of its business, according to the Cut

"A lot of times when we do runway, we're constantly blending these highly conceptual ideas with commerciality -- with what consumers are going to think. Who's gonna buy this?" he said. "But ... here it was just like, 'Let's just do anything we want.'"

Related video: Kerby Jean-Raymond speaks to CNN Style in 2019.

Having scrapped their first concept entirely, Jean-Raymond and his team based the collection on research into the US Library of Congress' archive of inventions (and an outing to Joshua Tree, California, that saw them drinking psychedelic ayahuasca together).

Encountering the list of Black inventions was humbling, he said. "I was really taken aback. I pride myself on being very knowledgeable on Black history. And a lot of that stuff I didn't have (prior) knowledge of," he added.

Bicycle handles were among the everyday objects incorporated into the designs. Credit: Cindy Ord/WireImage/Getty Images

Pyer Moss worked with fabricators to bring the objects to life, but each look was made by hand. Some, like a white long-sleeve leotard outfitted with bicycle handles, took a week to make. Others, like dresses inspired by hair curlers and a bottle caps, took months. This fall, the label plans to stage an exhibition about the collection at Madam C.J. Walker's estate together with Nicola Vassell, who this year opened the first Black-owned gallery in New York's Chelsea neighborhood.

But illustrating what wealth looks like can be complicated -- especially when history has shown that marginalized creators are not always given the credit or compensation they're due. "I believe that Black wealth matters, and I wanted to put it on display," Jean-Raymond said.

"Here's the Super Soaker, here's the curtain rod, here's the peanut butter jar and all these other things that we had a hand in creating. But how many of those items became Black-owned industries? None of them."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Marianna Cerini, CNN

Delving into the archives of pop culture history, " Remember When? " is a series offering a nostalgic look at the celebrity outfits that defined their eras.

They say rain can be a sign of good luck. And it certainly was -- in hindsight, at least -- for Diana Ross when a torrential rainstorm struck during her televised Central Park performance on the evening of July 21, 1983.

To this day, the show is considered among the decade's most epic live performances, and was perhaps Ross' most memorable appearance. It was also, possibly, the shortest concert to make such a long-lasting impression.

Ross had been performing on an open-air stage for less than 30 minutes when lashing winds and heavy showers began pouring over her and her fans, leading the singer to cut the evening short.

But that half-hour forever sealed Ross' reputation as a pop diva and style icon. Wearing a tight-fitting orange sequined jumpsuit with a cape billowing behind her, she looked nothing short of showstopping as she -- literally -- stopped the show and urged the crowd to slowly leave while continuing to sing.

Diana Ross wears an orange jumpsuit as she performs in Central Park at the televised 1983 concert. Credit: Carlos Rene Perez/AP

When Ross reprised the show at Central Park the next day, she stepped on stage in a striking purple jumpsuit (pictured top) that had as many sequins as her orange number the evening before.

These were two of the many, many brilliant stage looks flaunted by the Queen of Motown that helped make the jumpsuit -- usually of the glittering and skin-tight variety -- a dazzling sartorial choice for female artists ever since.

Ross had long shown a proclivity for one-pieces: In the 1970s, after leaving the Supremes to pursue a solo career, she made a habit of donning bold, gutsy jumpsuits for performances and fashion photo shoots (there was also the shiny one she notably wore in the 1975 movie "Mahogany"). She often alternated them with dreamy dresses, exaggerated ruffles, tulle confections and spangled bodysuits.

Uniquely personal and always over the top, the singer's glammed-up wardrobe helped turn her into an instantly recognizable figure in the industry -- and jumpsuits played a central role.

They were a sign of the times: From the late '60s to early '80s, everyone from Halston and Christian Dior to Oscar de La Renta and Yves Saint Laurent crafted their own version of the jumpsuit. Any celebrity worth their salt had one -- or more -- in their closets. Think of Farrah Fawcett, Cher , Liza Minnelli and Bianca Jagger, but also ABBA, and plenty of male performers, too: Elvis, David Bowie as Ziggy Stardust, Mick Jagger, Freddie Mercury

Diana Ross donned a violet sequined jumpsuit as she returned to Central Park the next day. Credit: Tom Gates/Getty Images

The appeal of the all-in-one is easy enough to grasp. Women loved them as liberating garments that defied the male gaze -- something that felt especially relevant in the midst of the Women's Liberation Movement. Men (the creative, liberal, hippie ones, at least) meanwhile liked jumpsuits for their gender-fluid, stereotype-breaking possibilities. They were anti-establishment, they were comfortable, and they made "cool" incredibly easy to pull off.

Ross wore them like a second skin on stage. In the '80s and early '90s, as the jumpsuit reached its golden years (and was declared "the ballgown of the next century" by American designer Geoffrey Beene), so too did the soul singer's embrace of it.

In 1991, she wore a golden, glittery and strapless jumpsuit for a gig at the Gorge Amphitheater in George, Washington. Four years later, at Super Bowl XXX, she sparkled in a purple one-piece that she paired with a gold foil coat (one of four outfits that night) during her half-time performance -- before exiting, full diva-style, via helicopter

Diana Ross performing at one of her Central Park concerts. Credit: Richard Corkery/NY Daily News Archive/Getty Images

It's little wonder that so many of Ross' successors have replicated her shimmering style. Take the Lanvin jumpsuit worn by Rihanna on her Diamond World Tour in 2013, or the tasseled one-piece she donned at a 2016 VMA after-party. Then there was Beyoncé's " disco ball " Vivienne Westwood jumpsuit, which she paired with a cape (very Diana Ross), and the ultra-tight Versace catsuit she wore on her 2018 On the Run II tour. And not to mention Kelly Rowlands' numerous metallic jumpsuits, including the sparkly showstopper she wore for Queen Bey's 35 birthday.

There was also Lady Gaga's strapless black jumpsuit from the 2016 Victoria's Secret show, and the dazzling one-piece she wore for her performance of " Shallow " at the 2019 Grammys, as well as J. Lo's many glitzy jumpsuits over the years.

They all owe a debt of gratitude to Ross, whose own daughter, Tracee Ellis Ross, has also sported the look time and again, looking as glam as her mom on each occasion.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Megan C. Hills, CNN

In 2009, Derek Morrison stood in an airport boutique and considered spending $960 on a pair of Louis Vuitton x Kanye West sneakers crafted from rose-tinted suede and caramel leather. He ultimately decided against it -- he couldn't justify the price and had too many suitcases.

A little over a decade later, the shoes are being advertised online for $10,000 a pair.

"I've regretted it ever since," said Morrison, who now works as European senior director for the sneaker resale platform, StockX

Released just months before West debuted his game-changing Nike x Yeezy line, the sneakers have become part of fashion history. "They represented a convergence of sneakers, Kanye and high fashion that was controversial at the time, but such a pivotal moment in the industry," Morrison said, describing it as "a breakthrough that paved the way for the modern era we see today."

Kanye West's Grammy-worn 2008 Yeezy prototype sneakers, which sold for $1.8m at Sotheby's in April. Credit: Jerome Favre/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock

But the price tag remains relative pocket change compared with some of the most valuable shoes on the collectors' market.

The auction record for sneakers has been broken multiple times since 2017, jumping from a little over $190,000 for a pair of Converse signed by Michael Jordan, who wore them at the 1984 Olympics, to the $615,000 paid for a pair of the basketball star's Nike Air Jordan 1s in 2020. Then, earlier this year, another of Kanye West's creations -- the prototype Nike x Yeezys he wore to the 2008 Grammys -- became history's most expensive sneakers after selling via a private sale for $1.8 million.

Over the past five years, there's been an "explosion" in collectors spending big money on rare shoes, according to Caitlin Donovan, head of handbags, streetwear and sneakers at Christie's auction house. Together with sneaker resale platform Stadium Goods, Donovan recently curated a sale focusing on Nike's Jordan line. The online auction, which concluded this week, featured almost 30 rare pairs, from Jordan prototypes and game-worn sneakers to early limited-edition samples. A pair of red and black salesman sample Air Jordan High 1s was the auction's most expensive single item, selling for $27,500.

A pair of Nike Air Jordan 1/2 development samples carried an auction estimate of $120,000 to $160,000. Credit: Courtesy Christie's

"From function to fashion, this auction (highlighted) some of the iconic shoes that started on the court, and landed themselves firmly in mainstream pop culture and fashion history, on the feet of Grammy winners and celebrated fashion icons to storied athletes across a number of sports genres alike," Donovan said.

A luxury collectible

Surging auction prices reflect the robust growth of the secondary resale sneaker market, which StockX estimates is now worth $10 billion. This figure is predicted to climb to nearly $30 billion by 2030, as growing numbers of collectors invest in limited edition "deadstock" items -- shoes that "must be new and unworn," Morrison said -- with the aim of reselling or displaying them as prized possessions.

Ligaya Salazar, curator of the London Design Museum's new StockX-sponsored exhibition "Sneakers Unboxed: Studio to Street," said that it is "young people, largely from diverse inner-city neighborhoods" who have "made sneakers what they are today." These original sneaker aficionados continue to have a major impact on the industry today, she added.

Sneakers on display at the London Design Museum's exhibit "Sneakers Unboxed." Credit: Courtesy Felix Speller/London Design Museum

Sneaker culture is also deeply intertwined with sports culture -- especially following the launch of Michael Jordan's 1985 Air Jordan sneakers, which Donovan called "the first and most collectible sneaker."

"It was the iconic sneakers of the early Jordan era that slowly permeated mainstream and pop culture, creating a breed of new collectors: sneakerheads," she said.

Collectors have diversified in the years since, with Donovan seeing a growing number of millennials, who "are only just starting on their collecting journey," join the more "serious and established collectors of sports history and fashion."

Sneaker collector Ann Jacobe , who owns around 500 pairs (and insists that she wears even the most valuable ones), said she welcomes new interest from luxury investors and auction houses. The Filipina collector, who has "lost count" of how much money she has spent on sneakers, said it "elevates the consciousness that shoes can be treated like art."

Collector Ann Jacobe with some of the sneakers in her closet. Credit: Courtesy Ann Jacobe

"It's a great thing, as I hold sneakers in high regard much like a sculpture or a painting. And based on the prices of some pairs (at auction), it is definitely going that route," she said, adding she would consider bidding for sneakers at auction if they "resonate with me and bring me joy."

While some collectors treat sneakers purely as an investment, others like Jacobe don't simply want to own coveted pairs -- they want to own the stories and lifestyles behind them, Morrison said. "People tend to devote themselves to values, or narratives, or themes that transcend individual brands," he said, adding that sneakers can "make us feel connected to brands, people and cultural moments."

Speaking about her buying habits, Jacobe said, "Sometimes it's how (a pair) make me swoon the first time I see them; sometimes it's the story behind the sneakers and how it resonates with my values."

If Air Jordans are among the most popular sneakers on the market, they also have one of the best-known stories . The result of a collaboration between Michael Jordan and Nike, the design famously flouted the NBA's "51% rule" that stated footwear had to be predominantly white. Jordan nonetheless wore a red and black pair during a preseason game, helping them transcend fashion to represent a cultural moment. Nike later capitalized on the controversy, reissuing the original Air Jordan 1s as the "banned" edition.

Ann Jacobe's sneaker collection, which she estimates consists of 500 pairs. Credit: Courtesy Ann Jacobe

Clearly aware of sneakers' cultural power, Nike has since collaborated with luxury fashion labels like Dior and Sacai, as well as non-sporting celebrities such as Travis Scott and somewhat unlikely brands like Ben & Jerry's. Others have followed suit, from Adidas' Marvel Avengers-themed sneakers to Balenciaga's appeal to gamers via a partnership with PlayStation.

Touchstones of sneaker culture can be found throughout Jacobe's 500-pair collection, including the Yeezy Boost 350 Turtle Doves ("a classic from Kanye West's rich sneaker story," she said) and the Nike Dunk SB Reese Forbes (from what she called the early-2000s "craze" for Nike's SB skate shoes). She spent nearly a year looking for a rare pair of Nike x Off-White sneakers from 2017, saying it was "like a self-declared holiday when I unboxed them."

The collector also seeks out shoes that pay homage to her home country. Her favorites include the Nike AF-1 Philippines, which feature the colors of the national flag, as well as a pair of Asics designed with Whang Od, the last traditional Filipina tattoo artist from the Kalinga tribe.

"(It's) so surreal finding and owning a pair that represents us and the community so well," she said.

Changing attitudes

Not all collectors are motivated by their love for sneakers, however. As with art and property, shoes can represent both an investment and a way for collectors to "diversify their assets," said Donovan, of Christie's auction house.

"Limited edition iterations of classic styles ... have always been the pinnacle of the luxury secondary collecting market," she said, adding: "Collectors seek out these collaborative works -- often released in limited quantities on the primary market -- on the secondary market at premium prices.

A visitor stands in front of a display at the London Design Museum's exhibit "Sneakers Unboxed." Credit: Courtesy Felix Speller/London Design Museum

Resale sites such as StockX, which tracks sneakers' real-time value and the latest sales like Wall Street stocks, has made it easier for collectors to treat rare, expensive sneakers like commodities. (The platform even checks for counterfeits at dedicated authentication centers).

And getting hold of new limited-edition designs is, increasingly, big business. Collectors might once have queued up outside stores for the latest "drop," but many of today's resellers instead turn to online "botting" -- using software that automatically buys up stock the moment a new collection goes online. For brands that would rather sell to sneakerheads than bots, it's "an eternal arms race," Morrison said.

If savvy resellers pay their cards right, they could make tens of thousands of dollars flipping deadstock. StockX said that the Jordan 1 Retro High Dior collaboration was the most expensive sneaker release of 2020, selling for $2,000 but fetching $11,000 online via a Sotheby's auction. Only 8,500 pairs of the sneakers were ever made -- and they were launched on Air Jordan's 35th anniversary, making for a perfect trifecta of rarity, luxury collaboration and historic moment. Today, the highest bid for a pair on StockX is over $12,600

"There are many factors why some may be more expensive than others, including how rare it is, has it been worn by a celebrity or if it was a hyped collaboration," Morrison said. "But in general, it comes down to supply and demand -- the fewer that are available, the more compelling or resonant the product is, and the more they'll cost to obtain."

But regardless of whether collectors are buying for pleasure or profit, all are looking for sneakers that speak to the culture of their day, Morrison said. "They're more than just something that goes on your feet -- they're a canvas that serve as a means of self-expression, whether you're a collector or wearing them right out of the box."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Fiona Sinclair Scott, CNN London

Russian Ghanaian photographer Liz Johnson Artur's work mostly falls under a single title: "Black Balloon Archive." Far bigger than a conventional series, the extensive project is instead an ongoing record of photos taken over a 30-year period.

The name was inspired by the song "Black Balloons," from the 1970 album "Is It Because I'm Black, by American soul singer Syl Johnson. "Black balloons fill the air. Black balloons, they're everywhere," go the happy lyrics, chiming sweetly with Johnson Artur's vast visual log of what she calls the "Black diaspora" in London and around the world.

Her photos of Black people of all ages, genders, nationalities and experiences are so broad they defy narrow categorization. She rarely captions her photos and is unapologetic in her unwillingness to explain the work, even to her subjects.

"I don't always explain what I do," she said from her London studio, an apartment on the 13th floor of a concrete tower block south of the River Thames "But to be quite honest, I don't have to.

"When I approach people ... what I say (to them is that I'll) try to put them in good company."

This is not to suggest that Johnson Artur doesn't treat her subjects with sensitivity. Her photos are nuanced and inviting, unaided by any sort of description; they ask the viewer to look deeply at each subject, to study the images for clues about the lives depicted. Young children, women dressed in religious wear, men in drag, musicians, models -- the photographer has captured Black people from all walks of life.

This week, her work is being recognized at Rencontres d'Arles, an annual photo festival held in the south of France, where she will be given the Kering Women in Motion photography prize. A relatively new award, the winners to date are Susan Meiselas and Sabine Weiss, in 2019 and 2020 respectively .

Despite the accolade and a prolific career, the 57-year-old photographer was relatively unknown until just a few years ago. She didn't stage her first solo exhibition until May 2019, a collection of works drawn from the "Black Balloon Archive" at the Brooklyn Museum in New York, the city where her love of photography initially took hold.

Born in Bulgaria to a Russian mother and a Ghanian father, Liz Johnson Artur migrated to West Germany as a child. During her first trip to America in the mid-1980s, she found herself staying with a friend of her mother's in the middle of a predominantly Black neighborhood in Brooklyn -- a very different scene to what she was used to at home. It was on this trip that she began building her confidence with a camera.

She remembers an early picture taken while walking through Central Park. She noticed a man sleeping on one of the park's famous boulders. Recalling the moment, she said she remembered feeling guilty about taking his photo. "It feels a bit like you're stealing something," she said.

Liz Johnson Artur, winner of the 2021 Women in Motion photography prize. Credit: Liz Johnson Artur

While she was preparing her shot, the man suddenly woke up and spotted her. At that moment, she didn't know what to do, "so I kind of looked at him, he looked at me, and then he just went back to sleep," she said. She took the picture, and remembers the feeling of guilt subsiding. It changed her approach to street photography -- "it didn't feel like stealing anymore," she said.

Since those early years, Johnson Artur has shot for magazines like i-D and The Face, photographed the likes of MIA and Lady Gaga on tour and worked with labels including Rhianna's Fenty brand and Italian fashion house Valentino. During that time she also had a daughter.

She staged her first UK exhibition in 2019 at the South London Gallery, focusing on Black life in the British capital, where she's lived since 1991. Last year, she was one of 10 artists to receive a cash bursary from London's Tate galleries, an award organized in lieu of the annual Turner Prize, which was canceled due to the pandemic.

When asked how she would define her work, Johnson Artur said quite simply that "it is a lot of different people."

She stressed that there's no overarching mission. "This is not about an agenda," she said. "It's about people and encounters."

Is the photographer cynical about the spike of interest in her work over the last few years -- particularly as it coincided with the rise of movements such as Black Lives Matter? Yes. (She said she has lost count of the number of emails she received from institutions around the time the demonstrations began last year). But does it bother her? It doesn't appear to. As Johnson Artur sees it, she's been taking pictures of Black people through her unique lens for three decades, and nothing about her work has changed. If brands and curators (and the media) are more attuned to it now, then so be it -- she's more interested to see what comes of it. "As far as I'm concerned, I'm just here to do my thing," she said.

That said, she enjoyed shooting a book for Valentino (a behind-the-scenes look at one of the brand's recent shows) and believes "they didn't just hire Black photographers to shoot a Black thing."

"Some people are genuine," she said, "it didn't feel exploitative for me."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Megan C. Hills, CNN

Taiwanese pop star Jay Chou tends to excel at whatever he puts his mind to. He's one of Asia's best-known singers, the director of an award-winning movie and a magician with his own Netflix series. But when it came to collecting art, Chou wasn't, by his own admission, instantly successful.

His first foray into the art world began in Paris' Le Marais neighborhood, an area renowned for its mish-mash of galleries, boutiques and bars. There, a three-dimensional, stereoscopic work caught his attention, so he purchased it and brought it back home to Taiwan.

He thought the piece was "super cool" at the time, he recalled in a video interview from Taipei. But his art-savvy friends didn't agree. "They said they would introduce me to a good art adviser," joked Chou, who buried the artwork in a warehouse and hasn't taken it out since.

The "Mandopop" (Mandarin pop) singer has come a long way since then. At home, a pink Picasso (a color closely associated with Chou, whose legions of fans often wave pink glow sticks at his concerts) has pride of place in his office; Peter Doig's stirring "Road Home" hangs along his staircase above a transparent piano; and a Jean-Michel Basquiat painting has been built into the structure of Chou's house, permanently encased in glass in his living room.

In 2019, the 42-year-old star was named in ArtNews' " 50 Art Collectors to Watch ." Paintings by the likes of Gerhard Richter and Frank Stella often pop up in the background of Chou's music videos. On Instagram, where he has a following of 6.4 million, the singer seesaws between sharing holiday snaps, previewing his latest projects and posting art he admires, such as David Hockney's "Portrait of an Artist," Philip Guston's "The Studio" and Vincent van Gogh's "Self Portrait with Bandaged Ear."

At the time of our interview, Chou was promoting his recent collaboration with Sotheby's auction house: A two-part contemporary art sale, personally curated by the musician. At the main auction, held Friday evening in Hong Kong , Basquiat's "Untitled" sold for over 289 million Hong Kong dollars ($37.3 million). A separate digital sale, featuring artists including Yayoi Kusama, Ronald Ventura and Yoshitomo Nara, closed Tuesday with KAWS' " Untitled (MBFR7) " fetching a top bid of 3.4 million Hong Kong dollars ($487,000).

From pianos to art

Amid the Picassos and works by celebrated Chinese French artist Zao Wou-Ki , a number of Chou's concert memorabilia went under the hammer, too (a tour-worn studded Tomas Chan outfit sold for over 1.2 million Hong Kong dollars, or about $154,000). The contrast raised an unlikely question: How did a mainstream pop artist find his footing as a credible figure in the art collecting world?

Chou is seemingly obsessed with nice things. He accumulates rare wines, watches and cars, though his affinity for collecting began in an unusual place: his fascination with Europe.

Long before his first ill-fated art purchase in Paris, he had amassed a collection of European antiquities and ornate pianos. When he encounters an antique piano, the singer imagines everyone who has played it before him, he said. As a classically trained musician, Chou says he's drawn to European architecture and furnishings -- so much so that he and his wife, Taiwanese Australian actress Hannah Quinliven, chose a castle in Yorkshire, England, as the venue for their 2015 wedding.

"I don't know if it's because I learned classical piano when I was a child, or (if) it's a past life connection," he said.

Jay Chou with an antique piano on the set of his directorial debut, "Secret." The instrument was displayed at Hong Kong's K11 Musea mall ahead of the Jay Chou x Sotheby's auction series. Credit: Courtesy Sotheby's x Enviseam

Chou has been surrounded by art his entire life -- thanks, in part, to his mother Yeh Hui-mei, a former art teacher who he still turns to for collecting advice. She made art history a part of his childhood, telling tales of famous artists. She preferred Salvador Dalí to Picasso, Chou recalled in a Sotheby's auction preview -- "Dalí was more loyal to his lover," he is quoted as saying.

When Chou decided to begin collecting art seriously, he started big. His first purchase was a work by Basquiat, an artist he admitted to not knowing much about. The celebrated painter was "the first artist I was exposed to" as a collector, the singer said.

Chou was initially intrigued by the artwork's extravagant price tag, but the more he learned about Basquiat, the more he fell in love with his work. "Basquiat (was) a pure artist, without commercial motives. He (was) like a child, directly expressing feelings in his paintings," Chou explained, likening it to how Picasso's works "transcend technique."

Since that purchase, Chou has committed to his expensive new hobby. "I've spent almost all my earnings from my concerts on artworks," he said.

How do you fall in love with art?

As one of Asia's biggest entertainers, Chou certainly has the means. Last May, he shared a tweet claiming that his 2019 tour earnings put him seventh among the world's male vocalists, just behind heavyweights like Ed Sheeran and Elton John. (He was also the only Asian artist on the list.) In his caption, Chou vowed his ranking would rise, saying he was "ultracompetitive" and needed to be "first place in everything I do."

According to Chou's friend Jazz Li, CEO of art collective Enviseam (a collaborator on the Sotheby's sale, alongside Hong Kong's K11 Group), the star is a "really passionate guy" and the same applies to his "crazy" approach to collecting art. "Sometimes I (tell him) calm down," Li said. "He gets very excited when he tries to buy something."

At the time of our interview, Chou said his next target was Richard Prince's " Runaway Nurse ," one of the pieces featured in the Sotheby's sale on Friday (it went on to sell for just under 94 million Hong Kong dollars, or $12.1 million, though it is not known if Chou was the buyer). He encountered the work, which was inspired by a film noir heroine, while in New York, and it left a "deep impact" on him, he said.

Chou said that seeing Richard Prince's "Runaway Nurse" had a "deep impact" on him. Credit: Courtesy Sotheby's x Enviseam

"Some people put their assets in real estate, sports cars, luxurious clothes, different (categories of collectibles)," Chou said. "But for me, art is the most important asset class."

Though art is very much an investment for Chou, he still purchases pieces with a view to displaying them at his home. Occasionally, he has interior designers mock up plans to display special artworks in his property, though as his collection grows, pieces have also gone into storage.

But for Chou, hanging art on the wall is not only a way to beautify his house. It has another purpose altogether: "Living with art inspires you to make more money," he said, "and to buy more art."

Imagining the future

While Chou is drawn to big names, he has a "strong desire" to support emerging artists. He can relate, he said, having spent the early part of his career songwriting and producing for other musicians behind the scenes, before releasing his breakout solo album "Jay" in 2000.

"People tend to look at big names like Jia Aili and Zao Wou-Ki," he said, referencing two prominent Asian artists. He compared collecting to running a record label, adding: "Everybody Is always looking at the big music stars, and they don't tend to get to see the more emerging singers."

Jay Chou reading an art book in a promotional shot for his recent collaboration with Sotheby's. Credit: Courtesy Sotheby's x Enviseam

An interest in lesser-known artists was apparent in his picks for the Sotheby's sale, which included Angela Yuen's mesmerizing spinning skylines and Fatina Kong's arresting collisions of nature and manmade cities. He names American artists Dana Schutz and Avery Singer as two of the names he's been quietly collecting.

And at home, Chou is also an artistic benefactor of sorts: His children Romeo and Hathaway have started painting. Just as his own mother nurtured his love for art, Chou proudly shares his children's passion on social media -- from 3-year-old Romeo's introduction to art appreciation to the family's chaotic home art studio. ("For the inception of the artist, don't be afraid of dirtying your home," he captioned the latter.)

Chou reported that both children are drawn to his favorite artists. During our video call, the star proudly shows off his daughter's latest project: a sketch of Chou sitting in front of a Basquiat. His wife, Quinliven, has found various places around the house to display the kids' works amid blue-chip masterpieces, and Chou has even incorporated their art into his clothing line, Phantaci.

Having not had time to learn to paint when he was a child, Chou said he wants to "make up for the lost opportunity" with his own children. As for whether they can make it as professionals, Chou reflected: "The path to becoming an artist is hard."

"If my children could work at Sotheby's, that wouldn't be too bad," he joked.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Paumbo, CNN

Keeping you in the know, Culture Queue is an ongoing series of recommendations for timely books to read, films to watch and podcasts and music to listen to.

If classic genres are like roadmaps, the new movie "Zola" -- steered by two exotic dancers who go on a whirlwind weekender in Florida -- is what happens when you turn off the navigation. Directed by Janicza Bravo, "Zola" starts out as an impromptu American road trip and descends into chaos.

The titular protagonist, played by Taylour Paige, is a self-possessed Black woman waitressing in Detroit when she encounters Stefani, played by Riley Keough, a White girl with a heavy "blaccent" (Bravo's words) who seems warm if a bit "fruit loops," as Zola notes to another waitress. But they soon bond over dancing, and Stefani entices Zola into an impulsive trip down to Florida to make bank at a nightclub.

"At its core, it is a story about friendship, and it's a story about fast friendships specifically," Bravo said in a video interview. It's about "those moments in our lives where we found ourselves falling in love with other women really intensely."

Stefani (Keough) and Zola (Paige) become immediate friends, but their relationship quickly deteriorates. Credit: Courtesy of Anna Kooris / A24 Films

Joined by Stefani's anxious boyfriend (Nicholas Braun) and shady roommate (Nasir Rahim), Zola soon finds herself in the queasy fluorescent lighting of a seedy Gulf Coast motel and a less-than-impressive strip club. (One gawking spectator tells her she looks like Whoopi Goldberg as he stuffs cash into her thong.) As the night unfolds, Zola discovers her road trip companions aren't who they seem, and Stefani has lured her into a precarious situation that gets wilder by the hour.

Yet the A24 film isn't a fictional tale -- it's an adaptation from a series of viral tweets that recount just such a weekend experienced by Detroit native A'Ziah "Zola" King. "Y'all wanna hear a story about why me & this b***h here fell out?" King wrote in October 2015 in the first of 148 tweets that became known as "The Story." "It's kind of long but full of suspense."

An uncanny, unsettling tale

Bravo's take on King's story has parallels to the unending, surreal nights of films like Martin Scorsese's "After Hours" and Stanley Kubrick's "Eyes Wide Shut." In other hands, it could have been close kin to Harmony Korine's glossy girls-gone-wild flick "Spring Breakers" (and in fact, James Franco, who played the film's hustler, was reportedly set to direct "Zola" early on). But Bravo handles the movie's source material with a particular sensitivity: "Zola" isn't the story of a narrator along for a crazy ride, but a woman telling a traumatic story through the shield of a dark comedy.

Bravo recognized King's ability to "process trauama with humor as a vehicle" when relaying her account of the weekend on Twitter. Credit: A24 Films

Seeing King's ability "to process trauma with humor as a vehicle," Bravo said, is "probably where I most saw myself because that's how I use humor. Humor is my greatest and strongest weapon, and I felt this 19-year-old was telling me...that without it, she wouldn't have made it out."

"Zola" is also a refreshing addition to the stories of American road trips, which are often told by White men, including Jack Kerouac in literature, Robert Frank and William Eggleston in photography, and Todd Phillips in buddy comedy films.

But in this case, the road trip experience isn't romanticized for Zola. The unease with her surroundings begins as they drive through the South, and she spots a Confederate flag blowing ominously in the wind. Her dynamic with Stefani becomes increasingly fraught as Stefani oscillates with ease between playing victim and victimizer, appropriating Black beauty and style and language as it suits her but wielding her Whiteness at the snap of a finger.

"You have to continue to remind the audience that (Stefani) is also the victimizer," Bravo said. Credit: A24 Films

"There is a portion of the audience that is going to arrive at this movie unconsciously rooting for (Stefani)," Bravo said. She said she had to consider how to present and position the two lead characters. "When we arrive at the start line, where are we setting (Zola)? And where are we setting (Stefani)?"

Zola is the only sane person on the journey, and like many characters who have been suckered into pandemonium, she just wants to get back home. And despite the film's willingness to take creative risks and to defy genres, Bravo says some of the approach is still a classic comedy.

"(Zola) is very much the straight man where (Stefani) is the menace or the clown or the buffoon," Bravo said. "Whenever there is chaos or unsteadiness, you should always be able to look to your straight man to ground you, and to recalibrate for you."

Add to Queue: American road trips, rewritten

In this photo book, using archival and contemporary images, photographer Amani Willett weaves together an alternate view of the glorified American road trip, showing how, over the course of 85 years, the seemingly carefree rite of passage has been marked by violence for Black Americans.

This film by Gregg Araki -- considered an early title of the New Queer Cinema genre -- follows two HIV-positive gay men who embark on a dangerous Thelma-and-Louise-like road trip when they have nothing left to lose.

Photographer Justine Kurland challenges the "masculine myth" of the North American frontier with this body of work , photographed in the late 1990s and early '00s, of fictional teenage girls forming their own utopia in the wilderness.

Director Andrea Arnold's "vagabond" film, co-starring Keough, is about a girl who runs away from home with a traveling group of hard-partying teens who sell magazines door-to-door. Bravo points to it as one of the reasons she wanted Keough for "Zola."

After a traffic stop goes awry during a Black couple's first date, they take to the road in this romantic crime drama written by Lena Waithe and directed by Melina Matsoukas.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Leah Dolan, CNN

The havoc wreaked by Covid-19 on the wedding industry was bound to leave its mark somehow. With 2020 ceremonies across the globe postponed indefinitely or canceled altogether, determined couples adapted as best they could: slashing guest lists by more than two-thirds and matching their outfits to mandatory face coverings. Some weddings even went virtual, with attendees dialing in to meeting apps to watch vows broadcast online.

Other lovebirds eloped, commemorating their private unions with small souvenirs mailed back to family and friends -- a gesture that trend forecasting firm WGSN predicts is here to stay.

But the past year's lasting impact on nuptials goes beyond keepsakes. As more people get vaccinated, "normal" life -- including social gatherings -- in some countries is beginning to resume. And with bridal parties and guests resurfacing, emerging sartorial trends reveal how the pandemic may have a lingering influence on wedding dress codes.

Four one-of-a-kind vintage wedding gowns hanging in LA bridal boutique, Happy Isles. Credit: Emily Knecht/Courtesy Lily Kaizer/Happy Isles

Shifting silhouettes

Using a combination of Google data and social media tags, global fashion search engine Lyst maps the rising demand of certain styles amongst consumers. In their 2021 wedding report , Lyst found that more brides-to-be were seeking out 19th-century-inspired gowns, à la "Bridgerton" -- the seductive period drama that engrossed 82 million households around the world during the pandemic and became Netflix's most popular original series

That penchant for escapist fantasy soon spilled over into wedding mood boards. Interest in empire line wedding dresses -- frocks with a bust-level waist and full skirt that appear largely unchanged from when they were first modeled by Regency-era women in the 1800s -- increased by 133% . Demand for bridal corsets also soared 291% , consistent with a growing appreciation for corsetry across the board. The ladies of "Bridgeton" were never fully dressed without a spangled tiara, and likewise embellished headpieces became a hot pandemic accessory with global searches climbing by 156% in 2021, according to Lyst.

Audrey Hepburn wears an empire line dress designed by Fernanda Gattinoni for the 1956 film "War and Peace." Credit: SNAP/Alamy

Allyson Rees, a senior strategist at WGSN, says period-inspired flourishes like capped sleeves and statement ruffles will continue to influence bridal silhouettes. "We still think that cottagecore is going to be a huge styling trend for the year ahead," she said in a phone interview.

But according to luxury retailer Net-A-Porter, large swathes of their customer base are choosing dresses that are timeless rather than time-specific. "There has been a newly created demand for adaptable, versatile, easy white dresses in sleek, simple silhouettes," Net-A-Porter Senior Market Editor Libby Page wrote in an email. "Smaller scale celebrations have required fewer formal looks and customers are coming to us in favor of something simple and chic."

Earlier this month, Business of Fashion reported a pandemic-induced ecommerce rush was sweeping the bridal industry, with "fewer custom gowns and more dresses bought straight off the rack." The surge of quick-turnaround ceremonies could be leading many to shy away from outlandish styles and stick to classic, more reliable looks.

Brands with established online stores like Net-A-Porter are benefiting from this sense of urgency, Page said. "Some of our top (selling) brands have been bridal brands," she noted. "Our 'Wedding' (section) on site is unquestionably receiving traction."

Instagram became a key way for Lily Kaizer to reach brides-to-be during the worst of the pandemic. Credit: Courtesy Lily Kaizer/Happy Isles

The post-pandemic party bug

For Lily Kaizer, owner of LA-based vintage bridal boutique Happy Isles, there was a time last summer when she thought the appetite for after-parties would never return.

"All the ruffles and the glitz and the glam that do well for us in regular times just, you know, weren't the thing people were after," she said in a phone interview. "So there was a moment where I was like, 'is anyone ever going to want an after-party dress ever again?'"

Kaizer began re-stocking resplendent pieces -- think turquoise sequined jumpsuits and gold mermaid-tail gowns -- in March this year, following a gut instinct that led her to believe "these bigger weddings are coming back, maybe bigger than ever." By May, her suspicions seemed to be confirmed, as she says brides and wedding guests alike poured in hoping to bag unique, one-off looks.

Similarly, Lyst dubbed 2021 "the year of the after party," reporting a resurgence on partywear including mini bridal dresses (interest for which is up by 170% ) to rhinestone heels.

However, while large-scale celebrations are certainly taking place, Rees believes the picture is more nuanced. "(WGSN) have seen it go in two different directions," she told CNN. "We're seeing a shift to more intimate settings -- what we're calling micro-mony."

Rees points to a 160% spike in searches for "small backyard weddings" on Pinterest as evidence. Leaner friendship groups are another reason, Rees says, for our lingering appreciation for low-profile events. While the pandemic put a strain on most platonic relationships , it razed some friendship categories -- like acquaintances -- to the ground.

"There's been a shrinkage in the last year of our social circle and our social groups," Rees said. "And so, you know, do you really need to invite your mother's friend from tennis to your wedding?"

A model wears a unique piece from Happy Isles. Credit: Noua Unu Studio/Lily Kaizer/Happ

Here comes the groom

Gender-fluid styles like skirts and dresses seem to have been embraced by a range of men, appearing both in the pages of fashion magazines and out on city sidewalks . According to Lyst, grooms are no different, with insights reporting a 26% increase in searches for "men's wedding skirts" on their platform since last year. The retail search engine highlights the Emmy Award-winning sitcom "Schitt's Creek" as a source of inspiration, in which fashion-obsessed character David Rose, played by Dan Lavy, sports a groom skirt for his special day.

Rees remains unconvinced. "I think it's a very niche audience for a men's skirt," she said. "But we are seeing a lot more attention being put into what men are wearing for their wedding day."

Traditional looks are still receiving a twist, with grooms opting for regular suit cuts in daring colors. Pink may be the new black, reports Lyst, pointing to a 33% increase this year in the number of men looking at pink suits online.

For the more understated grooms, jewelry is one fast becoming one low-fuss way to modernize an outfit. In May, luxury jewelers Tiffany & Co announced they would be selling men's engagement rings for the first time in their 184-year-history. When it comes to groom fashion, Rees agrees the devil is in the details. WGSN reports an uptick in groom-centric gift-giving, subverting the traditional bridal shower and lavishing the husband-to-be with presents like custom rings complete with engraving. Groom jewelry is on Lyst's radar, too -- with platform searches for engagement watches jumping over 40% this year.

Bold patterns and striking colors are set to dominate groom fashion in the coming years. Credit: Courtesy Lyst

The future of weddings

For Kaizer, the pandemic solidified vintage as a big player in the bridal market. "Over the pandemic, there's definitely been a rise in people collecting vintage," she said, citing popular resale apps like Poshmark as a driver of the trend. "We're seeing more vintage bridal focussed businesses popping up."

With Covid shuttering physical stores for weeks at a time and the environmental crisis looming large, platforms like Vestiaire and Depop filled an important corner in the retail market and ignited a passion for second-hand. Now, Kaizer says, vintage pieces will become a mainstay in the wedding industry through 2021 and beyond. "They just offer that special, unique thing that's completely guilt free."

Reflecting on future ceremonies, there will still be some markers of where coronavirus once was, Rees says. "There might be a little bit more space between tables, or maybe there is always hand sanitizer now in your goodie bag."

Top image: a digital collage of upcoming 2021 wedding trends, courtesy of Lyst.

Correction: An earlier version of this story included a photo caption that incorrectly identified a model for Happy Isles.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

The year after British novelist Jackie Collins died following a private battle with breast cancer in 2015, a listing went up for her 21,784-square-foot house -- an 8-bedroom Beverly Hills property inspired by the clean lines and Pop Art color blocking of David Hockney's pool painting "A Bigger Splash."

The home's origins were fit for a love story -- something Collins knew a thing or two about.

She captivated millions of readers in the 1970s and '80s as a rebellious romance writer who spelled out the details of pulsating desire. Her self-assured female protagonists, who never settled, were the stars of more than 30 different novels and eight movie adaptations over five decades. Collins was a self-proclaimed feminist -- though her brand of sex-forward feminism wasn't always warmly welcomed -- and she was known for her big personality and ostentatious love of leopard print.

"(Jackie) changed the way women got to have sex," said pop culture critic Wednesday Martin. Credit: Brian Aris/CNN FILMS

"She was putting female sexuality at the center of the world and people lost their minds," said pop culture critic Wednesday Martin in the new CNN Films documentary "Lady Boss," taken from the title of Collins' 1990 novel. "She changed the way women got to have sex; women got to be selfish in bed thanks to Jackie Collins."

But the house, which had a personality to match hers -- it had numerous writing desks and was populated with bronzes and paintings of big cats -- was a love letter born of Collins' own romance. Her second husband, club owner Oscar Lerman, had worked with architect Ardie Tavangarian to bring her architectural vision to life before Lerman died from prostate cancer in 1992.

Architect Ardie Tavangarian helped bring Collins' vision for her house to life. His photos show the house when it was completed in the early '90s. Credit: Ardie Tavangarian/Arya Group

"Oscar was more on the management side of it, and she was more on the creative side," Tavangarian said in a phone interview. "She was very clear on what she wanted. And we were basically helping her to bring it together."

"They planned out every element of this home," recalled Rory Green, Collins' daughter, in "Lady Boss." "It was quite beautiful; it was sort of almost museum-like. That was her fantasy."

A whirlwind romance

Collins met Oscar Lerman in the mid-1960s in his London club Tramp after a tragic first marriage to businessman Wallace Austin, who died by suicide, and when her ambitions to become a Hollywood actress were fizzling, according to "Lady Boss." Sister to Joan Collins of "Dynasty" fame, Jackie had always sought the spotlight but hadn't yet found her way into it.

It was Lerman who encouraged her to finish her first book, "The World is Full of Married Men," she said in an archival interview in the documentary. Published in 1968, the book was about an ad executive who begins an affair, but it's the two women who come out on top. It was an instant hit.

"I'd been writing all my life, I'd written a lot of half books that I hadn't finished, and he was the first person that said to me, 'It's absolutely terrific and you can do it,' and so I did it," Collins said.

Their courtship was the stuff of romance novels. Her daughter Tracy explained in "Lady Boss" that her mother actually had two marriage proposals, so she took them both on vacation with Tracy to see who would treat her daughter best. Lerman emerged the victor.

Collins wrote 32 books during her lifetime and they have sold half a billion copies. Credit: Brian Aris/CNN FILMS

By the time Collins and Lerman had two more daughters together and settled their family in sunny California in 1980, she'd followed up with a string of bestsellers. She began writing her most famous titles of sultry romance set against high society, including "Chances," "Hollywood Wives" and "Lucky."

In 1989, when Lerman was diagnosed with cancer, he and Collins began to plan the new Beverly Hills house based on her ideas.

"I think in many ways she didn't know how to cope with (Lerman's diagnosis)," said Collins' longtime friend and business manager Laura Lizer in the documentary. "She just thought if she carried on with her life, it just wasn't there. And they decided to build a new home."

A house fit for Jackie

When the couple hired Tavangarian to design their home, he was in his late 20s and inspired by the clean lines of Swiss-French early 20th-century architect Le Corbusier.

"(Collins) wanted more modern European architecture, which is what I do," he recalled. "Their vision was to create something to entertain (guests), and to show their art in a very clean, contemporary light."

The two-story home had a guesthouse in the back, and they decided a 100-foot-long gallery displaying artworks would connect the two.

"She was extremely visual and understood spaces," Tavangarian said of Collins' modern tastes. Credit: Ardie Tavangarian/Arya Group

"She was also very much in love with Art Deco...She has this incredible number of Tiffany lamps and these different objects," Tavangarian said. "We created these vitrines and spaces to display them."

Tavangarian's photographs of the time show modern, light-filled airy interiors with beige walls and light wood and off-white furniture meant to offset her art. The minimal, white, geometric exterior punctuated by palm trees opened up to a long stretch of patio in the back, surrounding the deep turquoise blue of the Hockney-inspired rectangular pool.

After three years of planning and construction, the house was ready in 1992, but Lerman's health was failing him.

"He was just so intent on getting that house finished for Jackie," Collins' friend Barbara Davis said in "Lady Boss."

The Beverly Hills house has been called 'museum-like' for its clean lines, skylights and artworks. Lerner died before they could move into their new home together. Credit: Ardie Tavangarian/Arya Group

Lerman died before they could move in, and as Tracy recounted, after his death, Collins retreated to her new study to write in seclusion.

"She really didn't deal with (his death) very well," Tracy said in "Lady Boss." But, she added, Collins kept up a strong facade. "She had learnt how to survive and for her, what was always there for her was you know, Jackie Collins."

, following a six-year battle with cancer. The house sold for $21 million in July 2016, Collins stayed in the house she'd planned with Lerman for over two decades until her own death at 77 years old , following a six-year battle with cancer. The house sold for $21 million in July 2016, according to the Los Angeles Times , but in Tavangarian's opinion it will always be hers.

"The house was Jackie," he said. "The house was about her."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Leah Dolan, CNN

Keeping you in the know, Culture Queue is an ongoing series of recommendations for timely books to read, films to watch and podcasts and music to listen to.

Sylwia is constantly being watched -- first by her 600,000 Instagram followers, then by a man parked outside her apartment.

If you are fascinated by the landscape of internet celebrity and what lurks beneath, the Polish thriller "SWEAT" -- part of the official selection at Cannes Film Festival 2020 -- should leave you reeling.

Out in theaters in June and available on arthouse streaming service MUBI next month, the film takes a time-honored trope about the pitfalls of fame -- loneliness, crumbling interpersonal relationships, a desperate need for validation -- and modernizes it through the lens of social media influencing.

A strained relationship with her mother pushes Sylwia to search for support online. Credit: Michał Dymek/Lava Films

The film follows Instagram-famous fitness guru Sylwia, played by Magdalena Koleśnik, as she moves through her daily influencer duties, wearing a seemingly endless rotation of hot pink athleisure. From opening mountains of free publicity packages to live-streaming the creation of her favorite protein smoothie, almost every mundane second of Sylwia's life is broadcast to her army of fans.

"Emotional exhibitionists fascinate me, probably because I am on the opposite side of that spectrum," said screenwriter and director Magnus von Horn in a statement.

Von Horn's observations of his own social media feed helped inform Sylwia's character.

"I couldn't stop watching fitness motivators and the way they made their lives into reality shows," he said in a recorded interview with MUBI. "I felt like I got to know them on some level because they shared so much of their everyday life. Twenty videos of a dog playing with a rubber toy and then an emotional speech about love problems. That's why I watched them. It was provocative, I both hated and loved them."

When she inevitably shares too much, Sylwia is brutally reminded that online actions can have real-world consequences. A vulnerable recording of Sylwia crying gives her devoted supporters a false sense of intimacy and, when one obsessive fan tracks down where she lives, compromises her safety. There is no screen to hide behind and she is forced to confront the danger of these parasocial relationships head-on.

The heartracing thriller holds parasocial relationships up to the light. Credit: Natalia Łączyńska/Lava Films

The show must go on

Much like influencing, the world of fitness is high energy. When we first meet Sylwia, she is hosting a dynamic in-person workout session for a crowd that has congregated at the mall. Headset microphone on, with sweat pouring from under her blonde ponytail, Sylwia is like a televangelist feeding off the audience, chanting superlatives and at times reaching a state of attention-induced ecstasy.

But after every scene that shows Sylwia's seemingly inexhaustible online personality, we're met with the deafening silence that follows once the camera is off -- or the eerie sound of her recorded voice echoing through her empty apartment. The illusion Sylwia's career hinges on -- impenetrable self-esteem, a self-assured, sunny disposition -- is repeatedly created and destroyed before our eyes as we watch her in private, yearning for human connection.

Swarmed by her adoring fans, Sylwia demonstrates how highly revered the online celebrity can become. Credit: Natalia Łączyńska/Lava Films

Would she be happier without her platform? The question goes unanswered. "As Sylwia got stronger I also stopped feeling the need to make a statement." Von Horn said. "Is it a film that criticises social media or not? I never wanted a clear stance."

Sylwia's life is designed to be seen, from the sculpted body that furthers her fitness empire to the grand apartment that helps facilitate brand deals. And anyway, as her old classmate says bleakly during a brief encounter, "What's the point if you can't share it?"

"SWEAT" opens in New York's Quad Cinema June 18 and in Los Angeles on June 25 at the Laemmle NoHo 7 and Lumiere. It is available to watch on MUBI from July 23.

Add to Queue: Welcome to the internet

Created in isolation during the pandemic with little more than a camera and some editing software, Burnham's comedy special digs deep into the mounting pressure that comes with existing online. The special feels like a thematic continuation of his 2018 directorial debut "Eighth Grade," which follows an introverted middle-schooler whose dreams of becoming a YouTuber appear at odds with her personality.

Set in Los Angeles, this HBO documentary follows a social experiment in which three wannabe influencers race to build a lucrative social media career through fake followers and plenty of contrived photo staging.

The debut novel by American poet Patricia Lockwood is a fragmented recounting of life as a Twitter personality. In her prose -- an Easter egg hunt of digital culture slang and meme references -- Lockwood blurs the boundaries between tweets and thoughts, emphasizing the indelible mark online life has left on the human psyche.

Journalist Moya Lothian-McLean sits down with Novara Media political editor Ash Sarkar to discuss the meteoric rise of the influencer and how this new form of celebrity is affecting wider society, from advertising to activism.

In this social media satire film, Aubrey Plaza plays Ingrid, an obsessive stalker who has successfully infiltrated the ranks of her favorite influencer. After being released from a psychiatric ward, Ingrid uses her inheritance to move to the modern-day promised land of Los Angeles in the hopes of pursuing Taylor, an internet celebrity played by Elizabeth Olsen.

Top image: A movie still from "SWEAT," courtesy of MUBI.

This story was updated to correct the MUBI release date which is July 23.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Fiona Sinclair Scott, CNN London

The story of the late Charlotte Perriand is an inspiring tale of an adventurous designer whose ideas and creations left a lasting mark on homes around the world. But most people will have never heard of the pioneering maker -- her place in history often overshadowed by her male contemporaries.

Starting off as a young furniture designer in Paris in the late 1920s, Perriand was one of very few women in the field at a time when society was often unwelcoming to working women. Le Corbusier, a giant of modern architecture, famously dismissed her when she first turned up at his office in search of a job after completing her studies. "We don't do embroidery here," he quipped condescendingly.

A year later, Le Corbusier reneged on his snap judgement when he saw Perriand's work on display at an annual fair for young artists, the Salon d'Automne, in 1929. Her installation, "Bar sous le Toit" (Bar in the Attic), a simple staging of modern, industrial-looking interior design, caught his eye and was her ticket to join his team.

During her time with Le Corbusier and his clique of creatives, Perriand would become instrumental in the design of one of the most iconic pieces of Modernist furniture to date: the B306 tubular steel chaise longue, also known as the "chaise lounge basculante" for its tilted design. An example of this piece, still coveted by today's collectors of modernist design, is on display in a new retrospective of her work at London's Design Museum. The exhibition follows a 2019 show about Perriand at the Fondation Louis Vuitton in Paris, and is one of the few celebrations of her work at such a scale.

"Chaise longue basculante" (Adjustable reclining chair), 1928 (Cassina). Credit: Felix Speller/The Design Museum

Born in 1903, she lived from the start to the end of the last century, passing away in October 1999. A great visionary, Perriand had a knack for dreaming up ways in which people would want to live in the future. Many of her creations feel particularly pertinent when viewed through today's lens.

Better to spend the day out in the sun, than dusting your useless objects Charlotte Perriand

In a series of drawings titled "Travail et Sport," (Work and Sport) published in interior design manual "Répertoire du goût moderne" in 1929, Perriand proposed a multifunctional space that could easily transform from a home to an office to a gym. She was solving a problem many of us would face more than 20 years after her death, as we sheltered in place during pandemic-related lockdowns, but at the time she was simply thinking about modern living.

Lead curator of the Design Museum show, Justin McGuirk, said Perriand understood that the future would call for more houses -- and more affordable housing at that. She was thinking about how to "take people out of poor-quality or slum housing, even in places like Paris," he explained during a phone interview, "and she (knew) that there was not going to be unlimited amounts of space for these people, that apartments might have to be small, and they have to be multifunctional."

"Travail et Sport" (Work and Sport) model, 1927, byCharlotte Perriand (Archives Charlotte Perriand). Credit: Felix Speller/The Design Museum

This desire to create good living spaces is one of the defining pillars of Perriand's work. According to Esme Hawes, assistant curator at the Design Museum, the appreciation that design is about providing a service to people was a recurring theme of Perriand's practice.

"A lot of her design is really focused around making things accessible and improving people's lives, and their quality of life, through design," Hawes said in an interview at the exhibition, "and I think that's something that a lot of female designers do." Noting that women in design often have to work harder to establish themselves, Hawes suggested "they feel they really have to use their platform" once they earn it.

Charlotte Perriand with Le Corbusier holding a plate like a halo in the background, 1928 Credit: ADAGP, Paris and DACS, London 2021 / © AChP

Perriand did just that. Over the course of her decades-long career she designed furniture, student accommodation, military quarters, private homes, offices and even a 1960s ski resort, in Les Arcs, France, which is still in use today.

Perriand parted ways with Le Corbusier after about eight years (some believe their disparate political beliefs caused their relationship to break down -- she was a steadfast communist, while her boss was apparently more sympathetic with the far right -- others figure she wanted to step out from behind Le Corbusier).

In 1940, Perriand received a then-extraordinary invitation to travel to Japan to work with the Department of Trade Promotion to help enhance Japanese products and increase sales to the West. While her role mostly saw her consulting and guiding local designers and artisans, she was deeply influenced by the two years she spent in the country -- most notably in the materials she used.

Les Arcs ski resort in France, 1967-69. Credit: © ADAGP, Paris and DACS, London 2021 / © AChP

According to McGuirk, Perriand had previously been dogmatic in her use of metal and modern materials that were seen as the "language of the future, the language of the Machine Age." But in Japan, she became "hugely impressed by the quality of (Japanese) craftsmanship," he said, explaining that she introduced materials like bamboo into her work, and eventually found "an interesting compromise between two contrasting worlds."

She also became enthralled by Japanese homes and their clever use of space, which underscored her belief in what McGuirk described as "flexible emptiness" -- the idea that you can live well without lots of furniture, as long as they are highly functional pieces. "Better to spend the day out in the sun, than dusting your useless objects," she wrote in the book "L'art d'habiter," published in 1950.

Perriand was informed by the belief that women should not spend hours at home doing housework. A keen sportswoman and traveler, she would have had little time for domestic duties herself.

While Perriand was finding compromises, the rest of the world was still at war. Tensions between France and Japan, an ally of Germany, were heating up, and Perriand, while trying to get back to Paris via the United States, ended up in French Indochina (now Vietnam), where she spent several years until the end of the war.

Once back in France, she solidified another quality she is often remembered for: her ability to collaborate and synthesize. She continued to design with Jean Prouvé , another important figure in French modernist and prefabricated design, who she had begun working with before the war. The Design Museum exhibition also notes her close link to artist Ferdinand Léger (a number of his artworks hang in the space around her furniture). Ironically, despite her openness to collaborate and the impression she made on the men she worked with, many of their names remain better-known than hers. But those who know her work have no issue explaining just how influential she was.

Bookcase for the Maisondu Mexique student's room, 1952. Credit: Felix Speller/The Design Museum

The easiest way to understand Perriand's work -- and to put it into context of today -- is to look at a very simple design concept: storage. As the exhibition catalog notes, it might seem banal to focus on storage, but her many cabinets and shelves are a tribute to her ethos: practical, modern, multifunctional and essential to everyday living. She often used large, modular shelving units to divide rooms, a very familiar interior design trick still used in homes and offices today. And echoes of her designs are everywhere -- just walk through Ikea for proof.

The last object on display at the Design Museum show is a very simple piece made by an unknown designer that she purchased in Brazil in the 1960s. It's a green plastic soda bottle that has been transformed into a simple decorative vase. Her attraction to the piece, and the fact that she kept it, speaks volumes about her design values, as summarized by a label on the exhibition wall: "resourceful, intelligent and infused with humanity."

"Charlotte Perriand: The Modern Life" is on at the Design Museum in London June 19 - September 5.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

A non-hormonal birth control capsule that women can insert just before sex. A rape kit that gives victims more agency and streamlines the evidence collection process. An overhauled design for a 150-year-old tool used in postpartum vaginal tearing.

These designs are just some of the finalists announced this week in the 2021 Index Award, and their creators hope to make the future of medicine and sexual health more equitable for all genders.

"There is still so much shame around female, trans and non-binary bodies that impose harmful barriers to healthcare," said Liza Chong, CEO of the award's Danish nonprofit organization, The Index Project. "A culture of silence persists around a number of important topics, ranging from women's sexual pleasure to the long-term implications of childbirth, serving to sideline vital conversations and deny people access to helpful and even life-saving resources."

Telemedicine company Sehat Kahani uses an all-female network of doctors to bolster healthcare accessibility in Pakistan and strengthen opportunities for female medical professionals. Credit: Sehat Kahani

Hosted since 2005, the biennial awards focuses more broadly on how design can solve crucial global issues -- past winners include the language app Duolingo and the 3D-printed Mars habitat MARSHA -- but with one category focused exclusively on design for the body, finalists and winners often tackle gendered issues in medicine that have long been ignored or are considered taboo.

Two years ago, for instance, the finalists included the AI-powered chatbot Raaji, which answers questions on menstruation, mental health and sex for girls and young women in developing countries. This year, two women doctors, Dr. Sara Saeed Khurram and Dr. Iffat Zafar Aga, have been recognized for their Pakistani telemedicine company Sehat Kahani, which uses an all-female network of doctors. According to the Index Award, the e-clinics provide accessible healthcare and attempt to combat the so-called "doctor bride" phenomenon, where many female medical students in the country forgo their careers , under pressure to prioritize motherhood.

Long overdue redesigns

This year's finalists hope to make seismic changes in the world through a single thoughtfully designed product that, in some cases, update a long-neglected area of medicine. Take the Hegenberger Speculum, for instance, which claims to make it easier for midwives to stitch perineum tears that occur during birth -- something 9 out of 10 women experience, according to the UK's National Health Service (NHS) -- and is made out of silicone instead of metal for more comfort for the patient. The current speculum had not been updated in a century and a half, according to its creator, Malene Hegenberger.

"It's quite a taboo subject," Hegenberger told the Danish media outlet Avisen in 2018. "Women generally don't want to be a bother and there's a lot of other stuff to focus on after childbirth. They put themselves aside and put the child first. I think that's why there hasn't been much done about it."

This silicone speculum stays expanded while inserted so midwives can use both hands to stitch postpartum tearing, allowing them to perform the proceduce without an assistant and simplifying the process. Credit: Malene Hegenberger/MadeByMakers

Meanwhile, the company Cirqle Biomedical is in the beginning stages of testing a new form of birth control that, if successful, could revolutionize the field since hormonal birth control was introduced to the market in 1960.

"Women's health has been under-prioritized and neglected for decades," said CEO Frederik Petursson Madsen over email. "Despite having billions of users, there has been very little innovation in the industry."

Its product, Oui, is a gel capsule that women can insert a minute before sexual intercourse and lasts for up to five hours, according to the company. It's non-hormonal, made of water and chitosan biopolymers, and works by thickening cervical mucus, preventing sperm from migrating past the vaginal canal.

Though Oui has only been tested on animals so far, its creators hope it will provide women with flexible, non-hormonal contraception. Credit: Cirqle Biomedical

Oui is meant to be less invasive than implants like Nexplanon and IUDs, which require in-office procedures to insert and remove; provide more flexibility than a daily regimented pill; and cut down on side effects that are common with hormonal birth control, from associations with depression to a higher risk of blood clots and stroke

"The necessity for women who take contraception is to prevent pregnancy, and because this need was the priority and there has been a lack of good alternatives, women (have) had to accept and put up with the side effects," said design manager Marie Lyhne in an email interview.

Addressing systemic issues

Designer Antya Waegemann has taken on a deeply complex problem that reaches across healthcare, policing and legal systems in countries around the world including the US: the backlog of hundreds of thousands of untested rape kits -- DNA collection kits which are crucial to identifying and charging sexual assault perpetrators.

While sexual assault affects people of all genders, the UN estimates that nearly one in three women over the age of 15 globally have experienced sexual violence, and the statistics for transgender people are even starker at one in two, according to the National Sexual Violence Resource Center (NSVRC).

In the US, the process for testing rape kits is plagued with issues from end to end, from laboratory delays to police destroying them . The problems start right from the beginning, according to Waegemann, who spent a year as a sexual assault advocate at New York Presbyterian Hospital, with confusing package design and collections that can take hours for victims who have just been through a severe trauma.

"It became so clear to me through that process, and also reading the instructions myself, how truly difficult it was to complete this kit," she said in a video call.

The Margo Kit is a redesigned kit to collect DNA after a sexual assault. Credit: Margo Kit

Though Sexual Assault Nurse Examiners (SANE) are trained to collect the rape kits, there is a national shortage of these types of nurses, and many hospitals will turn away victims if they don't have the staff -- or the kits -- available. According to Waegemann, she rarely saw a SANE professional on staff while volunteering; instead, it was mostly ER doctors and nurses handling the process. They tend to be much less familiar with the kit, Waegemann said, which was first designed in the 1970s and can include up to 16 different envelopes for collecting genital swabs, pubic hair combings and fingernail clippings, among other things.

Waegemann's redesigned kit offers color coding and clear instructions for healthcare providers, as well as an app for the victims to follow along with the process and understand each step.

The accompanying app helps victims stay informed with a step-by-step explanation. Credit: Margo Kit

But Waegemann also wants to make processing and testing the kits easier and faster for police and lab technicians, as well as provide immediate support for victims. Her company, Margo, is working on other products as well that aim to reimagine the system entirely, from how kits are tested and, importantly, tracked, once they leave the hospital, to an app that gives people information on how and where to get tested if they've been assaulted.

"The designs I have created of course consider the entire system," Waegemann said in a follow-up email. "But they are really about taking an entire process that is designed to exclude victims from taking control and seeking justice, and re-designing the aftermath...".

"I really believe that a product itself can change a system in a way that sometimes policy cannot," she said in the call.

On September 30, five winners will be announced from the 46 total finalists. The Index Award lists over €200,000 ($244,000) in prizes for the winners, as well as the potential for the organization to help fund their work moving forward.

Top image: A Oui capsule by Cirqle Biomedical
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Nina dos Santos, CNN Contributors Lauren Kent, CNN

It is the biggest legal fight the art world has ever witnessed: a Russian oligarch, who claims he was ripped off buying multi-million-dollar masterpieces, versus a Swiss art dealer who says it was just business.

Now, after six years of lawsuits in multiple jurisdictions, the tables appear to be turning once more in a saga so dramatic it's been given a name worthy of a movie script: "The Bouvier Affair."

Russian fertilizer tycoon Dmitry Rybolovlev has pursued Swiss art dealer and freeport storage magnate Yves Bouvier around the world for years in various courts, claiming to have been swindled out of $1 billion on 38 exorbitantly priced artworks sold to him by Bouvier over the course of a decade.

But in a new twist, Bouvier has told CNN he is preparing his own billion-dollar damage counter suit against Rybolovlev, after taking legal action in Singapore in February, alleging a long-running court battle with Rybolovlev has ruined his businesses and reputation.

The cases so far have kept an army of lawyers and reputation managers employed on either side, as one allegation against another is levied by each party, including claims of intimidation and political intrigue.

Fittingly, the tortuous imbroglio also involves some of the most priceless and controversial pieces of art, including the 2013 purchase of what is now the world's most expensive and enigmatic painting: the "Salvator Mundi," thought by some to be the work of Leonardo da Vinci despite years of debate over its authenticity -- a work on which Bouvier made a markup of more than 50%.

The "Salvator Mundi" on display at a press preview at Christie's in New York in 2017. Credit: Dennis Van Tine/Sipa USA/AP

Long believed by others to be a copy or the work of Leonardo's studio, the "Salvator Mundi" was purchased in 2005 by a consortium of speculative art dealers for under $10,000. Eight years later, after the painting had been restored and declared the work of the Renaissance master, Bouvier bought it for $80 million after enlisting the help of a poker player to beat down the price. The dealer swiftly sold it on for $127.5 million to his then-client, Rybolovlev, via the pair's offshore vehicles, according to an invoice referred to in court papers, and taking a 1% commission. And while the oligarch later auctioned off the painting for an astonishing $450 million in 2017 , to a secret buyer now widely believed to be Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, he nonetheless alleges that Bouvier defrauded him -- a claim Bouvier denies.

Rybolovlev declined to be interviewed for this story, but a spokesperson for Dmitry Rybolovlev's family entities told CNN: "These matters are being fought in the courts where we expect to prove what happened and that Bouvier's fanciful story is false. For now, what is most notable is what Bouvier does not dispute: as an art adviser, he pretended to help his clients assemble an art collection at a cost of $2 billion while secretly reaping half of that price for himself."

Yet Bouvier does dispute he was ever an "art adviser," a matter that has at been at the heart of the litigation and allegations by Rybolovlev of breach of trust.

"I am an art dealer," he told CNN. "The contracts prepared by Rybolovlev's lawyers and all my invoices explicitly described me as 'the seller.'

"Rybolovlev has never managed to convince a single judge or prosecutor otherwise, in any jurisdiction, for the very simple reason that his allegations do not match the reality of our contractual relations."

The saga of the legal battle encompasses many of the problems regulators have identified with the soaring global art market -- art, in the wrong hands, has become yet another commodity to move money with little accountability.

Related video: Why is art so expensive?

The "Salvator Mundi," meanwhile, hasn't been seen since the record-breaking sale. But it has been back in the headlines after a French documentary claimed in April that the painting had been at the center of a diplomatic spat between Paris and Riyadh, amid doubts over its authenticity and a request by the kingdom that it be shown in the Louvre.

CNN reached out to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for comment but is yet to receive a response.

In the documentary, "The Savior for Sale," an anonymous high-ranking French official claims that Prince bin Salman was adamant that the "Salvator Mundi" be displayed next to the "Mona Lisa" in order to solidify its place as an authentic Leonardo -- despite ongoing questions about whether the work is entirely by the Italian master.

The French government ultimately decided not to exhibit the painting under the Saudis' conditions, which the anonymous official says in the film "would be akin to laundering a piece that cost $450 million." Even with the painting out of the public eye, art historians and experts have continued to debate whether the "Salvator Mundi" is an autograph Leonardo or whether he merely contributed to a painting that was predominantly executed by his workshop. The difference could affect its value by hundreds of millions of dollars, given that there are fewer than 20 authenticated Leonardo paintings in the world.

A true Leonardo?

It seems that even those seeking to profit from the painting had doubts about its authenticity.

Emails shared with CNN by Bouvier appear to show communication between Bouvier and a representative of Rybolovlev in which the dealer advised his client in 2013 that the work was a thing of beauty but not a good investment. It was so heavily restored, the dealer wrote, that experts doubted the work was entirely completed by Leonardo himself, and neither the Vatican nor any major world museum had expressed interest in acquiring it.

Christie's employees take bids for Leonardo da Vincis "Salvator Mundi" at the Christie's auction in New York in November 2017. Credit: Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images

"The hands are the best-preserved bits," reads Bouvier's email, dated March 22, 2013, while "the rest of it has largely been restored."

In another email, Bouvier writes that any "buyer who acquires this painting that no one wants at too high a price will be seen as a 'pigeon' and become the laughing stock of the market and will lose credibility," given the "very low original proportion that appears to have been painted by the hand of Leonardo himself."

Bouvier nonetheless arranged to borrow the "Salvator Mundi" (with a $63 million deposit, he said) from Sotheby's. He claims he then arranged for it to be delivered to the Russian's penthouse in Manhattan in a "black document holder."

Antoine Vitkine, the filmmaker who spent two years producing the recent documentary, told CNN he was taken aback to learn that Bouvier, who began his career as an art world outsider, was among those to cast doubt on the painting's credentials given that more prominent experts have authenticated the "Salvator Mundi."

"That's extraordinary," Vitkine said, adding that he thinks some prominent art historians who have risked their reputation on the "Salvator Mundi" were more lax than they would normally be when it comes to weighing in on a rediscovered painting.

Among those to throw their weight behind the attribution to Leonardo was the UK's National Gallery, which exhibited the "Salvator Mundi" in 2011 and catapulted it into the global spotlight. The painting's unveiling was, at the time, widely covered by the press, including CNN.

"You have to remember, so many people have a stake in this work," Vitkine said.s

A view from outside of the Leonardo da Vinci exhibit at the National Gallery in 2011 in London Credit: George Rose/Getty Images

A bitter back and forth

Bouvier has always denied the charges of fraud leveled against him by Rybolovlev, who has seen his own share of tabloid controversy, including a headline-grabbing divorce and the purchase of an eye-wateringly expensive property from Donald Trump years before the former president took office.

The Russian oligarch, who is president and co-owner of AS Monaco Football Club, is fighting charges in relation to a bribery scandal of Monegasque officials in connection with the Bouvier litigation, in a case dubbed "Monacogate" by the French-language press.

Lawyers for Rybolovlev said in a statement "As far as these allegations are concerned, Dmitriy Rybolovlev remains presumed innocent. He is completely confident about the outcome of this case, in which, after more than three and a half years of investigation, no convincing evidence against him could be found."

Yves Bouvier Credit: Ore Huiying/Bloomberg/Getty Images

In the last six years, Bouvier has fended off legal action in Monaco, Singapore and Hong Kong. A $380 million suit, launched by Rybolovlev against Sotheby's for allegedly helping Bouvier inflate his prices is still ongoing in New York. That litigation sprang back into the public domain on May 7, when Rybolovlev's legal team amended their complaint for the first time in two years to include the sale of a Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec painting on behalf of Rybolovlev by Sotheby's via Bouvier, claiming it was hard to recoup the price paid on the work because of its inflated value. Rybolovlev also claimed in the amended complaint he was not paid the $9.5 million the auction house owed him over the sale. Sotheby's is contesting the claim.

The onslaught of litigation has, according to Bouvier, turned his life upside down. "I used to be an entrepreneur, someone with many businesses and a family firm built up over 50 years," he told CNN.

"Since all this started, all I've done is spent my time defending myself in court and my reputation in the press," said Bouvier, who admits he made $40 million by flipping the "Salvator Mundi" in two days.

Text messages presented in the French documentary -- not independently confirmed by CNN -- appear to show Bouvier claiming to Rybolovlev's aides that he couldn't secure him a better price than the amount the Russian eventually paid.

"That's a very good deal for my company. I'm not going to complain," said Bouvier when asked about the large difference.

"You have to understand what this was like," said Bouvier. "I was blacklisted by the auction houses, the banks wouldn't extend credit (to me, and) I had to start selling off assets to keep my staff and my businesses."

Dmitry Rybolovlev Credit: Patrick Kovarik/AFP/Getty Images

Bouvier claims he has been spied upon and followed by various individuals he does not know. Via a representative of his own he shared with CNN an 81-page private investigation he appears to have shared with prosecutors in Geneva, codenamed "Buldog" which he had commissioned from a Swiss security firm named 4CTM. Beyond concluding he had been tailed by a group of men the firm believed to be British as part of a "very big budget operation," the report was not able to further identify the people allegedly tailing Bouvier. Asked by CNN about the alleged surveillance, Rybolovlev's representative had no comment.

CNN reached out to 4CTM security for comment on their report but is yet to receive a response.

Exploiting the art world's opacity

To author and filmmaker Ben Lewis, whose 2019 book "The Last Leonardo" details the drama surrounding the "Salvator Mundi," the public fight between Bouvier and Rybolovlev lifts the veil on the art market's ugly side.

"The Bouvier Affair is a classic example of what can go wrong in the secretive, opaque, and -- in inverted commas -- discreet art market," said Lewis during an interview with CNN in London, who notes that parts of the art world have developed a rocky reputation for its way of doing business.

"Opacity, lack of transparency, greed, tax evasion, money laundering, art historical dishonesty, dissembling, disingenuousness, corruption. I mean, where does it end?"

But the secrecy, hefty markups, and legal contention involved in the "Salvator Mundi" scandal are not representative of the vast majority of art transactions, says art collector and expert Kenny Schachter.

"The fact that people always say the art world is so unregulated and has a dark side is a bit of an exaggeration," said Schachter, in a phone interview with CNN, adding that art isn't any more corrupt than other industries involving multi-million-dollar deals, such as real estate, jewelry, and banking. "No matter what it is, when there is a lot of money, there is going to be bad actions."

But when it comes to secrecy that does exist in certain facets of the art world, Bouvier is not only a conduit for valuable artworks -- he has built a career on helping the rich keep valuable works hidden from view. As well as having been a major investor in the Geneva freeport, a huge, high-security storage facility where collectors and galleries hold artworks in tax-efficient warehouses, the Swiss dealer has helped establish new freeports in Luxembourg and Singapore.

Bouvier told CNN that Russia also expressed interest in having its own tax-exempt freeport.

In 2016, a year into his legal woes, Bouvier said he was approached by Yury Trutnev, Russia's deputy prime minister and a personal friend of Rybolovlev, with a proposal to help build one in Vladivostok, at the behest of President Vladimir Putin. A photograph, shared with CNN by Bouvier, appears to show Bouvier and Trutnev meeting in Singapore. The Swiss dealer also shared various emails, which CNN was unable to independently verify, seemingly showing Russian officials inviting him to join the project.

The Russian freeport ultimately never went ahead. But Bouvier claims that he asked Russia's deputy prime minister to intervene in his dispute with Rybolovlev in return for his help on the project.

"I did mention (to Trutnev), 'I have some legal issues with one of your fellow citizens,'" Bouvier said. "He told me, 'I'll take care of it.' That was when I understood: The message was 'If you help me sort this problem out, I'll make yours go away.'"

CNN reached out to the Russian government and Trutnev's office for comment but is yet to receive a response.

"I might do business with Russia in the future -- why not? It's a country of great culture but I'd never do business with an oligarch again," Bouvier said.

Russia's Kremlin-connected elite is already under scrutiny over its art holdings: A report published by the US Senate's Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations in 2020 claimed companies linked to two other Russian oligarchs with close ties to the Kremlin had exploited the art world's opacity to evade sanctions.

The findings prompted Senators to call for greater transparency in the fine art sector.

"It is shocking that US banking regulations don't currently apply to multimillion-dollar art transactions, and we cannot let that continue," Ohio Senator Rob Portman, the committee's chairman, said in a statement at the time.

Related video: How do art auctions really work?

Art masterpieces often pack high dollar value into a small, portable canvas, Lewis says. "Fifty million bucks in a suitcase, right? And who's to say how much it's really worth?"

The European Union and UK have also bolstered regulations on art sales with anti-money laundering legislation adopted in 2020. Those regulations require auctions houses and art dealers to do due diligence on new customers for any transaction that exceeds about $12,000.

"There's been a steady increase in compliance regulations," Schachter said. "It's a big misperception for people to think that the art world is just this cesspool... maybe it was more like that in the past, but there's definitely been a clamping down."

Schachter also notes that storing art in freeports is relatively common and usually done for legitimate reasons, such as not having enough wall space for a vast art collection.

"A real collector is someone who is not really hindered by the lack of space to hang something or the lack of money to buy something because collectors just have to have it and they'll always figure out a way -- sometimes illicitly, but mostly not," he said. "I don't think everyone in the art world are angels, but I don't think that (freeports) are purpose-built for evasion or money laundering."

Still MIA

Against the backdrop of legal wrangling, there is one question on the lips of everyone in the art world: Where is the "Salvator Mundi"?

Bouvier doubts recent reports that it's on Prince bin Salman's yacht, as was alleged in 2019.

"To put a painting like this on a yacht, with the sea air and the evaporation would be utterly stupid. I cannot believe the buyer would put this painting in a setting like that," Bouvier said.

"It is on a wood board, which can warp in no time," he said, referring to the walnut panel on which the artwork was painted.

Vitkine speculates that "it might be that we see it one day in the Louvre Abu Dhab i. Who knows?"

Meanwhile, Lewis thinks it could be in a palace in Saudi Arabia, ready to be unveiled -- perhaps before the end of this year -- as part of the kingdom's drive to brand itself as a hub for arts and culture. "The important thing about the art market is that behind the most beautiful objects often lie the ugliest of motives," he said. "'Salvator Mundi' means 'Savior of the world.' And in a way, the painting is now not so much Savior of the world, as the Savior of Saudi Arabia."

Meanwhile, with the legal wrangling between the painting's former owners resurfacing once more, this valuable masterpiece and others once in the same collection, continue to test many a reputation.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Picture a sunlit modern interior built from light wood, where private apartments open up into airy communal spaces. Residents organize their social activities and hobbies in groups, connecting over shared interests. They meet regularly to vote on community rules. If you are elderly or a new parent -- or simply lonely -- there is always someone around for support.

This way of living may sound like an impossible utopia, but some are already experiencing its potential. "What We Share. A model for cohousing" is a concept for a housing project designed by founding architects Siv Helene Stangeland and Reinhard Kropf of Norweigian firm Helen & Hard. Currently on display as a walkable installation curated by the National Museum of Norway at the 17th Venice Architecture Biennale, the prototype invites visitors to consider giving up traditional residences to reduce their carbon emissions and improve social well-being.

The installation "What We Share" is currently on display at the Venice Architecture Biennale. Credit: Chiara Masiero Sgrinzatto/Luca Nicolò Vascon/National Museum of Norway/Courtesy of Helen & Hard

The model is not just a lofty idea that the architects are asking people to try, untested. It is based on the 40-unit cohousing project Vindmøllebakken, located in Stavanger, Norway, which they completed in 2019 and now call their home. They also have five similar buildings in the works.

"What We Share" presents an updated take on communal living that differs from both the hippie communes of the 1960s and '70s -- where members managed a plot of land and pooled their income -- and the more recent slew of so-called "adult dorms" cropping up in major cities like San Francisco, New York and London -- where residents rent sleek, furnished rooms and share common areas and amenities. Instead, Stangeland and Kropf's model is based on the Danish cohousing tradition, in which residents own their private homes but share communal areas that suit their needs. In "What We Share," however, they take ownership a step further, with each member having a stake in the common spaces, too.

The installation is a 1:1-scale cross-section of a cohousing model, encouraging visitors to explore and imagine what life would be like there. Credit: DSL Studio/Courtesy of Helen & Hard

"Most cohousing projects we know of in Scandinavia, they maybe have a common space, but this is not owned," said Kropf in a joint video call with Stangeland. "You get those architectural benefits by having this beautiful, generous common space, which (many) can't afford."

Located in the Nordic pavilion at the Biennale, the installation features a cross-section of what the actual layout would look like, down to the furniture and homewares. "(It) feels like stepping into something which is a home, but a new kind of home," Stangeland said. "We wanted the installation to trigger curiosity so that people think about...how architecture can help us live in another way together, and how it can facilitate a more communal life."

"What We Share" takes an even more radical approach to co-living than Vindmøllebakken, where there are shared spaces like kitchens, guestrooms and a library, as well as more flexible areas for work or leisure, but the delineation between private and public life is more pronounced. For the new concept, they posed a question to their current neighbors: Which functions or social situations could they move out of their apartments and share with other residents?

The Venice presentation is based on a real cohousing project that the architects completed in 2019; it's where they now reside with 39 other families and residents. Credit: Minna Soujoki langbord/Courtesy of Helen & Hard

The answer to that led to the design of a "sharing layer" between the compact private rooms and the open central space -- flexible areas that are separated from the central common one, which can be used for small social or solo activities. Kropf calls them "a buffer zone mediating between the very private space and the common space."

The layout itself is also modifiable. The interior is built from spruce wood planks and beech dowels, which means that residents can reassemble walls, dividers, counters, storage and furniture as needed to transform the space.

An alternative solution

Co-living may provide an answer to the pressing climate and population concerns that we face across the globe. Stangeland and Kropf say that residents of Vindmøllebakken significantly reduce their carbon footprint by requiring less space and sharing appliances like washing machines. The use of locally sourced timber for the existing project, as well as the proposed one, is around 70% more sustainable than steel and concrete, according to the architect's estimates.

Cohousing also provides an alternative to nursing homes at a time when aging populations are set to overtake younger ones. Last July, a study published in The Lancet estimated that the world's population was likely to enter a sustained decline in the second half of this century. It's already happening in countries like Japan, where the birth rate has been steadily decreasing

At Vindmøllebakken, residents own their compact apartments as well as co-own the ample common space. Credit: Sindre Ellingsen/Courtesy of Helen & Hard

The architects also want to explore how well-designed spaces can be a balm for loneliness -- a widespread problem in the US, where more than a third of adults age 45 and older say they feel lonely, according to the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine . Loneliness is even becoming endemic in one of the " happiest " countries, Sweden, where most households are people who live alone. Loneliness can have stark health impacts that substantially increase a person's risk of early death, and after a year of extreme social isolation due to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, the need to connect with others is becoming an increasingly urgent health matter.

"I think people are becoming much more aware of how important light is, and balconies, but also the neighborhood and the surroundings that you have access to, to gardens or spaces outside your dwelling," Stangeland said. She added that at Vindmøllebakken during the pandemic, they have "been able to keep on with social meetings and activities, although we have new restrictions, because they are organized and coordinated." That has meant breaking off into small groups or using their 5,300-square-foot common space for distanced events, like outdoor concerts that can be enjoyed from residents' balconies.

Sharing values

While the concept of co-living is as old as early hunter-gatherer societies, modern co-living has taken on a few distinct forms, including Berlin's "baugruppen," or "building group," movement -- which brings people together to cofinance building blocks with government support -- and Silicon Valley's "hacker homes," where engineers live and work together. Some mid-century European co-living projects were designed to make it easier for women to enter the workforce. And hippies across the Western world used communal living models as a way to eschew the nuclear family structure.

Co-living has also become an alternative in cities with steeper rental prices where young people are flocking for work, and US companies like Starcity and Common, China's You+, and the UK's The Collective have seized upon the trend. They each offer fully furnished private quarters with pristine-looking common areas, along with a slew of amenities, functioning almost like long-term hostels.

In addition to Vindmøllebakken, Helen & Hard have five other cohousing projects in the works. Credit: Sindre Ellingsen/Courtesy of Helen & Hard

For their own designs, Stangeland and Kropf looked to several cohousing projects for inspiration, including Sargfabrik in Austria, Lange Eng in Denmark, and Kraftwerk 2 in Switzerland, which cater to residents of all ages.

What all co-living initiatives seem to share is the desire to create community, whether based on ideological beliefs or simply to make friends or network. But for Stangeland and Kropf, that means building eco-conscious spaces for multigenerational inhabitants who act as a small village, volunteering their time to ensure their shared home thrives. They believe co-owning the property, instead of renting, helps to strengthen those bonds. At Vindmøllebakken, they say prices are about on par with the average home in the area, and they believe such a community can attract first-time buyers to the housing market.

"If you have a rental apartment it is more difficult to build...a long-lasting community," Kropf said. "We think that by empowering the inhabitants (as) shareholders and participants, you have more open processes and it's more democratic and transparent."

'This is a rich life'

At Vindmøllebakken, residents have organized 26 different groups, according to Kropf, including ones for dog owners, cooks and party planners. Several families have moved in, giving children opportunities for live-in playmates.

"This is a rich life," Stangeland said. She's built much of her routine around shared experiences, starting with group breakfast and meditation each morning. And though social activities are always available, it's not a setting in which extensive participation is enforced.

"People think you have to be very social (in co-living)," she said. "That's not the case. I think more of us are introverts than extroverts."

The only event with required attendance is a monthly meeting where residents vote on any new issues that arise, and while total agreement is an impossible feat, Stangeland says that learning to accept disagreements is part of the process.

"People think you have to be very social (in co-living)," Stangeland said. "That's not the case. I think more of us are introverts than extroverts." Credit: Sindre Ellingsen/Courtesy of Helen & Hard

"You have to learn to not agree, and that's OK," she said. "You have to be willing to...find solutions that everyone can live with, (even if) it's not your first choice."

When the residents met to vote on designated areas for smoking, for instance, they ultimately ended up agreeing that smokers should just be mindful of where they light up and who they are around, instead of banishing them to a specific area.

Ultimately, Stangeland and Kropf hope that their design and lifestyle can lead by example as people search for alternative, mindful ways to live in the future.

"You share certain values that you think are important (in cohousing communities)," Stangeland said. "It's important to know your shared vision or intention, and Vindmøllebakken is very much linked to living a sustainable life."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Leah Dolan, CNN

If you see a teenager with a disheveled mullet that moves like a windblown shag, it's probably a hairstyle known as the "wolf cut." This 'do is recognizable by its voluminous crown, which swiftly tapers into wispy layers, and it is the latest Gen Z beauty trend to take social media by storm.

Popular across genders, the wolf cut is thought to have originated in the salons of South Korea, taking its name from the wild, untamed look the heavy layers create, resembling the fur of its namesake. To take things further, the style is often set in place on loosely permed hair, to ensure an expertly tousled look.

Google searches for these ruffled coiffures are up 100% from 2020, and the term has also seen an 88% increase on Pinterest this year, as more and more teens scour the digital moodboard site to find the picture-perfect wolf cut.

On Instagram, hairdressers share studio-lit images of clients sporting more professional versions of the style. Meanwhile TikTok is filled with teenagers attempting to DIY the trend at home

The urge for a wolf cut can often strike in the small hours of the morning:" DIY wolf cut @ 2am " reads the title of one YouTube vlog. While more cautious -- or affluent -- teenagers will book in at a salon, many are content to use a pair of kitchen scissors or a hand-held razor and brave the cut themselves, while staring into the bathroom mirror.

Over on YouTube , teens tip their hair forward to fasten a unicorn-style ponytail at their hairline and gleefully snip away -- and it seems the vast majority are thrilled with the outcome.

Most of the 80.7 million TikTok videos attached to the #wolfcut hashtag are success stories, captioned with the zealous stock phrase "This is your sign to get a wolf cut." Part of the style's popularity might be due to the fact that it calls for choppy layers, allowing for many variations and for those with varying degrees of scissor skills to give it a try.

Wolf cuts are the latest iteration of a gender-fluid hairstyle. It's predecessor, the mullet, has a history dating back centuries. The Greek poet Homer, writing in " The Iliad " in the 8th-century BC, references spearmen with "forelocks cropped, hair grown long at the backs."

But the mullet was given an notably androgynous art-rock edge when sported by David Bowie 's alter ego Ziggy Stardust in the 1970s.

The signature scarlet 'do was the work of hairdresser Suzi Ronson, who wrote in "The Moth Presents: All These Wonders" that Bowie had first seen the spiky hairstyle on a female model and asked if Ronson, who worked at a salon in London at the time, if she could recreate it. "That's a little weird -- it's a woman's hairstyle." Ronson wrote. "And how am I going to actually do it?'"

David Bowie performing with guitarist and Suzi Ronson's husband, Mick Ronson at a live recording of 'The 1980 Floor Show' for the NBC 'Midnight Special' TV show, at The Marquee Club in London, 1973. Credit: Jack Kay/Hulton Archive/Getty Images

Leather-clad rocker Joan Jett has sported an unkempt glossy black shag for most of her career -- a longer, more evenly blended relative of the mullet, and Jane Fonda is donning a jagged shag in her infamous mugshot from 1970.

Fonda found the switch from her long tresses to her cropped cut nothing short of transformative. In her memoir "My Life so Far," she anointed the shag as "her first hair epiphany," which allowed her to change the way she was perceived."The men in my life liked it long and blonde." She wrote of her hair. "Perhaps I used it to hide behind."

Jin, a member of K-pop boy band BTS, has a shapely wolf cut style with long tapered layers and a trailing tail. Credit: Dia Dipasupil/Getty Images North America/Getty Images

It comes as no suprise that a look rooted in androgyny and gender non-conformism has reappeared today on the heads of a generation -- boys , girls and non-binary people -- that is increasingly comfortable with the idea of gender fluidity

In February, a US survey conducted by advertising agency Bigeye found that half of Gen Z believes gender is a spectrum and feel binary roles are outdated.

And while there's something undeniably anarchic about spontaneous midnight haircuts, wolf-cut-at-home videos also just offer a way to watch a risky haircut come good in the end.

The reimagined mullet may be an acquired taste, but the delight that follows a freshly clipped head is so infectious it's as though these teens practically leap off the screen and hand you the scissors.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

In the back of a 1952 Chevy Deluxe, a woman brushes back her hair, her heavily lined eyes closed in a moment of quiet, the words "No Soy De Ti" ("I don't belong to you") inked across her chest. Mary is a member of the Vintage Ladies Car Club, a Chicana lowriding community based in Los Angeles County, and she's one of the many lowriders photographer Kristin Bedford features in her five-year body of work "Cruise Night," which portrays the interiority of both her subjects and their cars.

"Cruise Night," recently published as a book, is a compendium of the vibrant velvet and leather interiors, wire wheels and dazzling paint jobs that make up the cars of the Mexican American lowriding community, bathed in Los Angeles' idiosyncratic golden hours or the artificial glow of ambient light at night.

Lowriding took root in Los Angeles during the 1940s and is often traced back to the countercultural "pachucos" -- Chicano youths in colorful high-waisted, wide-legged and padded zoot suits who faced violence in the racial unrest that shook the city during World War II. Early drivers lowered their cars inches from the ground -- often with the help of a few well-placed sandbags -- and cruised them slow through the city streets; they were the opposite of the speedy and popular hot rod.

"I bought my first lowrider in 1958 when I was twelve years old. It was a 1948 Chevrolet Fleetline. I bought it from a guy in my neighborhood, one of the Pachuchos on 38th Street," lowrider Oscar Reulas recounted to Bedford in "Cruise Night," saying he gave all the money he had: $63. "I started working on that thing that same night, fixing it my way, keeping it low to the ground."



































1 / 18 "Yahaira Millenium," Car Club Los Angeles, CA, December 27, 2015. Credit: Kristin Bedford

Lowriding faced disdain and was even banned in California, but it has nonetheless persisted, becoming a fixture in the iconography of West Coast hip-hop and spreading overseas from Jakarta to Tokyo . It's known for its vintage Chevrolets and Cadillacs with glitzy designs and bouncing hydraulics, but for Bedford, the image of Mary, like many she made over the course of five years, captured the fervent spirit of its members.

"While lowriding is about community, it's also about fierce calls for respect and independence," Bedford said in a video interview.

A different view

Bedford, who is based in Los Angeles, spent extensive time getting to know members of the community, recording their own oral histories in addition to photographing them. Underpinning all of her work is "an interest in social justice," she said, "and how communities express their civil rights in a society that often marginalizes them."

The portrait also represented a view of women that she believed was rarely seen within representations of automotive culture more generally. And as she continued to photograph, a powerful theme began to emerge from the quietude of her series.

"I began to see that the images featured reverent, natural and introspective women," Bedford said. In comparison, "the entire automotive visual narrative -- not just lowriding -- is male dominated, and women are relegated to sexual accessories."

"I began to see that the images featured reverent, natural and introspective women," Bedford said. Credit: Kristin Bedford

For "Cruise Night," Bedford spoke to many old-school members who reflected on lowriding and how the practice wove itself into the fabric of their own lives.

"I drove my powder blue 1979 Cutlass like a regular car," a lowrider named Tina Martinez Perez told Bedford in the book. "I raised all my kids in that car, brought my first grandchild home from the hospital in that car. Back in the day, most people on the Boulevard behind the wheel were men, and the women were sitting next to them. I was different."

Expressions of identity

Lowriders may be vehicles, but they are also a creative expression of the owners, becoming objects of identity and history.

"(I had an) interest in how the customization of a car is about having a voice, politically, culturally, creatively," Bedford said. "This specific community has been expressing their identity through this really distinct car culture."

The lowrider "Gypsy Rose" is one of the most famous customized cars in the world, recogniziable for its floral motifs and plush pink interior. Credit: Kristin Bedford

The cars are often the culmination of years of work to overhaul; Bedford calls them a "tabula rasa" for the owners. In one of her images, fake $100 bills explode like a paper sculpture from the seams of a trunk. In another, a glossy baby blue Don Julio bottle sits on display against matching blue leather and stitched seating. And then there's one of the most famous cars, named "Gypsy Rose," in which an 8 track player emerges from the car's lush magenta velvet interior.

It's these interior moments that Bedford often chose to focus on instead of the entirety of the cars. "I saw that there was an intimacy with the objects (in) the cars," she said. "(It's) these small areas and places where people have expressed their vision through the customization."

Some of her favorite details in her photographs also nod to the movement's origins. In a portrait titled "Yahaira," a young woman looks off to the side, her hair done up in bumper bangs and pinned with blue and purple blossoms -- a nod to a classic pachuca beauty.

Details, like pinned flowers, reference the cultural origins of lowriding, which is embedded in Chicano/a history. Credit: Kristin Bedford

"The pachuco/pachuca style is considered (as much) a style as a form of resistance," she said. "And so details that speak to me are where you see those hints of history."

Through "Cruise Night," Bedford is paying tribute to a West Coast tradition that has spurred an international legacy, though she believes it is not given enough credit for its wide-reaching influence.

"Lowriding has often been stereotyped and misunderstood as simplistic or crude, and in my own quiet way, I'm offering a glimpse at how I experienced this great American tradition," she said. "I feel strongly that it's not a subculture, it is culture, and it's a fine art tradition."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Brad Lendon , CNN Written by

With pseudonyms like the The Bastard, The Broker, The Astronaut and The Vampire, they've banded together deep inside the world of Soviet-era watch collecting.

This cabal of watch aficionados spans the globe, albeit in cyberspace, bringing history to the wrists of thousands with timepieces dating back to the days of Stalin.

Dashiell Oatman-Stanford calls himself "a Soviet watch nerd." His friends call him The Catalog.

His website, Watches of the USSR , reveals why. It brings together highlights from his exhaustive archive of around 3,000 pieces. Some come and some go, as he refines and revises his collection. But despite only starting his hobby seven years ago, Oatman-Stanford is one of the czars of historic Soviet watches.

"Why Soviet watches?" he asks on his website. "I am not a collector of watches as much as I am a collector of history and culture -- fragments of a life that once was. And indeed, these timepieces have an incredible tale to tell."

"Soviet watches are functional and utilitarian, but dig further and you uncover a world of mystery and intrigue, color and pizzazz," writes Texas-born Oatman-Stanford who now lives in the former Soviet republic of Estonia.

Oatman-Stanford and his Soviet watch collector friends have carried that mystery and intrigue into the present era, forming what they call the Bureau of Russian Watch Intelligence.

Membership of this secretive collectors group comes by invitation, said Ulices Rosa, who founded the bureau a few years ago by connecting people asking questions about Russian watches on Facebook. If you've been snooping around about Soviet watches, he may just find you.

With his Jersey accent, Rosa might have come from central casting for an old black-and-white Hollywood movie to head up a shadowy bureau. The Lansing, Michigan, resident calls himself The Broker, and you could imagine him selling watches stashed in his overcoat.

"I'm the guy who's constantly connecting the others to the sale," he said in a video interview.

Soviet watches pictured in a souvenir shop in Bukhara, Uzbekistan. Credit: Alamy

Other members include The Vampire, in Malaysia, who's up at all hours making watch deals, Rosa said. Then there's The Astronaut, an Italian guy specializing in Soviet watches related to the USSR's space missions. "A niche, upon a niche upon a niche," as The Catalog puts it.

The Bastard, the youngest of the group, lives in the Netherlands. He once found a $1,000 Soviet watch for $50. He's "the luckiest guy," Rosa said.

The Broker, meanwhile, can do things that will make your jaw drop. He recalls viewing the third season of the Netflix hit series "Stranger Things" and seeing a mission emerge. His 14-year-old son wanted the watch worn by Alexei, the Soviet scientist on the show. Freezing the frame, The Broker determined that it was a Kirovskie model, made by the Soviet's First State Watch Factory in the 1950s or '60s.

"I went on a hunt as soon as my son spotted it," he said. "I found it within two weeks for about $36."

The story illustrates just what make Soviet watch collectors tick. It's a hobby that gives them a relatively cheap way to connect with a bygone world. A working, presentable and likely authentic Soviet-era watch can be easily found on the internet for under $100 and in some cases as low as $40 or $50, Rosa said.

And that's what sets Soviet watch collectors apart from your regular horology enthusiasts, said Oatman-Stanford.

"Nobody is buying Russian watches or Soviet watches for the reason that most people buy watches, which is it's a fashion piece, a jewelry accessory," he said.

"It is purely for the interest and intrigue, exoticism, the military connection."

Roots in America

The Soviet watch industry traces its roots to what was then America's industrial heartland.

Soviet leader Joseph Stalin wanted to modernize the country's economy, and precise timing was key to making things runs efficiently.

"To coordinate anything in a modern world you need reliable time pieces, and the Soviets didn't have anything of that sort," Oatman-Stanford said.

Lacking the domestic manufacturing capacity, the Soviet leadership looked overseas and found help in Canton, Ohio.

The equipment and know-how for Moscow's First State Watch Factory was imported from Dueber-Hampden Watch Co., a Canton company that went bankrupt in the late 1920s, according to the city's local newspaper, the Canton Repository . A 2016 report in the paper said that a company representing the Soviet Union's trade interests in the United States "bought bankrupt Dueber-Hampden's watchmaking machines for $325,000, loaded it onto train cars and shipped it off to Russia."

The Dueber-Hampden Watch Works in Canton, Ohio. The USSR went on to buy equipment from the factory and ship it to Moscow. Credit: Alamy

Because the Soviets were short on skilled labor, they brought in American workers too, paying them handsomely for their efforts with an average yearly salary the equivalent of $70,000 in today's currency -- plus free housing and travel expenses. One worker bragged that he was being paid "more than ... Stalin, earned at the time," the Repository reported.

With the equipment to kick-start their watch industry, the Soviets also brought in technology from places like France and Switzerland to improve their watchmaking. Victory over Nazi Germany in World War II also gave the Soviet watch industry a boost, said Rosa.

The Soviets copied some of the best timepieces worn by German soldiers, he added. "Those happen to be the most expensive of the Russian watches -- the ones that are exactly copied from the German military," Rosa said.

Using all those resources, more factories were established around the country, and they turned out hundreds of millions of watches before the Soviet Union broke apart in 1991.

'A tank on your wrist'

Rosa said the watches became a symbol of Soviet resilience and pride in a country that had rallied to defeat Nazi Germany and become a world superpower.

One of the most famous Soviet watch brands -- Pobeda -- is the Russian word for "victory." The name was ordered directly by the Kremlin after World War II, according to the website of its manufacturer, Raketa. The watches "symbolize the willpower and heroism of the Russian people," the website says.

"There's a sense of grit with their watches," Rosa said, describing them as "robust."

"You feel like you're putting a tank on your wrist," he said, admitting that the military connection is what first appealed to him. But there's room in Soviet watch collecting for those who aren't military enthusiasts.

CS Lee, aka The Vampire, said the military models don't do much for him. He loves designs based on polar expeditions or space flight. These are the pride of his collection of 500-plus Soviet-era watches.

A Komandirskie -- or "Commander's" -- watch by Vostok, which supplied the Soviet ministry. Credit: Alamy

Oatman-Stanford, meanwhile, is partial to the dress styles, with "simple and clean" designs.

"I find Soviet designs tasteful and interesting, the Cyrillic writing exotic and alluring, the history endlessly fascinating, the prices affordable and the number of variations mind-boggling," he said on this website.

Like Rosa, Oatman-Stanford is struck by the reliability of Soviet timepieces.

"The Soviets built their watches so smartly and so well," he said. And they standardized components, making repairs and service easy.

"If a part from one fails, you can go to almost any other watch from this factory and this era and swap it over."

The rise of the Frankens

While that interchangeability was a convenience in the Soviet era, it can be a headache for modern collectors.

When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, it left an economy in disarray. Citizens looked for ways to get money, and their millions of watches offered an opportunity. Lee said that Soviet watch factories turned out 30 million to 50 million watches a year, and that a Polish contact told him of Russians selling timepieces by weight for as little as $5 a kilogram (2.2 pounds).

Some salvagers dug through piles of watches looking for gold to melt down and sell. Others mined them for parts and assembled them into new watches, which collectors call "Frankens" -- a reference to Frankenstein.

In Russia, Oatman-Stanford said, they have another term. "The translation for this is 'cutlet,' like ground beef," he said, "a kind of mishmash of parts that they've smushed together to form a patty."

A worker at the Second Moscow Clock factory assembles a watch. Credit: Alamy

To novice and experienced collectors alike, the Frankens can be hard to spot. Bureau members look for clues, like the words on the dial, the shape of the crown and machining marks on the inner workings. But they point out that there's really no single authority to determine where these watches came from -- themselves included.

While Frankens may not epitomize the Soviet era, they can be just as much fun for the not-so-serious enthusiast, the collectors say, while still giving a sense of the Cold War.

"It seems fashionable now to look toward what is nostalgic, and I think a lot of people are interested in these cool, unique pieces from history," Oatman-Stanford said.

And even if an acquisition turns out to be a fake, Lee said, the price -- likely below $100 -- is worth the experience.

'You can never have enough friends'

For English speakers, Frankens and authentic originals can be quickly found on websites such as eBay and Etsy. Some of the dozens of brands to look for include the aforementioned Pobeda and Raketa, as well as Komandirskie, Sekonda, Slava, Strela and Vostok.

To improve your chances of getting a fair price for an authentic timepiece -- and one that will actually show up in the mail -- the Bureau of Russian Watch Intelligence advises paying careful attention to the reviews. Most of the Bureau got their starts shopping online, though once they got serious, they found better, cheaper sources.

Lee said he has contacts in places like Spain, Italy, Russia and Romania who will search flea markets for him, looking for specific watches he wants to add to his collection.

A 1980 Soviet poster depicts a worker in hardhat with his wristwatch projecting the image of a factory. Credit: Ruben Suryaninov/Digital Soviet Art/Getty Images

"You can never have enough friends," he said.

Meanwhile, Oatman-Stanford, who can repair and refurbish his own watches, said he has established a network of middlemen who buy him cheap watches on the Russian and Ukraine domestic markets.

"I send them money and then they send me in bulk -- 20, 50, a hundred at a time," he said. He can then sort the wheat from the chaff himself.

When Rosa wants something, he'll often consult a mysterious figure known as The Oracle, a Ukrainian who only communicates by email.

"The Oracle never talks to anyone in person," Rosa said, but "he knows it all ... There's no fooling this guy."

Pulling the trigger

After exploring the world of Soviet watches, I needed one of my own. I scoured the web for hours searching for an authentic model.

With some advice from Oatman-Stanford, I pulled the trigger on a Vostok Amphibian, which collectors affectionately call "Scuba Dude" for the diver on the dial. The package arrived from Russia complete with Cyrillic stamps and an illegible handwritten return address.

A Vostok Amphibian, known as "Scuba Dude." Credit: John Mees/CNN

Examining it via video chat, Rosa said my Scuba Dude ticked all the boxes, including the "Made in CCCP" on the dial -- proof that, as advertised, it was manufactured in the 1980s, before the CCCP (the Russian abbreviation for the USSR) collapsed.

Purchase a few more of these and I could become a card-carrying member of the Bureau of Russian Watch Intelligence, Rosa suggested.

The Journalist isn't taken yet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Many Indians are horrified that Prime Minister Narendra Modi is rebuilding the capital's historic center in a pandemic. But debate among politicians, architects and heritage experts runs deeper still.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's overhaul of New Delhi's historic center was always going to be controversial -- even before the Covid-19 pandemic struck.

Since it was announced in September 2019, the $1.8 billion Central Vista Redevelopment Project has been branded unduly expensive, environmentally irresponsible and a threat to cultural heritage. And with Modi's elaborate new private residence -- which comprises 10 buildings across 15 acres (6 hectares) of land -- among dozens of planned new government structures, many critics have dismissed the scheme as an architectural vanity project that serves India's populist leader, not its people.

This outrage has been brought into sharp focus by the coronavirus crisis. Amid a devastating second wave that has pushed the country's hospitals to breaking point, opposition MP Rahul Gandhi took to Twitter last week to compare the cost of the project to the amount needed to vaccinate 450 million Indians or purchase 10 million oxygen cylinders. "But (Modi's) ego is bigger than people's lives," he concluded.

A man walks past the construction site for part of the Central Vista Redevelopment Project. Credit: Manish Rajput/SOPA Images/Sipa USA

Indignation has only grown in recent days, after it emerged that construction at the site has been deemed an "essential service" -- meaning work continues, even as building projects elsewhere are at a standstill. This urgency is widely thought to reflect a race to complete the new triangular parliament -- the project's centerpiece -- before the end of 2022, when India celebrates 75 years of independence.

Indeed, for nationalists, the building's symbolism lies not only in its design, which alludes to the importance of triangles in the sacred geometries of several religions, but in India's ability to complete large-scale infrastructure projects quickly and on schedule.

But while the speed, cost and timing of the development have attracted ire, the underlying question of whether New Delhi's aging government district needs revamping exposes deeper divides.

“ There's really been no opportunity for comments, criticism, suggestions, ideas. There's a vibrant architectural community and very few of them feel like they've been given a fair hearing. ” Shashi Tharoor, MP and writer

Indian MP and writer Shashi Tharoor, a fierce critic of Modi's, has long rallied against the project. Since the earliest days of the pandemic he has called for the government to redirect funds earmarked for the development to help fight Covid-19.

"Why now, at such colossal expense and at a time when the country and economy are reeling from the effects of the lockdown?" he told CNN in a phone interview earlier this year.

Yet even this most vocal of critics accepted that modernizing India's parliament and Central Visa -- a 3-kilometer (1.8-mile) stretch of New Delhi's central boulevard, Rajpath -- could, in theory, have its merits.

"From a purely utilitarian point of view, many would agree there is a need for some significant changes," Tharoor said. "One is that the parliament building would have needed an extensive renovation to be fit for purpose, and clearly the government concluded that they couldn't do that, and that they needed to build a new one."

The project will see an overhaul of buildings and public space along New Delhi's central boulevard, Rajpath. Credit: HCP Design, Planning and Management Pvt Ltd

"And as for the Central Vista, a number of the 1950s and '60s buildings, some of which I've had the dubious pleasure of working in ... there really is an architectural case for getting rid of them and replacing them.

"My concern here is the utter lack of consultation before such a momentous decision was taken," he said, adding: "There's really been no opportunity for comments, criticism, suggestions, ideas. There's a vibrant architectural community and very few of them feel like they've been given a fair hearing."

Fit for purpose?

When work began on the original Central Vista plan in the early 20th century, English architects Edwin Lutyens and Herbert Baker envisaged a long ceremonial boulevard akin to the Champs Elysees in Paris or the Capitol Complex in Washington D.C.

It came to be known as Kingsway, and the grand buildings running along its edges were designed to serve a colonial government, not an Indian one.

When the country gained independence from Britain in 1947, India sought to reappropriate the district for its own burgeoning democracy. A statue of King George VI, the then-reigning British king and last emperor of India, was torn down, but the colonial structures were largely retained and repurposed. The circular council house became India's parliament, the opulent Viceroy's House was transformed into a presidential residence and Kingsway was given a new name: Rajpath.

Known as Viceroy House by the British, Rashtrapati Bhavan now serves as the presidential residence. Credit: Shutterstock

In the decades that followed, development in the area accelerated to accommodate the growing administration. Police barracks were erected, car parking was introduced, and new ministry buildings spilled out either side of the central boulevard.

According to the architect behind the new redevelopment, Bimal Patel, this "haphazard" sprawl has corrupted Lutyens and Baker's original urban plan and left the area unfit for a modern government. Designs by Patel's firm, HCP, were chosen from six proposals in a competition to reimagine the area and modernize the facilities.

"You have old stables and barracks that have been converted into offices -- they're completely dysfunctional. It's like an old slum -- it's like a little village in there," said Patel in a video interview, referring to some of the buildings flanking Rajpath.

His firm's sweeping vision for the 86-acre (35-hectare) site includes new chambers for MPs, a conference center and landscaped public gardens. The country's National Archives will be refurbished, while the North and South Blocks of the Secretariat Building, which currently house India's cabinet, will be turned into museums.

“ We need to improve the technology, we need space for dining, we need to create toilets, we need to create storage space, and office and administration space -- it's very clear that it can't be done in the space available. ” Bimal Patel, architect

With the creation of new office space, ministries currently scattered around New Delhi will all be relocated to the site. Patel argues this will make the Central Vista a "synergistic location" that will improve the efficiency and productivity of India's government.

The symbolic heart of the project is the country's new parliament. HCP's triangular design sits directly next to its predecessor, which is also being turned into a museum. Inside, two horseshoe-shaped chambers will house the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha -- the parliament's upper and lower houses respectively -- while a light-filled Constitution Hall features an adjoining gallery displaying India's written constitution.

MPs will be seated in twos rather than crammed onto long benches, and the new, larger parliament features touch screens for each member.

For Patel, this modernization is a matter of necessity. While the current parliament has been updated over the decades, with new floors added, the old building is now simply too small, he argued.

A digital impression of the new Lok Sabha, the Indian parliament's lower chamber. Credit: HCP Design, Planning and Management Pvt Ltd

"It's crowded and there's no more possibility for expansion at a time when we need to increase the number of seats," Patel said, alluding to a planned increase in the number of Indian MPs to reflect the country's growing population.

"We need to improve the technology, we need space for dining, we need to create toilets, we need to create storage space, and office and administration space -- it's very clear that it can't be done in the space available, so we've created a new facility next door."

Ongoing concerns

On Wednesday, two Indian citizens lodged a case with the Delhi High Court to try to halt work at the Central Vista, arguing construction could aid the spread of Covid-19. The petitioners then took the matter to the Supreme Court, after city authorities had "failed to appreciate the gravity" of the situation.

This is not the first attempt to formally oppose the revamp. In April last year, eight months before Modi laid the parliament's foundation stone in a high-profile photo-op, a petition was filed to the Supreme Court opposing plans on legal and environmental grounds. The next month, a group of 60 former civil servants wrote a scathing open letter to Modi describing the project as a "thoughtless and irresponsible act" that was motivated by "a superstitious belief that the present Parliament building is 'unlucky.'"

The wide-ranging letter went on to discuss the "severe environmental damage" the redevelopment will cause to "the lungs of the city." The plans are "shrouded in secrecy," it read, and "not substantiated by any public consultation or expert review."

A copy of India's constitution will be on display in the new parliament building. Credit: HCP Design, Planning and Management Pvt Ltd

The group also highlighted the architectural value of buildings earmarked for demolition, saying that the scheme would "irrevocably" destroy the area's cultural heritage.

Historian Swapna Liddle, who has written various books on New Delhi's history, echoed some of their concerns. She highlighted the risks of turning symbolic political buildings -- like the North and South Blocks --- into museums.

"When you say North Block you don't just mean a building, you mean a particular institution," Liddle said over the phone. "The fact that buildings are associated with history, with traditions and with institutions is very important.

"Parliament House is the place where constitutional debate (has taken place), so you should think very long and hard before separating the building from the tradition."

The North Block of the Secretariat Building will be turned into a museum. Credit: Shutterstock

In a polarized political landscape, it's perhaps little surprise that a project of this magnitude has invited criticism from many quarters. But regardless of the scheme's virtues or shortcomings, Modi's insistence on pushing ahead amid India's worst public health crisis in a generation may see him lose the support of allies he might once have counted on.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

In recent years, pole dancing, once the preserve of the strip club, has been given a much larger stage -- from the 2020 Grammys, when FKA Twigs performed a routine during a tribute to Prince, to the floors of major gym franchises, where the practice has become a fitness mainstay.

But there remains a cultural fascination with what goes on behind the club's closed doors that has led to scripted takes like "P-Valley," the critically acclaimed Starz drama that delves into the lives of dancers in a fictional Mississippi town.

In New York, photographer and director Adrienne Raquel is featuring monumental portraits of the real women who dance in her first solo museum show, "ONYX," at Fotografiska. Shot at the famed Houston nightclub of the same name, which has been namechecked in songs by Drake and Megan Thee Stallion, the exhibition celebrates the Southern Black women who have long been a driving force in music and visual culture.















1 / 8 "ONYX" is photographer Adrienne Raquel's first solo museum show. Credit: Adrienne Raquel/Courtesy of Fotografiska New York

Raquel sees the changing attitudes around exotic dancing as indicative of a larger cultural shift. "I definitely feel like exotic dancing is not as much of a taboo as it used to be in the past," she said in a video interview. "Women in general stepping into their confidence and really expressing their sexuality... has become way more normalized in our society."

Raquel, who is based in New York and has photographed Megan Thee Stallion, Lil Nas X and Travis Scott in her gauzy style, started her career in Houston about a decade ago. She's had the show on her mind since around 2017, when she visited Houston for her aunt's birthday and suggested they hit up Onyx to celebrate.

"Onyx is one of the only strip clubs that I've actually been to where I feel it's welcoming," Raquel said. "It feels like home."

"ONYX" takes place inside the alluring Houston nightclub of the same name. Credit: Adrienne Raquel/Courtesy of Fotografiska New York

Her images in the darkly lit club project the fantasy that Raquel's imagery is known for, with velvety pink and red lighting, and deep, sensual shadows cast across the dancers. The photographer plays into the enchantment of the setting, while focusing on a sense of intimacy between the women.

"When you walk into the strip club, there's a bit of a shock value to it... At first you're in a little bit of awe, but then it's also kind of debaucherous," Raquel said. "Once you get beyond that, I really started paying attention to the dancers -- not only their athleticism or their sex appeal, but the relationships they have with one another."

"Women in general stepping into their confidence and really expressing their sexuality... has become way more normalized in our society," Raquel said. Credit: Adrienne Raquel/Courtesy of Fotografiska New York

"ONYX" pays homage to the heyday of hip-hop music videos of the '90s and early 2000s, adopting their aesthetics and alluding to the seductive power of the video vixen. Raquel says she was particularly inspired by "Belly," the only feature film from Queens-born music video director Hype Williams, who was responsible such iconic videos as Missy Elliott's "The Rain (Supa Dupa Fly)," TLC's "No Scrubs" and "Big Pimpin'" by Jay-Z. The Nas and DMX-led crime drama from 1998 was critically panned at the time, but remains influential for its slick visuals and surrealist overtones.

"I just love the way (Williams) treats the colors and the lighting," Raquel said. "Everyone looks so Black and beautiful."

At its core, "ONYX" is a showcase of beauty, from the way light bends around silhouettes and lucite heels, to the contemplative, quiet moments of the women backstage. But for Raquel, the intrigue goes beyond their appearances alone.

"I think that there's outward beauty, for sure," Raquel said of the dancers. "But the way they move, the way they walk, the way they talk -- they're just innately confident."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Though Jordana Bermúdez isn't a skateboarder, she found a sense of community at a skate park on Manhattan's Lower East Side.

The photographer, who relocated from Mexico City to New York City in 2019, grew up roller skating and biking. And it was in Coleman Playground, a stretch of concrete near the waterfront populated with ledges and grind rails, that she felt familiarity amid the unknowns of her new city.

"I grew up going to parks, and surrounded by these people," Bermúdez said over video. "And I felt safer there."

She was particularly intrigued by the number of women and non-binary skaters testing tricks and sharing laughs. Since watching Bing Liu's "Minding the Gap," a 2018 documentary about male friendships strengthened by skateboarding, Bermúdez had been interested in the skate culture and identity among those who don't identify as male.

Skateboarder Sarah Seafoss at LES Coleman Playground skate park in Manhattan, New York. Credit: Jordana Bermúdez, @jbtph

Bermúdez, who moved to New York to study at the International Center of Photography, began attending meet-ups organized by two groups: GRLSWIRL, a skate community that began in Venice Beach, California, and Quell, a female-founded media, magazine and podcast brand aiming to "increase visibility for nontraditional skateboarders." These groups both formed with the intention of providing a safe space for women and gender-nonconforming riders in a sport that is still dominated by men. Bermúdez was quickly pulled into their orbit.

"I couldn't stop (photographing)," Bermúdez said. "I followed my intuition, and I started going four times a week."













1 / 7 Skateboarder and student Miracle Jimenez, photographed at River Avenue Skate Park in The Bronx, NY. Credit: Jordana Bermúdez, @jbtph

Her ensuing multimedia project, "Girls Can't Skate," was shot over the course of nearly a year and comprises still portraits, GIFs and, during the height of the Covid-19 pandemic in New York, video interviews and virtual photo shoots. By shifting from in-person photographs to Zoom shoots, she could visit people's homes in an instant, taking pictures of skaters in Arizona and California, in Brazil and Norway.

Though not a skater herself, Bermúdez has become a fixture in the scene, and is even roommates with one of her subjects.

"It's just so natural to be part of the community," she said. "They're very welcoming and inclusive."

Strength through diversity

Skateboarding has become a cultural force around the world, spreading from its birthplace in Southern California to inspire thriving communities as far afield as South Africa, Afghanistan and Japan. In Tokyo, where the rescheduled 2020 Summer Olympics are set to take place this summer, skateboarding will be represented for the first time, and will include both men's and women's street and park competitions.

GRLSWIRL NYC chapter leader Kristen Noelle skating in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. Credit: Jordana Bermúdez, @jbtph

Though women have long been a part of skateboarding, they are not afforded the same visibility or professional opportunities as men -- and the gap is even more glaring for gender-nonconforming riders.

The rosters of professional skate teams are still nearly all male, but recent years have seen a handful of firsts for professional female and non-binary skaters. In 2015, Leticia Bufoni became the first female skater to sign for the Nike SB team, and she was joined two years later by non-binary skater Leo Baker. In 2016, Nora Vasconcellos became the first woman to join the Adidas skateboarding team, and in 2017, Samarria Brevard became the first Black woman to sign with skate brand Enjoi.

In amateur skateboarding, female and LGBTQ+ riders are also carving out a space for themselves, forming groups that promote support, solidarity and safety. As well as GRLSWIRL and Quell in the United States, they include Nefarious Skate Crew in London, Skate Gal Club in Ghana and Girl Skate India

Adrian Koenigsberg, director of Quell, said that she has witnessed a significant change in attitudes -- even in the short time since she founded the brand in 2017.

"When I started Quell, the conversation around gender was nowhere near what it is now," she said over email. "We were focused on women in skateboarding but now our language has shifted to focus on marginalized genders. When we support others, we make a stronger community."

Female skateboarders have seen increased presence on screen as well, with a 2019 documentary about young Afghan skaters, "Learning to Skateboard in a Warzone (If You're a Girl)," winning an Oscar last year, and HBO's teen comedy "Betty," which follows a group of girl skaters in New York City, debuting last May.

Thriving under restraints

While the Olympics are bound to bring more riders to the sport, the ongoing pandemic has also caused an uptick in interest , as people seek out new kinds of outdoor recreation and alternative ways to commute. In New York, Koenigsberg has seen the effects firsthand.

"I think the amount of people skating since the pandemic has increased tremendously," she said. "There are more non-male-identifying people absolutely killing skating than ever. There are so many people organizing their own events all over the city."

Skaters Kristen Noelle, Mary Chun and Charlotte Tegen at 2nd Nature Skate Park in Peekskill, New York. Credit: Jordana Bermúdez, @jbtph

As the community continues to widen, male skaters are becoming more welcoming, according to Kristen Miller, founder of GRLSWIRL's New York chapter. "Not too long ago, I would always be the only girl at my local skatepark. 'Men' would be super aggressive and snake my lines or get in my way on purpose and I would always be the one apologizing, feeling like I was always in their way," she said over email.

"As the tides have changed this year, I've noticed these same men have learned to take a step back and allow their fellow skaters more space at the park (and) they apologize when they accidentally get in our way. (They) see that there are more GRLS than ever before, skating and taking up space, and are showing more respect towards us."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Oscar Holland, CNN

It was 1996 when the young poet Tugsjargal Munkherdene heard American hip-hop for the first time.

Four years earlier, Mongolia's Soviet-aligned government had fallen, opening the country to a fresh wave of cultural imports. The easing of state censorship heralded a new era of free expression. It also meant that G-funk, boom bap and gangster rap soon arrived on the airwaves -- including the track that made a lasting impression on the then-teenage Munkherdene: Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg's "187 On an Undercover Cop."

"I realized I could put my poems on a beat like them, and I started writing rap music," he recalled in a video interview from his studio in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia's capital.

Growing up in one of Ulaanbaatar's impoverished ger districts, Munkherdene could empathize with the kind of urban hardship chronicled in the music he idolized. Comprised largely of semi-permanent tents (or gers, the Mongolian word for yurts), these sprawling outer-city settlements have tripled in size since 1990, as a traditionally nomadic population is lured to the capital.

Most of the districts' low-income households rely on wood-burning stoves -- or until a ban in 2019 , coal-burning ones -- sending pollution across the skies of a city where winter temperatures regularly fall below minus 20 degrees Fahrenheit. As a child, Munkherdene would walk several kilometers a day to fetch water.



















1 / 10 Rapper Big Gee riding a Bactrian camel in Mongolia's capital. Scroll through the gallery to see more images from photographer and filmmaker Alex de Mora's project, "Straight Outta Ulaanbaatar." Credit: Alex de Mora

"We didn't have recording studio -- there were very few and (they were) very expensive. The start of my rap career was very hard," he said. "We didn't have a way to make good money, to make high-quality audio and video, or to work with big companies. Television and radio stations blocked our music and videos. They thought hip-hop was a bad thing."

Now, more than two decades later, the 37-year-old, known professionally as Big Gee, is one of the country's best-known MCs. A regular fixture on Mongolian television, and even the star of a KFC ad , he is the heavily tattooed, sports car-driving epitome of the rags-to-riches hip-hop tale.

But he and Mongolia's rap community are little-known outside the landlocked country. This is, in part, what prompted British photographer and director Alex de Mora to capture some of the scene's colorful characters in "Straight Outta Ulaanbaatar," a documentary and book that profile a selection of the city's crews and artists, as well B-boys, a record store owner and a tattooist.

"When most people think about Mongolia, they think about big open expanses, and maybe they've heard of a two-humped camel or have seen people riding around on horses ... but they've never thought about contemporary culture in an urban environment," De Mora said on a video call from London. "That's what I wanted to show -- that across the world there are different things going on where cultures are crossing over."

Mongolian rapper Maberrant, pictured by photographer Alex de Mora in the passenger seat of a car. Credit: Alex de Mora

Tackling social issues

Describing himself as "obsessed with music and subcultures," De Mora has previously photographed high-profile US rappers like Pusha T, MF Doom and members of the Wu-Tang Clan. He often eschews the cliched tropes of hip-hop photography, an approach maintained during his self-funded trip to Mongolia. While some of the portraits show local rappers flaunting their jewelry or posing in -- or on top of -- their cars, many are warmer and more playful than the genre usually dictates.

"I try and avoid the obvious bravado-type portraits," he said. "It's quite funny when you get your camera out and a guy starts posing, which is good to have some of. But with this project I wanted to find more intimate and personal moments."

Big Gee, whose image features on the cover of De Mora's book, also serves as the documentary's central figure and narrator. The issues he addresses tell a wider story about the challenges of life in Ulaanbaatar.

"In Mongolia we have lots of problems -- social issues, unemployment, alcoholism corruption and many more," Munkherdene told CNN, adding: "The government isn't taking care of the Mongolian people, they're just taking care of themselves ."

One of Ulaanbaatar's sprawling ger districts. Credit: Alex de Mora

The rapper is known for speaking out about corruption and abuses of power. But if these themes are common to hip-hop around the world, then many of the other topics he raps about are specific to his homeland: struggles in the ger district and the pride of his Mongolian ancestry (Munkherdene has the word "Mongol" tattooed in traditional script beneath his left eye). He has also used his lyrics to rally against Chinese-operated mines for their alleged mistreatment of local workers -- controversially so, due to his use of a derogatory racial slur (his manager told CNN that the rapper had not used the word in reference to Chinese people, though the music video in question has nonetheless been deleted from YouTube).

And, like many Mongolian folk songs, there's another important theme woven through his music: nature.

"I've done some songs about protecting nature, (and I have one called) 'Leave My Country to Us.' What's the real richness? Money? Gold? In my opinion, it's not money not gold, not bling-bling things, not big chains or big cars. Real richness is human beings and pure nature."

Portrait of a city

Fittingly, nature is also a central character in De Mora's photos. Mountains, sand dunes and -- on unpolluted days -- rich blue skies are never far away in Ulaanbaatar. One shot sees Big Gee holding an eagle and sitting proudly on the back of a Bactrian camel; others replace the urban backdrops typical of hip-hop photography with the vast, empty landscapes found at the city's outskirts.

"They call (Mongolia) the 'Land of the Blue Sky' for very good reason," De Mora said. "It's something that makes the photographs themselves very vivid. I've never seen so much sun and blue sky in my life."

Though De Mora's project assumes the perspective of a particular subculture, it is, in truth, a broad portrait of the Mongolian capital. His photos paint a wider picture of the city's diverse residents, complete with kids playing in the streets and an elderly accordion player.

Big Gee poses in front of a Genghis Khan statue in Ulaanbaatar. Credit: Alex de Mora

In the documentary, meanwhile, footage of rappers is interspersed with shots of Soviet-style murals, identikit tower blocks, public statues and smokestacks. The combination of English graffiti and Cyrillic signs hint at the varying cultural forces at work in the city.

Aside from a song by the young Mongolian rapper Maberrant, played during the closing credits, the soundtrack looks to folk instruments, wind chimes and eerie natural sounds rather than hip-hop.

"I didn't want people to watch the film and judge the people by the music," said De Mora. "I wanted them to watch the film and understand the city and the personality of the people and the place ... It was always a portrait of a city, and a culture within a city. It was never going to be a critique or a review of the music."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jessie Yeung , CNN Written by

This feature is part of CNN Style's new series Hyphenated , which explores the complex issue of identity among minorities in the United States.

Tshab Her grew up feeling like she lived a double life.

Like many Asian Americans, the 29-year-old Hmong American artist was always switching between two names: an Asian name and her "American" name.

Jennifer, her legal first name, was what teachers and employers called her, and what she used in "White spaces," she said. But her middle name Tshab, which means "new" in the Hmong language, was what her family and close friends called her within their small community in Aurora, Illinois.

The Hmong ethnic group is spread across China and Southeast Asia, but most Hmong Americans -- like Her's parents -- are refugees from Laos who fled during the Vietnam War.

"When I went as Jennifer, I felt like I was playing a role -- this White-assimilated, American Dream type," said Her, now based in Chicago. "Tshab and Jennifer were always at tension with each other ... I felt like I was always living a different life as Jennifer, than who I wanted to be as Tshab."

There's a long history of Asian Americans using Anglo or anglicized names -- whether they adopted new White-sounding names like John or Jennifer, or changed the pronunciation or spelling of their original name to better suit English speakers. The practice was popularized in the 19th century due, in part, to fear in the face of intense racism and xenophobia.

Tshab Her, a Hmong American artist whose work pays homage to her heritage and family. Credit: Tshab Her

America has since undergone a cultural sea change. The past decade alone has seen surging demand for greater diversity, inclusion and representation. And as the national conversation shifts, many Asian Americans, including high-profile creatives and celebrities, are facing similar personal reckonings with their names.

The list includes comedian and producer Hasan Minhaj, whose interview on the Ellen DeGeneres went viral when he corrected her on the pronunciation of his name; Marvel actress Chloe Bennet, who said she changed her surname from Wang because "Hollywood is racist" ; and "Star Wars" actress Kelly Marie Tran, who called her family's decision to adopt anglicized names "a literal erasure of culture."

After reflecting on her identity and how she presented herself, Her decided to drop Jennifer and go by Tshab when she started college. It felt empowering, she said -- an affirmation of heritage, the Hmong language, and her parents' journey to the United States in the '70s and '80s.

Unbeknown to many Americans, Hmong soldiers were recruited by the CIA during the Vietnam War. They died by the thousands and were forced to flee when the US withdrew from Vietnam, essentially abandoning the ethnic group. To this day, the Hmong community is among the most marginalized Asian American groups.

For Her, just existing under her Hmong name "creates space in itself" and pays tribute to her roots, she said.

An artist, she also incorporates the journey from one name to another in her work, which celebrates Hmong history and iconography. One embroidery piece reads "It's pronounced Cha," while another reads "My name is Tshab, but the check is payable to Jennifer Her."

A history of violence and assimilation

Asian Americans have been Anglicizing their names since the first major wave of immigrants in the late 1800s and into the 20th century -- a practice also common among Jewish and European immigrants, according to the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).

There are a number of reasons why, with the most basic being convenience. English speakers often had trouble pronouncing or spelling non-English names, and for many immigrants it was just easier to choose a new "American" name. There were financial motivations, too -- immigrant business owners may have felt that an anglicized name would better appeal to customers.

Over the years, USCIS archives have recorded countless such name changes from a Russian immigrant named Simhe Kohnovalsky who asked to become Sam Cohn in 1917, to a wartime refugee named Sokly Ny, who fled Cambodia in 1979 during the Khmer Rouge regime and renamed himself Don Bonus in California, inspired by a "bonus pack" of gum.

Chinese immigrants play cards while waiting in the immigration offices at Ellis Island, US, around 1940-1950. Credit: Keystone-France/Gamma-Keystone/Getty Images

Any change that might smooth their way to the American Dream was seen (by many immigrants) as a step in the right direction," wrote Marian Smith, a former USCIS historian, in a 2005 essay , adding: "There were all kinds of reasons, political and practical, to take a new name."

But this seemingly eager pursuit of the American Dream doesn't fully capture the dark realities immigrants faced. Asians in the US were often demonized, exploited and discriminated against from the moment they arrived. Assimilation -- including the adoption of a new name -- was seen a survival tactic.

Japanese Americans -- the majority of whom were US citizens -- were forced into concentration camps during World War II. Early Chinese immigrants were lynched by mobs, and anti-Chinese sentiment was so strong that the US banned all immigration from China between 1882 and 1943. The fearmongering "Yellow Peril" ideology meanwhile depicted East Asians as dangerous invaders. An estimated 120,000 Japanese Americans -- the majority of whom were US citizens -- were forced into concentration camps during World War II.

Asian men being interrogated by an immigration officer on February 2, 1951 in Brooklyn, New York. Credit: AFP/Getty Images

An increasing number of Japanese Americans changed their personal names during wartime in order to "prove their patriotism and to reaffirm their American identities," according to a 1999 paper in Names, a journal dedicated to onomastics (the study of names). "Makoto became Mac, and Isamu shrank to Sam."

Asians in the 19th and early 20th century were largely portrayed as "strange, but also inferior, dirty, uncivilized," said Catherine Ceniza Choy, a professor of Asian American and Asian diaspora studies at the University of California, Berkeley. "(Back then) the desire to fit in is also about surviving an overtly racist, hostile society" that targeted "Asian difference."

In the period 1900 to 1930, about 86% of boys and 93% of girls born to immigrants (of all origins, not just of Asian heritage) had an "American name," according to US census data analyzed in the journal Labour Economics.

Now, a century later, it's common for members of the third or fourth generation not to have an Asian name at all.

The cost of sacrificing a name

The nation and its racial tensions have evolved since then -- but Asian and non-English names continue to be othered, treated as strange or used as cheap punchlines.

In 2013, for instance, a TV station reporting on a deadly Asiana Airlines plane crash fell for a prank, and announced that the pilots included "Captain Sum Ting Wong" and "Ho Lee Fuk." In 2016, the governor of Maine joked about a Chinese man named Chiu, pronouncing it with a fake sneeze. In 2020, a professor at Laney College asked a student, Phuc Bui Diem Nguyen, to Anglicize her Vietnamese name "to avoid embarrassment" because Phuc Bui "sounds like an insult in English." The list goes on.

Asian Americans have continued to proactively adapt their names, many citing ongoing forms of discrimination. Bennet, who started her acting career as Chloe Wang, spoke out about changing her surname on social media after being questioned about it in 2017.

"Changing my last name doesn't change the fact that my BLOOD is half Chinese, that I lived in China, speak Mandarin or that I was culturally raised both American and Chinese," she wrote. "It means I had to pay my rent, and Hollywood is racist and wouldn't cast me with a last name that made them uncomfortable."

Kelly Marie Tran poses with 'Star Wars' stormtroopers on the red carpet in London on December 18, 2019. Credit: Tolga Akmen/AFP/Getty Images

Tran, the "Star Wars" actress, has also spoken publicly about the pain of assimilating. Growing up, she internalized racist narratives "that made my parents deem it necessary to abandon their real names and adopt American ones -- Tony and Kay -- so it was easier for others to pronounce, a literal erasure of culture that still has me aching to the core," she wrote in the New York Times , before declaring, "You might know me as Kelly ... My real name is Loan."

Their public testimonies are part of a growing conversation about the potential psychological toll of adapting or compromising your birth name. Names aren't just an arbitrary collection of letters and sounds; for Asian Americans, who often juggle multiple languages, cultures and socioethnic circles, a name can encompass various elements of identity.

Tanaïs, a Bengali-American novelist and owner of a beauty and fragrance brand. Credit: Max Cohen

For instance, Tanaïs, a Bengali American novelist and owner of a beauty and fragrance brand, was born with the name Tanwi Nandini Islam. Tanaïs, 38, uses they and them pronouns.

Their parents, who had immigrated to the US from Bangladesh, chose their birth name carefully; "Tanwi" has various meanings in Sanskrit, including a blade of grass. "Nandini" means daughter, and is another name for the goddess Durga. And "Islam," which also reflects their family's Muslim background, means peace. Tanaïs, the name they go by today, is the combination of the first two letters of the three names.

"To have a name that holds all these cultural meanings, is very powerful," they said. "I am all of those things, from my ancestors to where I am now."

But during childhood, nobody knew how to say "Tanwi," or put any real effort into learning, they said. Tanaïs does not even remember teachers saying their name out loud, with a first grade teacher declaring that "Tanwi" was too hard to pronounce and using Tony instead.

"I was Tony for the whole year. I hated it, it wasn't my name," said Tanaïs. "I remember being very unhappy -- I felt misunderstood. I felt misgendered because it sounded like a boy's name to me."

To accidentally bungle someone's name upon introduction can be an innocent mistake. But to deliberately dismiss their name as too strange or complicated to attempt, like Tanaïs' teacher did, sends the message that "you don't matter, you don't belong," said Choy, the UC Berkeley professor.

"The consistent mispronunciation or misspelling of one's Asian name -- questions and requests for you to simplify or change your name -- do take a toll on one's individual psyche," she said. "Names reflect your presence, your being, your history. When people constantly do that, they're not acknowledging you -- as a person, as a human being."

Research has reinforced just how pervasive this problem is. A 2018 survey of Chinese students in the US found that the "adoption of an Anglo name was associated with lower levels of self-esteem, which further predicted lower levels of health and well-being."

However, the study cautioned that it could be a case of correlation, not causation -- for instance, people who already have higher self-esteem could be more reluctant to change their names, and less influenced by stigma.

Another survey of ethnic minority students, conducted by California researchers in 2012, concluded that "many students of color have encountered cultural disrespect within their K-12 education in regards to their names ... When a child goes to school and their name is mispronounced or changed, it can negate the thought, care and significance of the name, and thus the identity of the child."

Minhaj, the comedian and producer, called out Anglo-centric hypocrisy surrounding names during a segment on "The Ellen DeGeneres Show," where he corrected the host on the pronunciation of his name.

"When I first started doing comedy, people were like, 'You should change your name,'" he went on to explain. "And I'm like, I'm not going to change my name. If you can pronounce Ansel Elgort, you can pronounce Hasan Minhaj."

A reclamation of heritage

There are, however, signs of gradual change.

The number of people adopting new names fell in the late 20th century, said Smith, the former USCIS historian. This was partly due to the emergence of automated systems, like those used to register drivers' licenses, that are designed for just one legal name. But social change was likely a bigger factor, she said.

"While the economic, legal, systemic pressure to maintain one name grew, social pressure to Americanize names also lessened as more Americans embraced cultural pluralism or multiculturalist views," Smith said in an email.

We see this cultural shift in how people respond to instances of discrimination or xenophobia. Things that previously may have flown under the radar are now being called out, loudly and publicly.

For instance, the writer Jeanne Phillips sparked intense outrage in 2018 when she encouraged parents not to give their children "foreign names" on her syndicated column Dear Abby, adding that they can sound "grating in English." Furious parents and minority commentators argued she was perpetuating racist and assimilationist narratives, in a controversy that made national headlines.

The Laney College professor who asked a Vietnamese student to Anglicize her name also faced widespread backlash and was placed on administrative leave.

Demonstrators gather for a rally against anti-Asian racism and violence on March 13, 2021 in Seattle, Washington. Credit: David Ryder/Getty Images

the Atlanta spa shootings that killed eight people -- six of whom were Asian women -- reignited similar conversations. After several news outlets released In March,the Atlanta spa shootings thatkilled eight people -- six of whom were Asian women -- reignited similar conversations. After several news outlets released abridged or inaccurate versions of the victims' names, furious and grieving Asian Americans spoke out online about the racist treatment of their names amid a wave of anti-Asian violence and hate crimes.

"PLEASE STOP BUTCHERING THE VICTIMS' NAMES," tweeted Michelle Kim , co-founder of Awaken, an organization that runs diversity and inclusion workshops. "These might be small inconveniences to people. But our names are our IDENTITY. It's our HERITAGE. It's what we have left that remind us WHO WE ARE. WHERE WE COME FROM."

These recent controversies are a reminder of how much work is left to be done -- but also show that minority groups, and wider society, are redefining the norms of what is acceptable and what needs to be held accountable. It reflects an increasingly multicultural context -- a shift that has resulted from broader changes around the world like globalization and a reshuffling of power.

"Going as Tshab was an act of resistance... That was the start of me resisting this Whiteness of American culture that was forced on me." Tshab Her

Some Asian countries have become major political and economic players in recent decades, and have also wielded influence in the form of soft power. Bollywood, K-pop, anime and other aspects of Asian pop culture, for example, have gained legions of fans worldwide. And in the US, immigration policies in the late 20th century have allowed the Asian American population to increase exponentially, said Choy.

"That's just such a different social context to be in, compared to the way it was in the '50s, '60s, '70s," she said, adding that technological advances and globalization mean the "dominance of Anglo-American culture" is now "lessened."

This new chapter is reflected in the growing demand for greater diversity across nearly every sector: entertainment, politics, food, education and more. And among young Asian Americans, there is also an increasing awareness of what their immigrant parents or grandparents had to give up to survive -- a "realization that there is a loss of heritage and culture from the Asian home country," said Choy.

For some, this realization can spark a desire to get back what was lost. By studying their parents' or grandparents' first language, for instance. Others might visit their ancestral homes to reconnect with their culture.

Tshab Her's work "Returning," is inspired by the first time her parents traveled back to Laos since they immigrated to the United States as refugees. Credit: Tshab Her

For Her, embracing her Hmong name has become a way to assert her heritage.

"Going as Tshab was an act of resistance," she said. "I just want to be who I am, and who I am is Tshab, not (Jennifer). That was the start of me resisting this Whiteness of American culture that was forced on me.

"I think, for me, it's natural for me to feel like I am connected to my parents or my ancestors, going more as Tshab, and not wanting to forget where I come from, where my family (are from) and what the Hmong people have gone through."

Top image: A piece of embroidery by Hmong American artist Tshab Her.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Madeline Leung Coleman, CNN

This feature is part of CNN Style's new series Hyphenated , which explores the complex issue of identity among minorities in the United States.

impossible worlds. He has Andrew Thomas Huang is used to creatingimpossible worlds. He has summoned volcanoes and pulled cities from roiling landscapes. He has choreographed dances for fairies . He has shrunk the moon into a ball small enough to hold in your hand.

The 36-year-old filmmaker and artist made a name for himself directing music videos for the likes of FKA Twigs, Perfume Genius and Björk, using puppetry and digital effects to build alternate universes. Whether making these high-profile videos or his own independent short films, Huang's trademark has always been technical wizardry. "I get excited when I see something and I can't see the seams," he said over a video call from his home in Los Angeles.

Now Huang is entering new territory -- and with new priorities. His latest project, a feature-length coming-of-age fantasy movie called "Tiger Girl," has a story that pulls just as much weight as the visuals.

Huang on set filming the proof-of-concept trailer for his upcoming film "Tiger Girl." Credit: Courtesy Matea Friend

"I do feel like there's often a weird division," said Huang. "There are those (filmmakers) who are really great at writing spoken words -- acting, story, performance. There's a sphere of craft there. But then there's also a sphere of people who really get off on just visuals and design. I've noticed that there's this bridge between the two that's very difficult to cross."

"Tiger Girl" is more personal than much of Huang's previous work, drawing inspiration from his own Chinese American family. It follows a teenage girl who is -- like Huang's mother -- growing up in 1960s LA while struggling to reconcile her own identity with family expectations. Then she finds a tiger living in their attic.

While the "Tiger Girl" script is still in late development, Huang released a pastel-hued short film, "Lily Chan and The Doom Girls" last year, that hints at the movie's eventual look and feel. It features a shy protagonist who whiles away an afternoon with a group of bad girls sporting cat-eye eyeliner and teased hair. They chug beers in a parking lot and run around an empty swimming pool, bathed in milky California light. The fact that all the girls are Asian American makes this teenage dream feel quietly subversive; mainstream narratives about '60s youth culture have long excluded teenagers who look like them.

Although Huang had been thinking about "Tiger Girl" for a decade, he said Donald Trump's presidential inauguration in 2017 drove him to finally pursue the project.

"I just felt, at that political moment, like, 'Why am I making work for this privileged, small audience?'" he said. "I was doing this kind of digital art exhibition (at the time), and I still value that work. But I felt like, if this work doesn't make people laugh or cry, and it's so expensive to make, then why am I making it?"

By that point, Huang had made countless music videos and shorts -- all visually dazzling, but with less emphasis on dialogue and story. He started to think that storytelling could help him to connect with viewers on a deeper level. Maybe, instead of making imaginary worlds, he could use his own as a starting point.

Magic 'accepted as fact'

Huang first discovered the fantasy genre in elementary school. Growing up in a suburb of LA, he fell in love with Jim Henson films like "Labyrinth" and "The Dark Crystal," becoming obsessed with the art of puppetry. He longed to shape the foam, cut the patterns and work the armatures.

Later, he started working with digital animation tools, which he describes as being "a little bit more efficient." Still, he has never abandoned hands-on craft. Even with digital assistance, puppets and practical effects form the core of his aesthetic.

More recently, Huang has found inspiration in artists like Thai filmmaker Apichatpong Weerasethakul, whose work he said, incorporates elements that "speak truth to a spiritual realism or dream logic." This approach stands in stark contrast to what Huang sees as Western narratives' obsession with rules, even in sci-fi and fantasy. Huang is hungry for stories that aren't so "rationally tidy."

"I even think the word 'supernatural' kind of kills the magic," he said. "I like when magic is just accepted as fact."

Telling personal stories has always felt more fraught for Huang than fantasy. He identifies as queer and grew up in an intensely Christian household where the church had instilled an intensely "prudish" attitude toward sex. While he's no longer Christian, the filmmaker said religion has had a long-lasting influence -- pushing him to ask big questions about morality, sacrifice and existence: "It continues to be a huge reason why I am interested in finding alternative languages for speaking about personal, spiritual, emotional and sexual experiences."

Two years ago, online video platform Nowness asked Huang to contribute to a series of films about sex. Specifically, he was asked to make work about queer Asian sexuality. He balked at first.

"I was terrified of the idea of making a work that was so vulnerable," he said. "And for a moment, I was like, 'Why am I burdened with the task of tokenizing, and having to make a piece about me and my intersection?' But then another part of me was like, 'Well, you haven't done it yet.'"

The resulting short film, "Kiss of the Rabbit God," follows a young worker at a Cantonese restaurant who meets -- and is seduced by -- a sexy, cherry-haired incarnation of the Qing dynasty god Tu'er Shen, also known as the Rabbit God, the deity of homosexual love.

Still from "Kiss of the Rabbit God," a short film written and directed by Huang for Nowness. Starring Teddy Lee (left) and Jeff Chen (right). Credit: Courtesy Andrew Thomas Huang

In choosing the setting, Huang drew on his own life for the first time. He searched all over LA for a restaurant that would look like the one his Toisanese grandparents had once owned in Gardena, California, that his mother had helped run when Huang was growing up.

The film flips between scenes of hectic restaurant work -- the heat and exhaustion of taking orders and clearing tables -- and hushed after-hours encounters between the protagonist and the Rabbit God. Huang takes what might have been a more typical story of immigrant hustle and dissolves it into a pool of erotic self-discovery.

Uncertain times

The pandemic has cast uncertainty over Huang's plans. After taking a family trip to China in 2019, Huang felt closer to his roots than ever, and he had been hoping to return. He had workshopped the "Tiger Girl" script at the Sundance Screenwriters and Directors Lab, and was finding momentum and community with "a wave of ... my diasporic friends making really exciting work."

And then Covid-19 hit. For now, he's fine-tuning the "Tiger Girl" script with a view to starting the casting process. But the forced pause in production has also provided Huang with time to consider what he hopes to accomplish with the movie.

"Tiger Girl" will be, in some ways, a classic American story about a second-generation kid trying to navigate the pressures of parents and society. But Huang wants to evade cliche by avoiding a dreary, realist aesthetic, and instead use his signature mixed-media to depict characters' inner worlds.

Still from "Lily Chan & The Doom Girls." Credit: Courtesy Andrew Thomas Huang

"I just don't see why these things are mutually exclusive -- why someone's inner life can't be expressed with the same flair, effects and visuals as a big Hollywood movie," Huang said.

"I think, so much of the time, this arsenal of Hollywood production is used for very external stories of good versus evil. I'm more interested in finding a symbolic language to talk about this stuff."

Top image caption: Still from "Lily Chan & The Doom Girls" featuring Linda Ngo (left) and Hojo Shin (right).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

For decades, the smart home has been a mainstay in pop culture, from Disney's 1999 flick "Smart House," in which an artificially intelligent home takes on the personality of a domineering mother, to the retro high-tech home of "The Jetsons." The 1960s cartoon offered a view of domestic life a century later, from a grooming room that combs your hair and brushes your teeth, to the ever-attentive and overworked Rosie, the robot maid.

Some of the Jetsons' housewares and furnishings, such as the bed that ejected the occupant like a piece of toast, are still a pipe dream. But 60 years later, we've got their smart watches and (comparatively primitive) digital assistants.

In our homes, devices like Google Nest identify friends or strangers at the door, while Philips Hue lights can be programmed to shift their color based on our circadian clocks. When we plan meals for the week, Samsung's Family Hub refrigerator photographs what's left in the fridge and makes suggestions based on our diets. If there are unusual sounds in our homes (like the cat lazily knocking a drinking glass to the floor), Amazon's Alexa alerts us. In 2020, Samsung also teased a forthcoming robot companion named Ballie , that can roll around like BB-8 from "Star Wars" and help operate our smart home devices.

We may not have the living room of "The Jetsons" yet, but over the past decade, integrated smart devices have become a mainstay in our homes. Credit: leanza abucayan/cnn

For the most part, we still explicitly direct our devices on how best to serve us, but that's about to change, according to Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) professor Joseph A. Paradiso, who directs the MIT Media Lab's Responsive Environments group.

Just over two decades after the late venture capitalist Eli Zelkha and his team at Palo Alto Ventures introduced the concept of "ambient intelligence," laying out a future in which electronics were ubiquitous, interconnected and responsive parts of our homes, we're on the cusp of making their vision a reality. The exploding field of ambient technology promises innovative, intuitive electronics that fade into the background hum of our lives.

"Soon, you're going to have systems that will be proactive," Paradiso said in a video interview. Our devices are "going to see and hear as we do, and they're going to be suggesting and prompting."

In 2018, Amazon waded into these waters with Alexa's Hunches feature, which can perform small tasks, like turning off smart lights for you when you go to bed, without your direction. Until this January, users had to give permission for Alexa to act on her decisions. But now, once you've opted in, Alexa can decide what to do around your home based on your habits.

"It's a big change in your relationship with Alexa, if it starts to decide things for you," Sarah Housley, head of consumer technology at trend forecasting company WGSN, explained in a video interview.

Amazon's digital assistant Alexa can now make decisions for users based on their habits, thanks to an updated "Hunches" feature.

As technology progresses, artificial intelligence (AI), the linchpin of ambient technology, will likely augment more areas of our lives. Any error, however, may lead to backlash, Housley warned.

"All it would take is for an intuitive AI system to make a bad decision that impacts badly on you or someone else. And then there would be a very quick kind of cultural conversation of who's to blame for the decisions that technology is making for them," Housley said, pointing to the debate that surrounded a fatal self-driving Uber accident back in 2018.

And that conversation is bound to come soon: By 2030, WGSN has predicted that we will be using 50 billion connected devices around the world, creating smart networks in and outside of the home.

'The technology is now in line with the futurologists'

Jamie Cobb, director of industrial design group Map Project Office in London, believes the next five to 10 years will see an explosion in ambient technology, thanks to groundwork laid over the last decade. His team is interested in the new behaviors that this type of technology will enable and how we will live harmoniously with it, as Map outlined in a recent e-paper, " The Future of Ambient Technology ."

"The technology is now in line with the futurologists," Cobb said. A decade ago, he added, "you'd never (have) imagined that someone could order food or turn the lights on just by talking to an object, and that's quickly become part of a very familiar landscape."

Some of the biggest advancements have been made in computing power, sensor size and speech and natural language recognition, according to Paradiso. But our devices are poised to respond to far more than voice commands. Ambient technology will be sensitive to our movement, gaze, posture, body language, heat biometrics, and the nuances in our tone of voice, Cobb said.

At the Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in 2020, Panasonic unveiled a new concept based on activity-sensing technology that is designed to predict your behavior around the home, including biometric sensors that adjust room temperature based on your body heat. Chinese home appliance brand Haier, meanwhile, showcased a concept for a flexible and accessible kitchen that can adjust the height of appliances, among other features, by using voice and facial recognition to determine who is using it.

Samsung's smart refrigerators can help people plan their meals based on their dietary needs, as well as what's left in their fridge. Other kitchen concepts imagine an even more personalized and automated experience. Credit: Michele Tantussi/Getty Images

Ambient technology may help us rely less on screens, as we need them less to direct our devices. Our digital assistants can already access many of our apps for us without the need to swipe open our phones, and those types of interactions are bound to become more comprehensive.

"It's amazing how much screens have taken over my young children's lives," Cobb said. "That's a very lean-forward, immersive experience. But when we talk about ambient, it gives us an opportunity to create more lean-back experiences."

The technology may help run a more sustainable home. WGSN's " The Future Home of 2030 " report looked at new technology that could do just that, including VibroSense, an AI-powered device developed by researchers at Cornell University. Tracking vibrations in walls, ceilings and floors, VibroSense monitors and adjusts 17 different types of appliances in the home, turning off dripping faucets and alerting residents to the wet clothes left unattended in the washing machine.

Though it does take energy to run smart devices, manufacturers have touted overall savings costs. According to Google, its Nest thermostat saves US customers up to 12% on heating and 15% on cooling bills.

Devices like the Nest Learning Thermostat aim to run homes in a more sustainable way. Credit: Smith Collection/Gado/Archive Photos/Getty Images

The WGSN report details how our living spaces will be increasingly digitized and able to change up visually or aurally according to our moods, using augmented reality (AR) and deep learning, which Housley suggests could lead to a creative boom when it comes to home decor. IKEA has provided a glimpse into what our homes might soon be capable of through its project "Everyday Experiments" with Danish design lab SPACE10, proposing blinds that adjust themselves according to the sun, or an AR and spatial audio app that turns the objects in your home into a musical symphony by scanning and assigning each of them a sound, which can be changed by rearranging objects, among other concepts.

"The idea that a designer can design a mood, or design an ambience is a fantastic thing," Housley said. "So thinking about how all of the senses come together is going to be really inspiring for designers -- how do they pair lighting with color and with sound and with pattern and tactility?"

"I think that digital decor could become a sustainable way to update your space, if you have furnishings that you can change digitally by projecting color or light onto them," she added.

And, though it may have been too early for smart glasses when Google Glass was introduced back in 2013, a number of AR glasses on the horizon -- reportedly including Apple and Facebook -- will mean that soon enough, anything in or outside of the home may become interactive and responsive.

Privacy in a world of intimate technology

But all of this innovation could come at a cost: our privacy. And in the current landscape, it's a fee consumers may be reticent to pay. "With the big backlash against Big Tech that we've seen over the past few years, I think consumers... have a certain level of interest in privacy and ethics now that they didn't before," Housley said.

These fears aren't entirely unfounded. Massive breaches to major websites have compromised the data of hundreds of millions of people in the past few years, and the comprehensive data ambient technology relies on will include far more than our addresses and credit card numbers. The digital assistant that will be able to identify when you''ll be most attentive for a Spanish lesson -- a function Paradiso said is being heavily researched -- will have the type of information that could be used to manipulate you.

"We can start looking at your internal state: Are you focused? Is this the best time to give you this information now?" Paradiso said. "If you have intimate knowledge of people, you can start knowing exactly how to make an intervention to sway them."

While we are now accustomed to hyper-targeted product advertising, the Cambridge Analytica scandal , which saw Facebook user data harvested and exploited for political advertising, portends a future where it may become much easier to use people's personal preferences for much more than purchasing decisions.

A decade ago, "You'd never (have) imagined that someone could order food or turn the lights on just by talking to an object, and that's quickly become part of a very familiar landscape," Cobb said. Physical robot assistants, like Samsung's Ballie, are likely on the horizon. Credit: Bridget Bennett/Bloomberg/Getty Images

Housley also notes smart home features could soon extend beyond just your home. Amazon Sidewalk, for instance, will be rolling out soon, offering the ability to create smart neighborhoods by allowing connected devices to work beyond the range of a single home's Wi-Fi, including home security systems, broadening their potential reach.

But Housley says technology meant to connect people also has the potential to exacerbate inequalities. She points out racial profiling that has taken place on some neighborhood social networking apps like Nextdoor as foreshadowing to what may follow. The app has been criticized for allowing users to report people they see in their neighborhood as "suspicious" based only on their race. The company has tried to address the issue with several features, including a new " anti-racism notification " that identifies offensive phrases and asks users to reconsider before they post.

"(The racism is) almost amplified by the technology... And so that will need to be tackled as well for consumers to feel like these systems are equitable and that they're democratic."

Identifying these problems will become crucial as more people opt in to relinquishing their tasks to ambient technology. In a world with billions and billions of connected devices that learn us intimately to streamline our lives, it will be harder to opt out.

"I think it will become more and more of a luxury to be unconnected," Housley said.

But Paradiso takes a more optimistic tone, referring to sci-fi writers who have opined about the collective intelligence humans will be capable of when more fully linked.

"(Ambient technology) is going to really unite us with machine intelligence and each other, ideally, in a way, that's great," he said. "I like to take the long view, and something like that would be wonderful."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Allyssia Alleyne , CNN Written by

For 20 years, photographer Diana Markosian thought she knew her family's immigration history -- or the gist of it, at least. In 1996, when she was seven, Markosian's mother, Svetlana, woke her and her older brother, David, in the middle of the night, telling them to pack all of their important things: the three of them were going to see America. The way Markosian remembers it, neither of them asked any questions. That night they boarded a plane in Moscow bound for Los Angeles, without saying goodbye to their father.

Diana Markosian, My Parents Together, 2019, from Santa Barbara (Aperture, 2020) © Diana Markosian Credit: Courtesy Diana Markosian

When they disembarked at the airport, the family was greeted by Eli, a pudgy, much-older, American friend of their mother's, who brought them into his home in coastal Santa Barbara. The trip, Markosian was told, was meant to be a holiday. But after Svetlana and Eli married less than a year later (they remained so for nine), Santa Barbara became home.

"When we came to America in the '90s, it felt like an absolute dream to be here. (My mom) fell in love with being an American, she embraced it," Markosian recalled in a phone interview. "I am not sure my mom was leaving anything behind. Everything had already been taken."

Even before they lived there, Markosian had been aware of some version of Santa Barbara. The 1980s American soap opera of the same name was the first TV show of its kind to be broadcast in post-Soviet Russia, and her mother was among the millions of Russians who made "Santa Barbara" a hit , escaping into a world that felt exciting, exotic and far-removed from their own.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Svetlana, an economist, and her husband Arsen, an engineer -- Armenians who emigrated to Moscow to finish their doctorates, and separated before Markosian was born -- were living in poverty, amid widespread unemployment and hyperinflation. Arsen hawked Matryoshka dolls in Red Square and sold homemade Barbie dresses across Moscow to make ends meet. Svetlana assisted him with his bootleg Barbie business, and waited in the bread lines for handouts to feed the family.

Diana Markosian, Moscow Breadline, 2019, from Santa Barbara (Aperture, 2020) © Diana Markosian Credit: Courtesy Diana Markosian

But in January 2017, when Markosian was 27, that narrative was disrupted. As the newly ascended President Trump enacted his first travel ban, Markosian, who was then working as a photojournalist for the likes of National Geographic and the New Yorker, began pressing her mother about their own immigration story.

"I just started talking about it and trying to understand: How did we even manage to do this? How did we manage to come to America? And I saw [my mother had] this real desire to tell me, and this readiness to reveal something that felt so shameful, so difficult to tell me. And that's kind of how it came about" Markosian said.

In reality, Svetlana, enamored with the vision of America she'd seen on TV, had met Eli through an ad she'd had circulated in American newspapers and magazines through a Russian agency that matched Soviet women with American men -- a popular route for women looking to immigrate at the time. Her proposition was simple: "I am a young woman from Moscow, and would like to meet a kind man who can show me America." Her first husband had had no idea she was looking to move, and was blindsided when she flew across the world with his children and severed communication. (When she was 22, Markosian and her brother tracked her father down during a trip to Armenia. He had returned to Yerevan, the capital, where the family had lived when Markosian was a child.)

Markosian was stunned. "You hold your parents up on a pedestal and I think, for me, there was this anger, (this feeling) that this can't be our story. Why didn't I know more about this? Why wasn't I included in this decision?" she said. "It's not just us coming to America and living an American life. It's us coming to America, keeping this secret of where we are for 20 years, and of not seeing my father for 20 years. It's completely abandoning our past for this dream."

Diana Markosian, The Disappointment, 2019, from Santa Barbara (Aperture, 2020) © Diana Markosian Credit: Courtesy Diana Markosian

To help her process the revelation, and learn to empathize with her mother's decision to abandon her life in Moscow, Markosian set out to reenact her family's journey on camera, through a short film and an accompanying photo series titled "Santa Barbara." Shot from her mother's perspective, the project saw her auditioning hundreds of actors to play her family members (she looked at 384 women before she found an actor to play Svetlana, someone "who would understand what it meant to give up everything for this one decision"), and shooting in locations across California, as well as the family's former apartment in Yerevan . (The current tenants allowed her to rent the space.) Ana Imnadze, the actor who plays Svetlana, even wears pieces from her mother's wardrobe; Armen Margaryan, who plays Arsen, wears her father's watch.

"I started seeing it as a story, and trying to divorce myself from my own life," she said. "It needed to be a work of fiction, almost, for me to accept it, to process it, to fall in love with it. Because otherwise, it just felt too, too painful."

The photos that comprise "Santa Barbara" are a careful mix of the cinematic and the personal, fantasy and reality. There are dramatically framed domestic scenes, moodily lit (nodding to the dark Americana of Gregory Crewdson and David Lynch ), and overexposed snapshots, including one that shows her "father" holding out a birthday cake, a still life with cigarettes and a cherry-red rotary phone, which looks like its been borrowed from a family scrapbook.

Palm Springs, from Santa Barbara, 2020 © Diana Markosian, courtesy the artist Credit: Courtesy Diana Markosian

Similarly, Markosian said the accompanying film, running about 15 minutes, "relies on all these different formats to kind of understand a chapter in my family's life." Recreated moments from Russia and California are intercut with Super 8 videos and photos from Markosian's childhood, as well as auditioning actors' screen tests. Much of the dialogue is organic: At various points, Svetlana is interrogated by her doppelganger, dressed as her younger self, over the dinner table; and Markosian and Svetlana have their own back-and-forth in voiceover.

Markosian had originally intended for the project to be scripted. She even recruited one of the original writers from "Santa Barbara," Lynda Myles, to pen a script, and gave her family the opportunity to edit it. In part, this was a way to mitigate her own anxiety about telling a story in which she felt like a bit player.

Diana Markosian, The Wedding, 2019, from Santa Barbara (Aperture, 2020) © Diana Markosian Credit: Courtesy Diana Markosian

"The hardest part of this project was coming to terms with the fact that I was the narrator," she said "I sometimes sit with that thought and think why me? I was the youngest person in the room; I really didn't have a voice in any of the decisions that were made. Why am I the one who's in the place to tell this story? "It was a collective memory, and we all had our own version."

But finding a version of events that her family could agree on -- from the nuances of Arsen and Svetlana's relationship, to the realities of life in California -- proved impossible. She brought Myles' script to her father in Armenia, giving him the opportunity to inject his own perspective, but when she returned to California, her mother ended up crossing out his words and replacing them with her own. The process repeated when she handed the script to her brother.

Hearst Castle, from Santa Barbara, 2020 © Diana Markosian, courtesy the artist Credit: Courtesy Diana Markosian

"The whole thing is disputed (but) I think we reached a place of understanding that we were never going to really agree on any of it. (The differences were) not so dramatic that I couldn't put out a project, but enough that I started to understand how fascinating memory is, and that if I leaned into the gray, if I leaned into every perspective, I would arrive at a closer version of the truth than just this one version that I called my own," Markosian said. "I looked at the script (after everyone had added their notes), and it became a piece of art in itself."

Diana Markosian, The Argument , 2019, from Santa Barbara (Aperture, 2020) © Diana Markosian Credit: Courtesy Diana Markosian

"I remember how special it was to come to America, and I never took that for granted. It just came with a very big sacrifice for all of us," she said. "That second chance to remember and recreate a part of your life is an absolute gift, and I think that's what art has given me."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Oscar Holland, CNN

Plastic surgery has become synonymous with the quest for youth and beauty, albeit with varying degrees of success. But the field has, for centuries, been driven by medical necessity -- and it has nothing to do with plastic.

The discipline derives its name from the Greek word "plastikos" -- to mold or give form. And while the idea of perfecting yourself surgically is a relatively recent phenomenon, there is evidence of reconstructive surgery going back to antiquity.

The oldest-known procedures appear in an ancient Egyptian medical text called the "Edwin Smith Papyrus." Thought to be an early trauma surgery textbook (and named after the American Egyptologist who purchased it in 1862), the treatise contains detailed case studies for a variety of injuries and diagnoses.

As well as showing how the Egyptians treated wounds and bone fractures, the papyrus revealed a suggested fix for nasal injuries: manipulating the nose into the desired position before using wooden splints, lint, swabs and linen plugs to hold it in place. The Egyptians occasionally used prosthetics, too: In 2000, an ancient mummy was found to have a prosthetic toe that may have aided the woman's walking, according to researchers who tested replicas of the toe on modern-day volunteers.

An illustration depicting 19th-century plastic surgery being performed on a woman with facial burns. Credit: Universal History Archive/Universal Images Group Editorial/Getty Images

Whether these procedures can be considered types of plastic surgery is a matter of historical debate, according to Justin Yousef, whose research on the topic was recently published in the European Journal of Plastic Surgery. It is in India, in fact, that historians have found "the first description of reconstruction proper," he said in a phone interview.

By the 6th century B.C., physicians in India were carrying out procedures not dissimilar to a modern-day cosmetic rhinoplasty. In a detailed compendium called "Sushruta Samhita," the Indian physician Sushruta -- who is sometimes called the father of plastic surgery -- outlined a remarkably advanced technique for skin grafts.

As in Egypt, the procedure involved repairing noses. But according to Yousef, patients' motives were, in a sense, cosmetic.

"In ancient India, there was a practice of having one's nose removed as punishment for adulterous acts or (other acts that were) against the law at the time," said Yousef, who is also a trainee surgeon at Sydney's Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. "It was a public sign of shame -- if you walked around with an absent nose, people knew that you'd done something."

Sushruta's technique involved constructing new noses using skin from elsewhere on patients' faces. "There are two schools of thought," Yousef said. "That the skin was either from the forehead or the cheek. But he basically raised the skin and the underlying fat, before transporting it to the area of the nose."

Elsewhere in antiquity, the first known cleft lip repair is believed to have been successfully carried out by 4th-century Chinese doctors. And in ancient Rome, the encyclopedist Aulus Cornelius Celsus documented a procedure whereby excess skin around patients' eyes was surgically removed

"Celsus described what we today would call blepharoplasty, or eyelid rejuvenation," Yousef said. "It was used when hairs (eyelashes) became inverted and started to affect the patient's ability to see. They were trying to shorten the eyelid so the hairs wouldn't reach the eye."

In the ancient world, patients were usually "seeking to replace something rather than enhance their aesthetic appeal," Yousef said. And given the pain and risks involved, going under the knife was reserved for those most in need. "Wine was the anesthetic," Yousef added.

The needs of war

Progress in the field was slow over the ensuing centuries. Like much of medical science, it was the development of modern germ theory and the 19th-century invention of anesthesia that began shaping the practices seen today.

As with so many innovations, however, there was another factor that accelerated plastic surgery's progress: war.

During World War I, the sheer volume of patients with facial injuries -- coupled with advances in blood transfusions and infection control -- allowed doctors to experiment with innovative new techniques, according to Andrew Bamji, author of " Faces from the Front ," a book tracing the origins of modern plastic surgery.

"If you've got 100 patients to learn from, that actually isn't very many, given the various types of injuries you can have," the writer and retired rheumatologist said in a phone interview. "But if you've got 5,000 patients, it's a different game altogether."

A doctor examines a patient at the maxillofacial Center of Marie Lannelongue Hospital in Paris. Headed by doctor Maurice Virenque, the hospital has been a pioneer of reconstructive surgery in the 20th century. Credit: AFP/Getty Images

The institution at the heart of Bamji's book, Queen Mary's Hospital in London, was the "first to concentrate all the patients in one place," he added. Skin grafts, bone grafts, facial reconstructions and wound-stitching techniques all made dramatic leaps forward.

"You've got literally dozens of surgeons working there, and they can bounce ideas off each other. We have photographs of two operations happening in the same operating theater at once -- which from a cross-infection point of view, nowadays, would be completely forbidden -- but... you have this incredible interchange of ideas and the development of reconstructive techniques."

At the time, the priority for military and civilian patients was improved functioning, such as chewing or breathing more easily. And the idea of using surgery to simply improve one's appearance remained in its infancy. Doctors in Europe and America had experimented with rudimentary cosmetic procedures prior to World War I, though they were "hit and miss," Bamji said, adding that "quite a lot of it went wrong."

At the start of the 20th century in France, for instance, doctors sometimes attempted to re-contour patients' faces using paraffin wax. Although solid at room temperature, when the wax warmed in the body "it started to melt, and so it sank into the lower regions," Bamji said.

Standards improved in the inter-war period, which also saw the first attempts at sex reassignment surgery. But cosmetic procedures were frowned upon by parts of the medical establishment. In the 1930s, some surgeons "bobbed noses and performed some breast operations," Dr. Richard L. Dolsky wrote in the American Journal of Cosmetic Surgery in 1999, although "such work occurred quietly, without fanfare."

"Most plastic surgeons yearned to be recognized as 'serious surgeons' and avoided what were considered frivolous procedures," he added.

Entering the mainstream

The post-war period saw drastic changes for the field. Improved technology, diminished risk and increased disposable income all contributed to plastic surgery's growing popularity -- as did a surplus of doctors after the end of World War II, according to Bamji.

"You've got all these plastic surgeons that haven't got anything else to do," he said. "Once they were done with all the wartime causalities, of which there were vast numbers, then they can get on with all these other things."

By the 1960s -- in the US especially -- many of today's most common cosmetic procedures, such as breast augmentation, rhinoplasty and face re-shaping, were becoming more commonplace. Innovation was still driven by the needs of trauma patients or those suffering from cancer or disfigurements. But the technology could be used to vainer ends.

A patient recieves botox injections at a Philadelphia hospital in 2002. Credit: Don Murray/Getty Images

Take, for instance, the emergence of Botox. Originally a treatment for strabismus, or crossed eyes, in the late 1960s and 1970s , the injections were later harnessed by the cosmetics industry for their skin-smoothing properties and were approved by the US Food and Drug Administration to treat frown lines in 2002. (In recent years, innovation has benefited the medical profession once again, with Botox now used to treat migraines and spasms. Just last year, a study found that the injections may help alleviate depression, with the authors hypothesizing that paralyzing facial muscles disrupts the feedback loop between negative facial expressions and negative emotions.)

It took a plastic surgery explosion boom of the 1990s, which saw the volume of procedures in America grow tenfold , for cosmetic procedures to begin outnumber reconstructive ones. By 2005, the number of cosmetic surgery procedures performed in the US was almost double that of reconstructive procedures, according to data from the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, or ASPS. Fueled by celebrity endorsements and economies of scale, cosmetic surgery also tapped into a new aesthetic of desirability, said Ruth Holliday, a professor of gender and culture at Leeds University's School of Sociology and Social Policy.

"Post-feminist thinking, which first emerged in the 1980s, was all about showing how empowered you were," she recently told CNN . "It was about women reclaiming their sexuality, both from the patriarchy and the feminist movement itself. Within the realm of plastic surgery, that translated into emphasizing all the parts of their bodies that were already widely eroticized by society -- thighs, curves, breasts -- to own and show off their femininity."

According ASPS data , 15.6 million cosmetic procedures were carried out in the US last year. New technology continues to drive the sector's growth, with some 85% of these procedures (of which Botox and fillers were by far the most popular) considered "minimally invasive."

Tastes continue to change, too. And while the Covid-19 pandemic has impacted the entire industry, with ASPS reporting a 15% drop in cosmetic procedures carried out in the US in 2020 compared to the previous year, some procedures suffered far larger falls -- the number of breast augmentations was down 33% and buttock lifts were down 27%, year over year.

Patients await a check-up after a plastic surgery procedure at a clinic in Tirana, Albania. Credit: Gent Shkullaku/AFP/Getty Images

It remains to be seen whether the so called " Zoom effec t" (or "Zoom boom") will be reflected in 2021's figures. But a number of surgeons and clinics have reported an increased demand for surgery on those body parts most visible during video calls -- neck liposuctions, lower facelifts and under-eye fillers.

Dr. Sheila Nazarian, star of Netflix reality show "Skin Decision," said in a phone interview last year that, when her Beverly Hills clinic reopened after California's lockdown, "lots of people came to get lower face work ... because, with Zoom, the camera points up from below."

"People started thinking about doing things that would make them feel good in the long-term."

Top image: A physician and patient at Moscow's Beauty Institute cosmetology clinic in 1968.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

For more than six decades, American late night talk show hosts have sat behind large wooden desks, with guests in cushioned chairs or couches to their right. Behind them, the wall may be painted to mimic an open vista; around them, a brightly lit studio set is made more inviting through warm wood tones, mugs on a desk or -- in Johnny Carson's case -- a couple of well-placed house plants.

As much as the programs themselves are part of Americans' nightly rituals, the late night talk show set has become an iconic -- and predictable -- fixture in television, today inhabited by comics including Stephen Colbert, Jimmy Fallon and Jimmy Kimmel, following in the lineage of Jay Leno and David Letterman, and further back, Carson, Steve Allen and Dick Cavett.

Johnny Carson (pictured with Dolly Parton) remains televisions longest-running late night talk show host, spending four decades behind the desk for "The Tonight Show." Credit: Alice S. Hall/NBC/Getty Images

"It's funny how late night sets have not changed much since they started," said Robert Thompson, a media scholar and professor of television and popular culture at Syracuse University, in a video interview. "It's an attempt to show some semblance of our idea of an American living room. But an American living room where one of the people, the owner of the living room, sits behind a desk."

When it was first introduced around 1949, late night was a different beast than the already familiar entertainment of evening variety like "The Ed Sullivan Show" or daytime talk show programming like "The Today Show." The late show concept had a very low bar for success, as the CNN original series "The Story of Late Night," details. Prior to the debut of the then-novel, post-11pm programming, the nightly news would give way to a test pattern, and then static -- a foreign visual today, in an era when there is always something to stream.

Watch a brief history of late night talk shows

"Late night began as a way to kill time," host Conan O'Brien, who just announced the end of his long-running program on TBS, said in the docuseries. "It was the networks realizing... 'let's kick the football a little further down the road and see what happens at 11:30.'"

Today, late night talk shows have branched out beyond network television, and have begun to include more women and hosts of color, including new shows helmed by Seth Meyers' writer Amber Ruffin and popular YouTuber Lilly Singh.

Yet the desk setup largely remains, and it's notable when a host tries to do away with the formula -- like when Bill Maher sat among his guests on the '90s show "Politically Incorrect." Last year, Samantha Bee explained the reason her weekly show "Full Frontal" is deskless in an interview for the Television Academy Foundation, saying the traditional approach made her feel "super confined."

Comedian Steve Allen first introduced the talk show desk during the often experimental 1950s show "Tonight Starring Steve Allen" -- the first iteration of "The Tonight Show." Credit: NBC/Getty Images

Still, the spirit of the 1950s and '60s era of set design has largely persisted.

"Every time you see a late night show, it seems like everybody starts with the same formula," said Keith Raywood, a production designer who has built sets for O'Brien and Fallon, in a video interview. "They just dress it differently."

Designed for power dynamics

The pioneer of the late night talk show was actually a woman, the actress Faye Emerson, who hosted interviews and gave her own political commentary in 1949 on "The Faye Emerson Show," often from a couch in a living room. But then women were relegated to the realm of daytime television, where advertisers could appeal to stay-at-home wives, media historian Maureen Mauk explained in "The Story of Late Night."

"The men started to take over (late night), and the women were really never to return, in a lot of ways," Mauk said. (The next female host to nab a nighttime talk show was Joan Rivers in 1986, but Fox cancelled "The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers" the following year. A decade later, Cynthia Garrett became the first network late night Black female host, but her NBC show "Later" was axed after a single season.)

Joan Rivers was often a guest host for Carson on "The Tonight Show," as pictured here with Oprah Winfrey, but wound up competing against him with her own short-lived Fox show. Credit: Paul Drinkwater/NBC/Getty Images

Comedian Steve Allen first introduced the desk during his wacky and experimental programming that was the first iteration of "The Tonight Show" -- which included him dipping into vats of jello and happily pie-smashing his guests. According to "The Story of Late Night," Allen's successor, Jack Paar, added the content format we're still familiar with today: a monologue, interview and performance.

But it was Johnny Carson, host of "The Tonight Show" for over four decades, whose affable, family-friendly charm became synonymous with late night. And his long-running show also cemented the hierarchy implicit in the layout of the set.

"The desk is occasionally breached," said Thompson. During the first taping of the "Late Show with David Letterman," Bill Murray spray painted Letterman's desk. Credit: Alan Singer/CBS/Getty Images

"It's less democratic, less egalitarian, if someone is sitting behind a desk in an elevated position, and his guests are not equal in stature in terms of how they're being seated," Raywood said.

Thompson points out the setup "leaves the guests to be fully exposed." Cavett, whose talk show slots included late night, preferred to sit more casually on comfortable chairs with his guests, putting them on equal ground.

Arsenio Hall (here with Eddie Murphy) shook up late night as the first Black host -- and notably did away the desk format. Credit: Ron Galella, Ltd./Getty Images

But one magnetic personality aimed for an even more personal way of engaging with his guests. Arsenio Hall, who in 1989 became the first Black host to helm a late night talk show, sat close to his guests, who were on a couch, and leaned in with rapt attention.

"We see him in his entirety," Thompson said of Hall. "He would lean into his interviews...which gave it a sense of intimacy."

Carson, on the other hand, "had an emotional distance to him," Thompson said. "The idea of him leaning in in that friendly, familiar way that Arsenio did would have been unthinkable. And I think it's one of the reasons ("The Arsenio Hall Show") really had some voltage and some energy -- because it looked less like what we had seen so many times over and over again."

Reworking the formula

Some of the most creative takes on talk show sets have come out of the parodies, which have become as ubiquitous as late night itself.

The original spoof, Norman Lear's "Fernwood 2 Night" from 1977, and its grandchild, Zach Galifianakis's "Between Two Ferns," which premiered in 2008, directly referenced the ever-present greenery on Carson's set. President Obama was famously tapped for Galifianakis's Funny or Die series, which took place on a simple black set with two towering green ferns. During his interview, Obama deadpanned to the comedian: "When I heard that people actually watch this show, I was actually pretty surprised."

Eric Andre and Semere Etmet at "The Eric Andre Show Live!" The sketch comedy series parodies public-access talk shows with a wild dose of surrealism. Credit: Michael Tullberg/Getty Images

Meanwhile, "The Eric Andre Show," the absurdist Adult Swim show that debuted in 2012 and repeatedly destroys its set, heightened all of the strangeness that Steve Allen had established in the Wild West of late night, and that Letterman continued early in his career.

"Older late night television had a real sense of that iconoclastic," Thompson said.

But Thompson has noted how even kitsch and subversion has become cliché. It's only recently that another substantial shift in late night set design has occurred, he said, thanks to the ongoing coronavirus pandemic, which forced late night hosts to tape from home for an extended period of time.

"All of a sudden, the set of the talk show itself was totally downsized, because people were doing it from home," he said. "Colbert started in his bathtub the very first day."

As Colbert suited up in his bubble bath the first night for "The Late Show" on CBS, Meyers posted up at his in-laws' house for "Late Night" on NBC. After 68 episodes there, a painting of a sea captain, which had become an animated "guest" throughout the remote shows, said goodbye with a jaunty sea shanty.

Late-night TV marks anniversary of pandemic

"In a strange way, the liberation from those Carson-era studio sets was actually, creatively, a good thing for late night talk shows," Thompson said.

Instead of guests stopping by the set, they could dial in from wherever, using Zoom backgrounds or sharing the intimacy of their homes.

"Sometimes it's more interesting to talk to Arnold Schwarzenegger from his house, than it is to have Arnold Schwarzenegger wander onto the stage, which is so artificial, so prepped," Thompson said.

Raywood also signaled that it's time for something new, after nearly seven decades of following the same formula.

"I think we could easily be due for a change in format for late night television," he said. "Every generation veers into another direction -- how they look at things, how they dress, the kind of music they listen to -- so why are we doing the same show every (time)?"

He added: "You need producers who are creative enough, and brave enough."



This article has been updated to correct the title and year of Joan Rivers' late-night show with Fox, and to include additional context regarding the Dick Cavett set.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Marianna Cerini, CNN

Breast implants are more popular than ever. They remain one of the most sought-after cosmetic surgeries in many countries from the United States and Brazil to the UK and China. They're the subject of reality shows and tabloid spreads, a recurrent topic of celebrity culture and a perennial punch line.

But in terms of size, implants are actually getting smaller.

A shift has been underway since the mid-2010s, with women around the world, from Victoria Beckham to Crystal Hefner, seeking implant removals or reductions. While some, like Hefner, do so due to health complications, there are also signs that the unnaturally large look has simply fallen out of style in recent years.

Studies also indicate that in the United States and the UK , demand for breast reduction procedures grew 6% from 2018 to 2019 and, according to Google Trends, the number of people searching for "breast reduction surgery" has been rising steadily in different countries since the onset of the pandemic in 2020. (South Africa, for instance, saw a 100% surge in searches for the term, compared to the previous year.)

For Dr. Gabriel Chiu, a plastic surgeon and founder of the Beverly Hills Plastic Surgery practice, breast augmentations, while still popular, have been "moving towards a smaller size and more natural shape," explaining over email that people are typically asking for more "personalization" and a look that is proportional and compliments the patient's figure.

Meanwhile, Dr. Caroline Payne, a London-based specialist in plastic and cosmetic surgery and member of the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS), has also seen a preference for smaller cup sizes in her own practice. "Among my patients, requests for major augmentations are very, very rare," she said in a phone interview.

Changing aesthetics

The first breast enlargement surgery using silicone implants was performed in 1962, when Timmie Jean Lindsey, a 30-year-old mother-of-six, was taken from a B cup to a C cup at Jefferson Davis Hospital in Houston, Texas. Lindsey had come into the hospital to have a tattoo removed from her breasts, when doctors offered her the chance to get the first-of-its-kind procedure.

The times were ripe for a new kind of look. Barbie had hit the scene just a few years prior, and Playboy published its first issue less than a decade before. Throughout the 1950s, curvaceous Hollywood stars like Marilyn Monroe, Rita Hayworth and Jayne Mansfield had America lusting after their hourglass figures and ample breasts, shaping ideals for feminine beauty.

Marylin Monroe in 1952. Her pear-shaped figure helped set a beauty standard that endured for decades. Credit: Hulton ArchiveArchive Photos/Getty Images

In the fashion world, the vogue for curvy figures stretched back further, to Christian Dior's 1947 "New Look," which pushed forward an hourglass silhouette that emphasized a stereotypically "womanly" aesthetic -- big bosoms included -- in contrast to a more modest sartorial trend seen during World War II.

Modern medicine, on its end, had been developing procedures for breast augmentation for quite some time. In 1895, German surgeon Vincent Czerny performed the first breast reconstruction surgery by transplanting a lipoma (fatty tissue growth) from a patient's lower body to fill the hole left by a mastectomy. Other methods followed in the early 20th century, from shaping breast "mounds" out of flaps of muscle, to the injection of paraffin directly into women's breasts. (The latter came with the risk of severe side effects, including infection and pulmonary embolism, that could manifest up to 10 years after the procedure.)

It wasn't until the end of World War II that industrial silicone emerged as a viable alternative. The trend started in Japan, where sex workers were known to inject silicone directly into their breasts, reportedly to make themselves more attractive to occupying American soldiers, though the practice often led to gangrene around the injection site.

By the 1960s, hospital-grade silicone implants had been adopted by the Western medical community, and appeared safer and more reliable than the rubbers and sponges on offer.

After Timmie Jean Lindsey's operation, silicone breast implants entered the mainstream. They remained firmly there (upgraded to silicone gel) until the early 1990s, growing larger and more popular along the way, thanks to the likes of celebrities like Pamela Anderson.

Then, in 1992, as it emerged that a number of women had suffered complications like leakage and infection from their implants, the collective fascination suddenly subsided. In its place came a widespread backlash against fake breasts, and an FDA ban on silicone gel breast implants that was also adopted by countries like Germany, Spain, France, Austria and Italy.

Restrictions in the US, which lasted until 2006, led several major manufacturers, including Dow Corning (which would later file for bankruptcy) and Bristol-Myers Squibb, to leave the silicone implant market.

Implants go big

But implants weren't out of favor for long. Saline-filled alternatives were elevated as the new golden standard and the FDA ban on silicone was lifted in 2006, once again clearing silicone implants for cosmetic use in women over the age of 22. By 2010, breast augmentation was the most popular form of plastic surgery in the US (it first eclipsed liposuction in 2008), with 318,123 procedures performed that year, 62% of which using silicone implants.

Pamela Anderson arriving at an event at Radio City Music Hall in New York in 2001. Credit: Frank Micelotta/ImageDirect/Getty Images

If you looked around, you'd have noticed them everywhere: on celebrities and your next-door neighbor, in men's magazines and TV shows. What made them stand out -- literally and figuratively -- was their volume. Circular and perched high on the chest, implants of the 2000s were deliberately obvious, and coveted precisely for their gravity-defying look.

Ruth Holliday, a professor of gender and culture at Leeds University's School of Sociology and Social Policy, attributes the popularity of this aesthetic to shifting attitudes toward gender politics.

"Post-feminist thinking, which first emerged in the 1980s, was all about showing how empowered you were," Holliday said in a phone interview. "It was about women reclaiming their sexuality, both from the patriarchy and the feminist movement itself. Within the realm of plastic surgery, that translated into emphasizing all the parts of their bodies that were already widely eroticized by society -- thighs, curves, breasts -- to own and show off their femininity."

Big implants and other artificial enhancements, Holliday said, opened the possibility of being a sexual subject -- an overtly desiring woman -- rather than a sex object.

The very act of undergoing surgery, Holliday added, has also turned into a marker of status. "Being able to afford the operation... said, 'Look at me: I am in the know, I am worth it, and I have the means to do it.'"

Over the years, many women also embraced implants as a tool to be noticed in an increasingly visual society, according to Alexander Edmonds, a professor of social and medical anthropology at the University of Edinburgh. "Ultimately, going under the knife is, for many, a way to reclaim their self-esteem, and open themselves up to a more confident life," he said in a phone interview. "Or at least that's the story we've grown used to telling."

New natural looks

However, there's been a twist in the story in recent years, with unnaturally large fake breasts no longer a signifier of sexual liberation or individuality, according to Holliday.

"They became synonymous with artificiality and tackiness," she said. "Most women didn't want to be associated with that."

The deflation of oversized breasts was also spurred by a shift in aesthetics. "Simply, a new trend began taking hold: that of natural-looking bosoms," said Gemma Sharp, a clinical psychologist and senior research fellow at Australia's Monash Alfred Psychiatry Research Centre (MAPrc), in a phone interview.

And the rise in popularity of a more athletic look -- toned and slender -- has perhaps further contributed to the demand for smaller breasts. "Big breasts seem incongruent with that 'strong woman' ideal," Sharp added.

Marcos Sforza, a plastic surgeon based in the UK, believes the rise in the number of implant removals and reductions could also stem from more serious concerns. "Women are worried about the risks that have been linked to implants and (are) opting for smaller ones as a preventive measure," he said.

Among some of these risks is the 2017 discovery of a link between textured breast implants and anaplastic large cell lymphoma (a rare type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, commonly referred to as BIA-ALCL), which led breast-implant manufacturer Allergan to recall a number of its products from the market last year. Breast Implant Illness (BII), a series of systemic symptoms that include (but aren't limited to) fatigue, joint pain, hair loss, headaches, rash, brain fog and depression, is another ailment women have become more aware of, with more patients reporting BII symptoms to doctors and to the FDA during the last few years (though it should be noted that there haven't yet been any major studies into the number of women with breast implants who develop BII).

"With BII, removal is often the only way for women to feel better," Sforza said. "Hence the rising popularity."

"It's a very weird place to be for women," he continued. "On the one hand, they know about all these complications. On the other hand, they're still looking to 'improve' their appearance, feel better about themselves, better fill their clothes. And so, they look at what else they can do."

Related video: Our perception of the ideal body has changed throughout history

In his practice, Sforza offers what's known as hybrid breast augmentation, which supplements a smaller silicone implant with fat cells from other parts of the body, gradually increasing the amount of fat with every new implant. (The average silicone implants may last anywhere from 15 to 20 years, after which they must be replaced). "The idea is that when you're 60 or older, your last implants will be mostly made of fat, (which is) lighter and safer (than silicone). I now do 25% of breast surgeries using this technique."

While Sforza firmly believes that it's health, not trends, that is influencing the demand for smaller breasts, he conceded that what most of his patients now want is a size and shape that leaves space for the question: Did she, or didn't she? "That's the foundation of the 'new' breast job," he said.

Both Chiu and Payne agreed. "Younger patients wish to only go slightly bigger, while older women are asking me 'Can we downsize?'" Payne said. "But at the end of the day, all everyone wants is a subtle, versatile look."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Oscar Holland, CNN

Architectural photographer Arthur Drooker is well aware of the reputation held by America's city halls. After all, the subjects of his latest project are so closely associated with bureaucracy they have inspired the despairing aphorism, "You can't fight city hall."

"Most people have probably never gone into their city hall unless they absolutely had to, whether that was to pay a tax bill, pull permits for construction, vote on election day or attend a hearing," Drooker said in a video interview. "But the more memorable ones are beautiful buildings you just want to visit just for their own sake."

Over the course of four years, Drooker traveled to around 40 of America's 300-plus city halls. Often spending days at each, he documented their grand exteriors, explored long-forgotten corners and spoke to local politicians and architects about how the institutions operate. The resulting images reveal a surprisingly rich variety of styles, from Flemish Renaissance Revival in Milwaukee to Art Deco in Saint Paul, Minnesota.

Los Angeles City Hall as seen from the Walt Disney Concert Hall, another of the city's architectural icons. Credit: Courtesy Arthur Drooker

Unlike many federal buildings, city halls were often designed to reflect the places they represent. For instance, in California's Palm Springs, famous for its Modernist villas , Drooker found a low-rise mid-century city hall complete with palm trees growing through a circular opening in the canopy above its entranceway.

In New York state, meanwhile, the halls of Buffalo's soaring Art Deco city hall are painted with murals nodding to the region's industries and decorative tiles inspired by Native American motifs.

By choosing just 15 of the country's most architecturally eye-catching examples, the photographer's new book " City Hall " is neither exhaustive nor strictly representative. (He filtered out buildings he found dull during his research, and some of the shortlisted buildings he visited proved "disappointing" in person.) Yet, as a selective survey, the photos instead show what cities can achieve when political will, financial resources and visionary design converge.

"Those three things, working together, can make a building that transcends its function," Drooker said.

Changing face of power

Despite the buildings' apparent diversity, Neoclassicism has, historically, reigned large in American civic life. It has always been the "default architecture," of government, Drooker said.

"They have the Greek-style columns, the pediments and the steps leading up to it because it conveys, very quickly, that this is an important building -- there's power in this building."

Milwaukee City Hall was build in the Flemish Renaissance Revival style at the end of the 19th century. Credit: Courtesy Arthur Drooker

As such, the Neoclassical movement still resonates with many in politics today. Donald Trump's 2020 executive order requiring all new federal buildings to be built on "the forms, principles and vocabulary of the architecture of Greek and Roman antiquity" may have been overturned by his successor -- and would not, in any case, have applied to city halls -- but it exposed a disdain for contemporary architecture that exists in parts of government and elsewhere.

For Drooker, however, modern city halls not only reflect evolving tastes but changing expressions of power. Their designs suggest that the way rulers present themselves to the ruled has shifted in the 200 years between his book's oldest case study, New York's Federal-style city hall, and its most recent, Las Vegas City Hall, which was completed less than a decade ago and is wrapped in an LED-enabled glass facade.

"City halls are now consciously designed to be more open and more welcoming," Drooker said, offering San Jose's, completed in 2005, as an example. "It has a plaza that's open to the street, and the architects of the building wanted to think of it as the city's living room."

San José City Hall, opened in 2005, features a modern take on the classic rotunda seens in many of America's historic civic buildings. Credit: Courtesy Arthur Drooker

The photographer's inclusion of two Brutalist buildings -- namely the seemingly austere Boston City Hall and Dallas' inverted concrete pyramid by late architect I.M. Pei -- might appear to contradict this correlation between modernity and openness. Brutalism, which was singled out for criticism by Trump's aforementioned executive order, is often maligned for being cold and uncaring. Yet, for Drooker, there is an unexpected transparency to these designs.

"A lot of people -- I dare say including me -- don't think of Brutalism as especially welcoming," he admitted. "But the architects of Boston City Hall were very clear that they wanted this building to be open to the people, because Boston was coming out of a very corrupt period, politically.

"It was basically a stripped-down concrete building, as if to say: 'We have nothing to hide, it is what it is.' It is a very permeable building that is very open to the street, so this (reflects the idea of) consciously designing buildings that are open and available to the people they serve."

Local democracy at work

The photographer's personal fascination with city halls began with his local one, in San Francisco. "I would visit two or three times a week, and just take photos with my iPhone then post them on Instagram," Drooker recalled.

Rebuilt after its predecessor was destroyed in the 1906 earthquake, San Francisco City Hall is a notable remnant of the City Beautiful movement, which sought to reimagine America's cities at the turn of the 20th century. The striking Beaux-Arts design features a pink Tennessee marble staircase leading to an ornate rotunda and a 307-foot dome -- the nation's tallest -- painted with gold leaf.

Local references feature prominently in Buffalo's Art Deco design, opened in 1932. Credit: Courtesy Arthur Drooker

The famous dome's illuminated interior graces the cover of Drooker's book. But the photographer reveals lesser-seen details, too. In one image, a crack is seen running along the rotunda's marble floor, a reminder of the 1989 earthquake that almost threatened to repeat history.

Indeed, while the photographer is primarily concerned with architecture, his images are often acts of symbolism, too, whether focusing on a Los Angeles ceiling panel that alludes to the city's moviemaking heritage or a gavel in New York council chamber, worn from years of passing judgement. It is a fitting approach a project that, according to Drooker, was not just about documenting the buildings but checking the pulse of local government.

"Part of me felt like I was on a mission to create a manifesto for democracy," he said. "Because democratic ideals are baked into these buildings, whether it's a quote on the wall or a city council chamber designed to be welcoming to the general public."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thomas Page , CNN Written by

"Nomadland" won best picture, Chloé Zhao best director, and Frances McDormand best actress at the 93rd Academy Awards on April 25. This feature, published ahead of the awards, asked the cast and crew to reflect on the production of a history-making Oscar winner.

Having been wrenched from the earth, the mineral gypsum is crushed first. It's then blasted at high temperatures and ground down, packed up and shipped out to find a new purpose. What's left behind is a void; an empty space where something once thought permanent used to be.

Such was the fate of Empire, a mining town near the Black Rock Desert, Nevada. When the gypsum mine closed in 2011 under the weight of the recession, it extinguished the community and scattered its people. Not even the zip code survived.

Out of this event the character of Fern was born, the lynchpin of Chloé Zhao's Oscar-frontrunner "Nomadland." Played by Frances McDormand, Fern is a widow who leaves Empire to become a nomad and travel the American West. Amid its vast landscapes she finds a new purpose with people brought together by happenstance and bonded by the road.

Fern is a fiction, but the world she inhabits is not. The itinerant lifestyle of a subsection of the baby boomer generation is becoming well-documented -- through Jessica Bruder's 2017 non-fiction book "Nomadland: Surviving America in the 21st Century," from which "Nomadland" was adapted, but also Zhao's film.

The director's novel approach, enlisting two-time Oscar winner McDormand to act as a friend and confidant to real life nomads playing themselves, has become one of the film's most beguiling features, if not its defining one. These interactions, like everything in "Nomadland," appear effortless. But the film's grace was hard won; the product of a dedicated crew who found poetry out west and presented it to audiences with rare clarity.

Winner of a slew of awards, the film has been nominated for six Academy Awards: best director, best adapted screenplay and best editing for Zhao, best actress for McDormand, best cinematography for Joshua James Richards, and best picture. But how "Nomadland" was made is every bit as noteworthy as the film itself.

CNN spoke to Zhao, her cast and her crew, and asked them to recall the long journey to screen. The following interviews have been edited for length and clarity.

Frances McDormand and crew shooting "Nomadland" in Badlands National Park, South Dakota. Credit: Courtesy of Searchlight Pictures

The story begins in 2017 when McDormand and producing partner Peter Spears optioned the rights to Bruder's book. In 2018 McDormand pitched the film and the directing job to Zhao, whose second feature "The Rider" had impressed the actor.

Joshua James Richards, cinematographer/production designer: Chloé had been looking at alternative ways of living on the road for years, so there was an element of serendipity when Frances McDormand came with this project.

I read the book the same time as Chloé (Richards is Zhao's partner as well as regular cinematographer) and there were some early discussions about the potential for narrative -- because it was unusual to take a documentary book and turn it into narrative. But we immediately saw this middle ground and that excited us.

A still from "Nomadland." The shoot took the crew through five states in the American West. Credit: Courtesy Searchlight Pictures

Zhao spent time with the film's two professional actors, McDormand and David Strathairn, developing their characters, but she also needed to cast the nomads. She and Richards embarked on a road trip in their campervan "Akira" to connect with the community, including Swankie and Linda May, who featured in Bruder's book and would go on to star in the film.

Linda May, actor/nomad: Chloé came to visit me in Douglas, Arizona. I happened to have several van-dwelling RV ladies in my neighborhood at the time, and Chloé asked if we could all get together. We just told her stories all day.

Swankie, actor/nomad: They caught up with me in Colorado. I thought it was neat that they actually had a camper van and they were building it out. That sort of surprised me. They cared about the lifestyle.

Linda May, a nomad featured in Zhao's film. "I thought our community could use some good press, and that people could learn another way of life," she says of her involvement. Credit: Joshua Richards

Chloé Zhao, writer/director: The trip gave me time to let go of all these worries about production and just experience the landscape and meet people and not feel like I had to commit to anything.

Richards: It was kind of an on-the-road screen test. The most important thing was familiarizing ourselves with the nomads and getting a sense of how they're going to be in front of camera.

Swankie: Chloé doesn't take no for an answer. It took her two days to talk me into it. I had this surgery coming up and I didn't know if I would still be in a sling when they started shooting. She said, 'we'll work around it,' and I went, 'wow, they really must want me.'

Richards: Swankie's monologue (one the film's highlights in which she describes a moment of bliss in the wild) came from the first time we met her. Chloé was like, 'please remember that.'

Those trips are not just important, they're the magic trick. Because the audience arrives once all these relationships have been formed, but all the work is done really in prep.

Zhao: Every project I've done, there is this moment in prep which is my own dark night of the soul. I go, 'Do I have a movie?' You've gathered so much and it's all in your head and it hasn't worked yet. That trip really made me realize that it could.

Writer/director Chloé Zhao on set with actor and producer Frances McDormand. Credit: Joshua James Richards/Searchlight Pictures

Beginning in South Dakota in September 2018, the 36-strong crew traveled through Nebraska, Nevada, California and Arizona over six months, picking up scenes as they went. McDormand is in nearly every shot, delivering a flinty, unfussy performance typical of the actor.

Zhao: She's one of the legends.

Richards: She is a force of nature.

Swankie: I'd never heard of Frances McDormand before. But somebody pointed her out and I thought I should introduce myself. I tapped her on the shoulder and started to say, 'hi I'm ...' and she turned around and squealed 'Swankie!' She started talking to me excitedly about all the plans and the scenes. It was like working alongside an equal.

Richards: It was tough on Fran, because the nomads come in and Chloé would have to work with them quite carefully. And then Fran gets five minutes and just kills it. You feel bad, because we'd leave a scene and everyone's just 'Swankie! God, Swankie!' Then, 'well done, Fran. Anyway, next scene.'

Chloé Zhao and Frances McDormand take a moment on the set of "Nomadland." "I wish I'd had a little bit more time to learn from Fran," says Zhao. "I think in this film she sort of stepped out of her world into mine. I imagine if I were in a situation where there were rehearsals, I would be able to learn so much from her." Credit: Joshua James Richards/Searchlight Pictures

Linda May: The crew was so enthusiastic. I eventually learned they had morning meetings and would go through what the shoot was going to be that day, so Frances knew what they were trying to capture. I wasn't included in those roundtable meetings -- all for the better.

Zhao: With non-professional actors, I do not like to rehearse them. With these wide-angle lenses close to people, the lens is very sensitive to things that are not authentic. So even though the first take might not be usable, sometimes there might be something there that cannot be repeated. And I would really hate myself if that wasn't on camera.

Swankie: Oh my god that camera was so big, and he got so close to my face. You forget the camera after a while -- until you see the movie on IMAX and realize your wrinkles have been multiplied 50 times.

Frances McDormand and Swankie in a still from "Nomadland." "I didn't feel like I was dealing with somebody that was better than me or richer than me," says Swankie. "I feel now that she's a good friend of mine." Credit: Courtesy of Searchlight Pictures

Richards: (No-rehearsal) impacts everything. Gone are the big lighting rigs. You're allowing as much freedom as possible.

You have me, Wolf (Snyder, production sound recordist) and Chloé all moving as one. If (image, sound and performance) aren't all working, then there's no point. Chloé would even look to Wolf sometimes about performance -- close your eyes and you can hear a bad performance almost better than you can see it.

Linda May: Chloé would just say, 'tell me this story,' or, 'we're gonna have this conversation.' I just got to be myself. Almost everything was done in one take.

The result is documentary-style testimony within a narrative framework. Perhaps the most powerful account is that delivered by Linda May, who describes contemplating suicide in 2008.

Linda May: I wouldn't say (I was) happy to share my lowest point, but it was honest. I think sometimes our greatest defeat can turn into our biggest strength. To be able to share that with someone who may be considering 'this is the end of the road for me, there's nowhere else to go' -- that if you just take one more step, magic and miracles can happen. To put my life on screen like that, another human being can see, 'wow, one day she was going to kill herself and today she's a movie star because she didn't.'

Linda May and Fern (Frances McDormand) recreate a spa experience between shifts at a camp site in "Nomadland." Credit: Courtesy of Searchlight Pictures

Richards: It doesn't get any more collaborative and inclusive than the experience of "Nomadland." I mean, Derek ...

Derek Endres was found through street casting; a young man who had been hopping trains and living on the road for four years, says Richards. Zhao says his scene best illustrates her approach to filmmaking.

Zhao: The scene with Fern and Derek is very special to me. I like to make films where there's something about it that's slightly off what the rest of the film is about. Fern is reciting a Shakespeare sonnet with a little young drifter -- it seems like it has nothing to do with the rest of the film, but it somehow does fit. When the world throws interesting things at you, catch them.

Derek Endres, a young drifter who features in "Nomadland" and became one of the crew. Credit: Joshua James Richards/Searchlight Pictures

Richards: We just loved this guy and he started staying at the hotel with us. We said, 'Derek, do you want to be part of the crew?' Derek became part of the art department and worked on the movie for a good few months and became part of it.

It's almost like community theatre, what Chloé is going for. (There have been) questions, 'why isn't it just a documentary?' Why would a documentary be more true than what "Nomadland" is?

Zhao: I think we need both facts and fiction. Since the dawn of civilization, we've had poetry, fiction, allegories and myths to help us make sense (of the world) in a safe place.

I don't have the guts to make documentaries. I think it's incredibly brave to connect with people and be able to say, 'this is what you're giving me: yourself.' I don't really know if I could form that kind of relationship. Sometimes, I find the best way to convey truth is through poetry.

"They are in the twilight of their years, these characters," says Richards. "They're very aware that they have fewer years ahead of them than behind Credit: Courtesy of Searchlight Pictures

Zhao edited the film with an international crew, beginning post-production in 2020.

Richards: Post(-production) was fascinating, in that maintaining naturalism is really difficult to do sometimes. Chloé wanted to be true to the colors that are there and not put anything between the audience. There's no feeling of the digital intermediate (image manipulation processes including color enhancement) whatsoever.

It was interesting with "Nomadland," because the experience of the film was just nowhere near complete until sound was done.

Zach Seivers, re-recording mixer/supervising sound editor: Chloé's insistence that the production sound captures the environment exactly as it is -- meaning there's no crowd control, no locking down of sets -- really makes for a magical sounding production track.

Sergio Diaz, sound designer/supervising sound editor: For me, the sound was another character. I wasn't familiar with the sonic richness of the American West. I was very meticulous selecting the most accurate and atmospheric layers to contribute to the story and make it more powerful, emotionally.

Richards: Chloé and I have been really lucky to be able to collaborate with people who believe in the same kind of things we do. I discovered on "Nomadland" how I want to make movies. Until this film, I wasn't sure. Now I feel like I know.

Frances McDormand, Swankie and Linda May at the "Telluride from Los Angeles" drive-in premiere of "Nomadland" last year. Credit: Todd Williamson/January Images/Searchlight Pictures

"Nomadland" premiered at the Venice Film Festival and the Toronto Film Festival on September 11, 2020, winning top prizes at both. It has been garlanded with awards ever since, and lauded by critics. But some opinions matter more than others.

Swankie: The first time I saw it there were seven other women there that I knew. When my scene came on, that close up, I couldn't watch it. I honest to god just sat there with my fingers in my ears and my eyes covered up.

I had to go back the next day with nobody with me. That was the first time I actually got it -- I could understand the movie from the public's point of view, I think, because I cried. That was pretty amazing. It's hard to get gracious enough to watch yourself, especially when you think you're making a fool of yourself.

Linda May: I know some people say, 'Oh, it's so depressing.' But I don't see that. I hope that the joy comes through. I think that Chloé got it. What more is there?

Editor's note: Interviews for this feature were conducted before the death of production sound recordist Michael Wolf Snyder was reported on March 6
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Leah Dolan, CNN

A dogged work ethic has granted fashion royalty Naomi Campbell a phenomenal 35-year-long modeling and acting career, but even perennial highfliers need some R&R. Campbell takes hers in a spacious and serene East African retreat, where a turquoise saltwater pool stretches from the sunny patio right into the living room.

The crystal clear pool knits the outdoor and indoor spaces together. Credit: Khadija Farah/AD

After a visit to Malindi, Kenya, in the 1990s left Campbell besotted, the supermodel, who at the time dominated runways for Chanel, Vivienne Westwood and Versace, bought an idyllic villa in the sleepy seaside town which has served as her circuit breaker for more than 20 years. "It's a very calming place," Campbell told Architectural Digest in a recent interview for the magazine's May cover story. "You don't really want to be on the phone. You're not trying to find a television. You just want to read and be with yourself. It's nice to just have the silence and the crickets."

The airy, open-ended structure, crowned with a Makuti roof -- an intricate thatching technique native to East Africa -- bathes Cambell's holiday home in natural light. It also frames her picture-perfect view: There's no external stimulation necessary when gazing out at her twin voile-curtained pergolas, nestled beneath a chorus of splayed palm trees and Keyna's eternal blue sky.

Pictured is Naomi Campbell's guest room, featuring a locally made rug. Credit: Khadija Farah/AD

While Campbell isn't afraid to scour far and wide in the search for striking furniture (she found the ornate latika lanterns currently draped over her rafters in Marrakech), she is keen to support local craftsmanship where possible. "A lot of the wood furniture that we have in the house is made in Malindi," she noted. "In fact, we used to have a workshop at the back of the house."

The work of esteemed local artist Armando Tanzini reappears throughout the residence, from hand-carved wooden doors to giant maps of Africa. Campbell can also be found on the other side of the continent, hunting for statement pieces to set against her understated earth-toned palette. "Senegal has amazing furniture," she said. "Every time I go, I buy furniture, and I just collect it and store it away."

The May issue of Architectural Digest featuring Naomi Campbell. Credit: Khadija Farah

The contrast between her hectic professional life, split dwelling between capital cities London and New York, and the change of pace her Malindi oasis offers her is not lost on Campbell. "It's wonderful to go in July," she told Architectural Digest. "All the animals are crossing over from Kenya to Tanzania, and you see everything. It's incredible. It's like seeing National Geographic come to life right in front of your face."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Challenging binaries and stereotypes, "Swing" is a pop-up series that paints a nuanced portrait of America through photography of the day-to-day lives of overlooked people and communities.

In the summer of 2019, as an overcast sky hung over Minnesota's Prairie Island Indian Community, photographer and filmmaker Tomás Karmelo Amaya took a portrait of a couple kissing while wearing colorful regalia.

The couple, Nevada-based dancers Adrian Matthias Stevens and Sean Snyder, were visiting the reservation to dance in the Tinta Wita Wacipi powwow, a tradition that brought them together -- and a tradition in which they are now making history.

Two-Spirit couple Adrian Matthias Stevens and Sean Snyder are changing cultural expectations through dance. Credit: Tomas Karmelo Amaya

Stevens, who is of Northern Ute, Shoshone-Bannock and San Carlos Apache heritage; and Snyder, who is of Southern Ute and Navajo heritage, are a Two-Spirit couple that have been together for seven years. Within North American Indigenous communities, Two-Spirit refers to people who possess both masculine and feminine spirits, but it can also be used to represent LGBTQ+ Indigenous people more broadly.

"It's not biological, it's spiritual, and it ties back to what I was taught growing up," Stevens told Vogue in 2020. "My aunties recognized me as a Two-Spirit individual way before I even recognized it."

Stevens is a grass dancer and Snyder is a fancy dancer, but the two began competing in "sweetheart special" categories together, mixing both their styles. Credit: Tomas Karmelo Amaya

Through his images of the pair, Amaya shows their bond and the beauty of their movement. When Stevens and Snyder met, they were both dancers on Utah's powwow circuit but it took years for them to perform couples routines -- called "sweetheart specials" -- together. That category was exclusively performed by male and female dancers until 2018, when they became the first Two-Spirit pair to do so, after being disqualified from a dance the year prior.

"Because our styles are so different, we had to find a way to dance together," Snyder is quoted as saying in Vogue . "And for us being two men, it was surprisingly difficult. You don't grow up going to dances and learning to dance with another same-sex partner. We had to learn how to lead and how to take direction."

Since then, their routines and matching regalia -- each embellished with their own handmade beadwork -- have brought them widespread attention. In 2019, a short documentary telling their story, "Sweetheart Dancers," was shown at the PBS Short Film Festival.

Tomás Karmelo Amaya shows the beauty of the dancers' movements and their bond with each other against a stormy sky. Credit: Tomas Karmelo Amaya

For Amaya, who is of Yoeme, A:shiwi, and Rarámuri Indigenous descent, the shoot was particularly resonant. "We see front and center this beautiful expression of love between (them)," said Amaya, reflecting on a portrait he took of Stevens and Snyder kissing. "(It's) a beautiful, proud moment. Because this is the type of safe environment we need to create for our youth and for our future ancestors, as well as a lot of our community members who have faced a lot of discrimination and oppression, and because of systems that are constantly negating their existence."

Creating 'visual medicine'

It was dance that brought Amaya and the Two-Spirit couple together. After a shoot in another part of the state, Amaya and his wife and business partner, Siera Begaye, decided to drive to the powwow in Prairie Island. Begaye, who also dances, had previously met Stevens and Snyder, and Amaya photographed the couple while they were waiting to hear the results of the categories they had performed in separately that day.

Amaya calls his images "visual medicine," believing photography has the power to heal. Credit: Tomas Karmelo Amaya

Amaya remembers speaking with Stevens and Snyder about their hope to provide a network of support for LGBTQ+ Indigenous people. "Sean, Adrian and I had very meaningful conversations about the importance of visibility for our Two-Spirit relatives, for our gender-nonconforming relatives, and our trans relatives within the Indigenous community ... our Indigenous communities included this entire spectrum of sexuality and expression far before it was in this system of settler colonialism."

Calling his images "visual medicine," Amaya believes that photographs have the potential to heal. "Sometimes it feels like it exists almost in an intangible way, where I know I'm doing healing work. I know the intention is there," he said. "And then there are moments like receiving a message from a community member saying, 'This particular photo made me feel seen, it made me feel safe. It made me really proud.' Then I started feeling like it's not just in my mind -- there's real impact and effect."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Marianna Cerini

Holding an array of cosmetics in one hand and a multi-color compact in the other, a model with a coiffed hairstyle smiles contentedly at the camera. "It's literally everything!" reads the text beneath, referring to the tidier of the two. "It's confidence, it's fearlessness, it's stability, it's everything you could want and more!"

The image looks like a beauty ad straight out of the 1970s -- except it's not. The brand being advertised, Max Fab, isn't real. And the model is plus-size and Asian. The ad copy is meant to poke fun at its own absurdity: a makeup compact can't really be "everything." It might offer confidence, sure, but as for its other touted attributes? Not so much.

The work is one of five photos featured in "Prim 'n Poppin,'" a new photo series that reimagines '70s and '80s beauty advertisements to be more inclusive. Photographer Julia Comita and makeup artist Brenna Drury set out to challenge the industry's heteronormative notions of beauty, which often result in White, cisgender, thin models starring in its campaigns.

Model Kaguya poses for the "Prim 'n Poppin" series. Credit: Courtesy Julia Comita

"When we decided to collaborate on recreating the ads ... the first thing we noticed as we went through them was how they only showed young, White women," Drury said in a phone interview. "There was no diversity in the group of people who were being represented. We asked ourselves: 'What would society look like today if inclusivity and diversity had been standard practices in the past? "Prim 'n Poppin'" is our way to begin answering that question."

To that end, Comita and Drury riffed on the vintage ads' campy style with bright hues, lots of pastels, voluminous hairdos and dreamy smiles. Their casting choices, however, were markedly different, with their models varied when it comes to race, gender, size and sexuality. Two of the people featured have vitiligo, an incurable skin condition that causes colorless patches to develop on a person's body.

The photos are accompanied by interviews with the models, in which they share their personal experiences and thoughts on beauty, representation and the industry.

"We wanted to flip the whole thing on its head in a fun, empowering way," Comita said in a phone interview.

Comita and Drury hope Prim' n' Poppin will become an ongoing series. "We obviously know we can't represent everybody in five pictures," Comita said. "There are still too many people who haven't been accounted for." Credit: Courtesy Julia Comita

A history of gloss and shame

Beauty ads have historically targeted White women, pressuring them to buy products through a mix of emotional appeal and appearance-shaming.

Their message was that if you didn't buy beauty products to become more attractive, you risked letting yourself and the people around you down, therefore missing out on life opportunities, social recognition, romance and general happiness.

In the early 1900s, a deodorant brand called Odorono became one of the first to use these strategies, warning that women could experience heartbreak if they didn't invest in antiperspirants (sales spiked after it was published).

Nail care product brand Cutex ran similar campaigns in the 1910s and '20s, cautioning that unmanicured nails were a marker of low-class status, and should thus be avoided at all costs.

Interviews with the models feature on the Prim 'n Poppin' website, which also includes a list of beauty brands, modelling agencies and education groups that stand for diversity and inclusion. Credit: Courtesy Julia Comita

Beauty ads continued in a similar vein in the 1950s, with guilt-marketing directed mostly at housewives. Firms also began betting big on their slogans -- the most famous being Clairol's "Does she... or doesn't she?" first used in 1956, which essentially helped normalize hair dyes by emphasizing their subtlety.

By the 1960s, the messaging -- while still fairly conventional -- had turned to objectifying women. In the latter part of that decade, an ad from British brand Yardley of London read: "She couldn't fix a proper cup of tea. She even beat him at darts. But he loved her madly because of her English Eyes." (Translation: You can be forgiven for being a bad housewife as long you look pretty).

It was in the 1970s that things became more empowering. L'Oreal's "Because I'm worth it" campaign debuted in 1971, putting a woman's point of view -- rather than pleasing others or the fear of being judged -- at the heart of its ad.

The popularity of African American and female-centric publications, such as Ebony, Jet and Essence, as well as the Black is Beautiful movement (which had started in the '60s), also saw more Black women and celebrities promoting beauty products on TV and in print ads. But, for the most part, the faces selling cosmetics continued to be predominantly White, and brands peddling "Black beauty" rarely accounted for varying skin tones or hair textures with their products.

Ads then became flashier, screaming phrases like 'Hello, Fresh Face!" and "Great Look, Great Body, Great Lash Mascara!" The trend carried into the 1980s, which is what made Comita and Drury pick these two decades as inspiration.

"The bright eyeshadows and nail polishes felt more relatable," Drury said. "Though it was also apparent everything else wasn't."

The project's creators used heavy messenging to emphasize how beauty brands rely on slogans to drive home beauty values. Credit: Courtesy Julia Comita

This included the messaging. After looking at the texts of different ads, the duo hired copywriter Bre Harrison to create slogans for their fictional shots that would feel more contemporary -- "It's sheer! It's queer!" reads the copy for a flavored lip balm; "Colors that scream 'I'll probably leave your text message on read,'" boasts an ad peddling eyeshadow -- while also exposing the hilariously unrealistic promises made by beauty brands.

"We were keen to point out how both the language and imagery of those (vintage) ads kept selling the idea that beauty products would magically turn you ... into the best, most alluring version of yourself," Comita said. "Their message, essentially, was that the way you looked simply wasn't good enough."

The photographer was also interested in deconstructing the ads' subtext, which often positioned male desire as a chief reason to invest in beauty products.

"In so many instances, it was implied that you should 'make yourself better' so that you could be more acceptable to men," she said. "'Buy this so that he will find you more attractive,' 'buy that so that you can make yourself better, more beautiful for him.'"

Recasting beauty

While still far from inclusive, the beauty industry has made efforts to diversify in recent years, with celebrity-led lines like Rihanna's Fenty Beauty rolling out products for all skin tones.

Representation has become a global talking point, as have our notions of what looks and is deemed beautiful. Kaguya, the model who features in Comita and Drury's "Max Fab" ad, said the project's subversion of rigid standards and marketing helps to highlight "what genuine representation in the industry could look like ... from (having) different size ranges, to visibility beyond ... cisgender women and Eurocentric standards."

"If we had ads like these from the get-go, I believe we'd all be a lot kinder to each other, and more progressive as a society," she said over the phone. "I, for one, would have loved seeing someone like me represented this way growing up."

Prim'n' Poppin' aims to be a call for the beauty industry to diversify their talent pool and marketing strategies. This ad features model Jesi Taylor Cruz. Credit: Courtesy Julia Comita

Non-binary model Jesi Taylor Cruz, who appears in a nail polish ad for the photo series, agreed. "For too long, real people have had no place in the portrayal of what's considered 'beauty,'" they said in a phone interview. "This project shows that there's so much more in life than the ads and conforming to one ideal or the other."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Tufayel Ahmed, CNN

Professional wrestling has historically gotten a bad rap as neither being a respected sport nor form of entertainment. To most, the pervading image of wrestling may still be beefed-up, baby-oiled behemoths like Hulk Hogan or John Cena competing in staged fights, or the over-the-top, spandex-clad comedy theatrics seen in Netflix's hit series "Glow."

Pro wrestling's merits as a legitimate sport have long been debated, but can this curious confluence of kitsch characters and Cirque du Soleil-style acrobatics be considered art? In the 1950s, French philosopher Roland Barthes wrote an essay likening wrestling to theater -- the staged spectacles acted out in the ring presenting an allegory for good versus evil. In modern day, critics have compared wrestling's dramatic storylines to the televised soap opera, itself an extension of theater.

Pro wrestling has always been known for its kitschy theatrical violence, but does it have artistic merit? Credit: George Napolitano/Orange Crush

Adam Abdalla, the lead creative behind art and wrestling journal Orange Crush, said that in the past, he's brought visual artist friends to watch wrestling shows with him. "(They) have told me, 'This is better than any performance art that I've been to,' because of just how visceral it is, the way wrestlers put their bodies on the line and just the choreography of it," he explained in a telephone interview.

A wrestling and art journal might seem niche, but Abdalla has so far published two issues of the annual, which feels more akin to an indie culture publication than the highly saturated pages of a conventional wrestling magazine. The latest issue features thoughtful pieces on intergender wrestling -- contests between men and women -- and the contemporary artist Raymond Pettibon's secret love affair with the sport.

Raymond Pettibon is just one of the artists featured in "Orange Crush," a new journal about art and wrestling. Credit: Raymond Pettibon/David Zwirner/Orange Crush

"If I go to people who might not be interested in wrestling, 'I did this journal,' they go, 'Oh, this is cool, this is eccentric,'" Abdalla said. "And I wanted to open wrestling fans' eyes to the scope of how people incorporate the visual language of wrestling into contemporary culture."

Creative risk-taking

Wrestling is a well from which wider culture has long drawn, but has given little credit. Take, for example, Hollywood plucking Dwayne Johnson from the wrestling ring and ascending him to the top of the box office, or wrestling serving as the premise for "Glow" and the new NBC series "Young Rock."

"Wrestling does take artistic chances to tell a story," said "Orange Crush" creative lead Adam Abdalla. Credit: Michael Watson/Orange Crush

Abdalla sees wrestling as an artistic and cultural force because of the sport's willingness to take creative risks. "I watched a match with Kazuyuki Fujita and Go Shiozaki of (Japanese wrestling company) Pro Wrestling Noah where they stared into each other's eyes for 31 minutes without moving. And there was no audience --you're watching these guys stare each other down in complete silence," Abdalla said. "Wrestling does take artistic chances to tell a story. That reminded me of (Serbian performance artist) Marina Abramovic."

It's this artistry and the eclectic assortment of athletes who make up wrestling that Orange Crush spotlights. The cover star of the latest edition is Jon Moxley, a former WWE wrestler who broke away from the global platform of WWE television programs like "Raw" and "SmackDown" to exercise more creative freedom over his career. The photographs of Moxley, shot by wrestling photographer Ryan Loco, smoking a cigar and wielding a bottle of Jack Daniel's backstage after a match are immediately arresting.

Jon Moxley is the latest cover star of "Orange Crush." Credit: Ryan Nixon/Orange Crush

"WWE is not great at portraying people as stars in a way that resonates with youth culture or popular culture," Abdalla said. "I want these people to look like the stars that they are."

"A lot of wrestlers are very hip, have great taste in music and are interested in art and they're not really given that platform," he added. "Here they can express themselves in a unique way."

Art world presence

"Orange Crush" also gives a unique outlet to artists who harbor a passion for the wrestling ring. Complementing veteran artist Pettibon's punk-rock wrestling sketches in the latest issue are stunning Cubist-inspired collages by emerging Japanese artist Mio Okazaki that portray the effects of wrestling moves by manipulating paper.

"I want these people to look like the stars they are," said Abdalla. Credit: Michael Watson/Orange Crush

Meanwhile, the first issue of the magazine, published last year, featured rarely seen images of the legendary masked Mexican wrestler Mil Máscaras shot by photographer Avery Danziger, as well as portraits of a mask of wrestler Nick Gage's face by Miami-based artist Nick Lobo. The reconstructive art illustrated a story about Gage's imprisonment for bank robbery -- a crime he committed without wearing a mask.

"These are artists who show in museums that people in the art world know," Abdalla said.

"Even if you're not into the wrestling aspect, you might be interested in the art aspect," he continued. "I think when you really pay attention and you get invested, you start to appreciate the art of it."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Over a century ago, Suzanne Valadon began painting lively nude portraits of sensual and self-assured women, with full, curvy bodies and pubic hair. Occasionally, she painted nude men as well, bucking art historical tradition and presenting them as figures of desire. Her canvases were full of bold outlines, vibrant colors and loose brushwork, and she deftly illustrated her subjects' interior lives, rather than the idealized scenes of leisure so prevalent at the time.

Championed by some of her most famous contemporaries, including Edgar Degas and Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Valadon was no minor artist, and one of the few women painters of the era to receive critical acclaim. Yet, like many women artists of the 20th century, her fame faded after her death.

Suzanne Valadon was a famous artists' model who posed for Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Henri Toulouse-Lautrec before striking out on her own to paint. Credit: Bettmann Archive/Getty Images

But today, curators and art historians are taking a second look at Valadon's works, and reconsidering her life with more nuance. This September, the Barnes Foundation in Philadelphia will stage her first major institutional show in the US, positioning her as an important yet underrecognized modern artist.

From the start, Valadon was a controversial figure in Paris' thriving art scene at the turn of the century, known as much for her bohemian attitudes and provocative personal life as her distinct, rebellious vision.

Valadon's paintings featured contemporary women with body hair, curves and a strong sense of self, diverging from the delicate femininity and timelessness favored in art. Pictured: "Nude on the Sofa," 1920. Credit: Suzanne Valadon

"People were quite scandalized by her lifestyle," said Nancy Ireson, deputy director for collections and exhibitions at the Barnes Foundation. "The fact that she had a younger lover; the fact that her son (the artist Maurice Utrillo), who was a famous painter, was also an alcoholic.

"This is over 100 years ago, but I'm sure that women still face the same kinds of criticisms these days. How do you balance a successful career with being a good wife and a good mother?"

'She understood how to perform'

In 1865, Suzanne Valadon was born Marie-Clémentine Valadon to an impoverished single mother in Montmartre. In her 2017 biography, "Renoir's Dancer," Catherine Hewitt describes the young artist as a headstrong, imaginative child who exasperated the nuns trying to teach her. Valadon held a series of short-lived menial jobs before training as a circus performer at 15 years old, but her career was cut short by a back injury sustained during a trapeze stunt.

Valadon will receive her first major US show at the Barnes Foundation in Philadelphia this fall, a century after she began receiving critical acclaim for her work. Pictured: "Nude Sitting on a Sofa," 1916. Credit: The Weisman & Michel Collection

It was during her recovery that Valadon began to draw. Lacking the training or money typically needed to enter the art world, she began modeling for artists. It was a salacious job, considered to be on par with sex work at the time, but one that offered her direct access to the art milieu of Paris.

Valadon slipped into the new role with ease, serving as painter Pierre Puvis de Chavannes' model for more than seven years. In works by lesser-known artists, she transformed into figures of allegory and myth: the sultry Greek siren in a Gustav Wertheimer canvas, the feminine embodiment of truth for Czech painter Vojtĕch Hynais, always with her auburn hair as her calling card.

Valadon was a female artist from a low-income background with no formal training, making her entry into the art world unheard of at the time. Pictured: "Joy of Life," 1911. Credit: Sepia Times/Universal Images Group/Getty Images

Her reputation spread through word of mouth, as well as her determination to socialize and network in spaces exclusive to male artists, particularly the smoky, absinthe-steeped rooms of Parisian cafe culture. Soon Valadon was populating the works of some of the most famous Impressionist painters of the time. Most famously, she danced across Renoir's scenes of societal leisure, in "Dance in the City" and, likely, "Dance at Bougival," both from 1883.

"It wasn't just that she was good-looking," said Ireson. "She understood how to perform, how to create a character. And so in different works, by different artists, she becomes almost a different person."

A stop-start career

Valadon did more than just pose. She used the sessions as informal training, observing and learning from the artists for whom she modeled. When she showed painter Henri Toulouse-Lautrec, he introduced her to Degas, who became her mentor in 1889.

As she was beginning to stake her claim in the art world, Valadon was raising a young child. She had become pregnant at 18, and though she never named the father, Miguel Utrillo, a young artist with whom she had a close bond, formally claimed paternity.

Valadon's time as a model made her particularly intuitive in how to paint the body. Pictured: "Reclining Nude," 1928. Credit: Sepia Times/Universal Images Group Editorial/Getty Images

When Valadon first began receiving attention for her work in her late 20s, Degas suggested she show at the Salon de la Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts in 1894. "For an untrained, lower-class woman artist to have her work accepted -- it was outlandish, unthinkable, impossible," Hewitt wrote.

Valadon had five drawings of children accepted. In each, her subjects were depicted as moody and natural, unlike other domestic scenes of the time. But in the catalog, she was listed as the androgynous "Valadon, S."

Through her early exhibitions, Valadon caught the interest of major art dealers. But when she married businessman Paul Mousis and moved out of Paris, her artistic output slowed. Further complicating her life were her son Maurice's troubles in school, and his growing alcohol addiction, which first took hold when he was a teenager. She often put her energy into Maurice's artistic talent, hoping that a painting practice would ease his troubles.

In Valadon's first showing at the prestigious Salon de la Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts in 1894, for a series of drawings, her listed name, "Valadon, S.," did not reveal her gender. Pictured: "Woman in White Stockings," 1924. Credit: Suzanne Valadon

Though Degas continued to submit Valadon's work to exhibitions, she wouldn't give her full attention to her art career again until she was 45 years old, after she left her husband for the younger artist André Utter. She began to paint prolifically, making studies of herself and her family, as well as the nudes she became known for. In 1909, her painting "Summer" was accepted into the new and trendy Salon d'Automne, followed by her first solo show in 1911.

In the 1920s, Valadon began receiving critical acclaim. She was mentioned on the front page of French newspaper Le Gaulois, and critics took notice of her 1921 show at John Levy Gallery in Paris. French critic André Warnod described her nudes as "powerful," according to Hewitt, and observed that they "enchant the viewer by virtue of the truth that emanates from them."

Valadon's figures didn't adhere to the delicate femininity that was expected of the time. They were contemporary women with modern clothes and hairstyles, as well as body hair -- a far cry from the timeless nudes so prevalent in art history, Ireson points out.

Even more surprising were Valadon's depictions of nude men, though she rarely painted them. "The fact she was painting male nudes at all in the early 20th century was pretty shocking," Ireson said. "And she paints the male nude in quite a sexualized way. You can see that there's a desire there; there's an appreciation of the body that was quite audacious for the time."

Valadon's sensual depictions of the male body were daring, like in 1914's "Casting the Net." Credit: Suzanne Valadon

In 1923, in her late 50s, Valadon painted her most notable work, "The Blue Room," depicting a curvy brunette reclining among the patterned blue sheets and curtains of a daybed, a stack of books at her feet. Caught mid-thought, a cigarette dangling from her mouth, she pays little attention to the viewer, emanating confidence through her casual ease.

"Strength, Suzanne suggested, was compatible with and even complementary to the idea of 'woman,'" wrote Hewitt of the work.

Under-recognized after death

Valadon also chronicled her own body as she aged, painting herself nude well into her 60s -- which, Ireson pointed out, would still "raise a few eyebrows" today. In her later self-portraits, she shows herself solemn, her mouth pursed, favoring hard edges and dark, neutral tones over the softer, brighter scenes of her earlier works.

"One of the things that's quite striking when you look at her self-portraits is her attitude to aging," said Ireson. "(There's) a refusal of prettiness there ... And an attention (to) the artifice of beautifying yourself, and then this very unflinching representation of her body as it changes."

Valadon painted self-portraits as she aged, eschewing idealized views of herself. Pictured: "Self-Portrait," 1927.

In the last decade of her career, Valadon exhibited worldwide, with shows in New York, Prague, Chicago and Berlin. In 1938, after a lauded retrospective at Galerie Bernier in Paris, she died at the age of 72 after suffering a stroke. At the time, French art critic George Besson called her "the most justifiably famous" woman painter of the era, according to Hewitt, while another critic predicted that her "place in the history of 20th-century painting is already assured."

But history can be fickle, and Valadon's fame dimmed following her death, perhaps because she was never associated with a particular art movement, or because she was overshadowed by her male peers. She was also routinely excluded from French art critic Louis Vauxcelles' influential exhibitions and books, on the basis that he simply didn't like her work, according to Hewitt.

But with figurative painting recently brought back to the fore, and overlooked women artists being revisited, Valadon's work is primed for a revival.

"It's like an undiscovered chapter of a book that you figured you knew," Ireson said. "If you know Toulouse-Lautrec and Renoir, and the painters of the 1920s and '30s, Suzanne Valadon is absolutely part of that story."

Top caption: "The Blue Room," from 1923, is Valadon's best-known work.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Several months after photographer Laurence Philomène began testosterone hormone therapy as part of their transition, they began to take pictures of themselves at home. This was in 2018, and Philomène, was concerned about burnout, so they took two months off from work to focus on self-care.

"Puberty" began in 2018 when Laurence Philomène began taking testosterone injections. This image marked the two-year anniversary. Credit: Laurence Philomene

Establishing a portrait practice became part of their daily routine: They photographed themselves making breakfast or brushing their teeth; they took nude self-portraits against their home's baby blue walls or while wearing a fairytale princess gown in bed. All these images are made more vibrant by the presence of Philomène's signature neon orange hair.

What began as a simple impulse to chronicle a period of physical and mental change has become an archive of thousands of images and now a forthcoming book, "Puberty," set to be released this summer.

The artist began the series while facing intense feelings of burnout. "I was in a place where I had been prioritizing other people's needs and I really needed to relearn how to take basic care of myself," they said. Credit: Laurence Philomene

"Puberty" captures all the intimate details of daily life in lush color, and the photographer often interrupts the mundane with the unexpected. Philomène sits in the lilac-tinted water of a bathtub, eyes downcast, sipping from a mug. They recline on a couch like Ingres' famous 19th-century painting of a concubine, "Grande Odalisque," gazing over their shoulder at the camera. In one image, their hand holds a peach in the dappled morning light; in another frame, echoing that composition, they hold a medical syringe with hormones above an overturned plush Care Bear.

Laurence Philomene

On one level these photos are about the photographer's personal experience of transitioning. At the same time, Philomène's images capture what has become a globalized human experience, as the difficulties of self-care at home and the pressures of productivity have grown more relevant during the coronavirus pandemic.

"(Puberty) is about my transition, but it's also just these themes that resonate really deeply with being a human in the 21st century," said Philomène in a video interview from their home in Montreal.

The beauty of fluidity

In the mid-2010s, as celebrities like Caitlyn Jenner and Laverne Cox were landing magazine covers, Philomène saw how trans beauty was being framed in a specific way.

"I felt like a lot of it was very much focused on this idea of passing as your gender and transitioning in a very binary sense," the artist said. "That really wasn't representative of the trans community that I was a part of, which was a lot more fluid."

Philomène began spending alone time taking baths during quarantine. Many of the themes they explore in "Puberty" became even more universal during the coronavirus pandemic. Credit: Laurence Philomene

Philomène is non-binary and sees photography as "a space where you can play around with gender," they said. Much of their work has focused on studio portraits and documentary-style images of gender nonconforming youth, though self-portraits have always been part of their practice. In the 2019 series "Huldufólk," they appear nude, embedded in various desolate landscapes in Iceland, as a way to evoke the country's folk history of elves, called "hidden people," and compare the ever-shifting terrain to a human body in perpetual change.

In "Me vs Others," a series they shot from 2014-2019, they cast people of different genders and ethnicities to play themselves, each wearing a wig to assume Philomène's identity. The staged portraits of the doppelgangers are often tongue-in-cheek, with objects like oranges and Cheetos becoming symbols for the artist as well.

"Puberty" also incudes still lifes of the ephemera of the home, painting a more complete picture of what the artist sees every day. Credit: Laurence Philomene

Now 27 years old, Philomène grew up during the mid 2000s, and as a teenager was just as influenced by the photo-sharing platform Flickr as they were by Wolfgang Tillmans's effervescent snapshots of youth culture, or Nan Goldin's diaristic depictions of intimacy.

"I just have a lot of nostalgia for (the Flickr era), because (social media) wasn't fully formed in the way that it is with capitalism now," Philomène said. "I wasn't trying to sell anything. When I was 14 posting on Flickr we were just trying to make cute pictures."

Philomène was diagnosed with a chronic illness when still a child, and at age 11, they began dyeing their hair to assert a sense of control over their body, the artist recalled. Living with an illness for so much of their life has greatly informed their work today, they said -- a sentiment that resonates with some of its major themes: how one cares for their body, and how one's sense of self is more than their appearance.

"Representation is not the end all be all," the artist said. "My goal at the end of the day isn't just to represent a trans life, but to really...create a sense of connection." Credit: Laurence Philomene

"Lately, my sense of self is expanding beyond the physical body," the artist said. "(I've been) thinking of myself as a being having a human experience and wanting to communicate what that feels like outside of what I look like."

Philomène hopes to tap into some of the experiences human beings share, and encourage self-reflection. "(I want to) inspire people to see beauty in their day-to-day lives," they said. "Because that's really what the project is all about at the end of the day."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Paul French Oscar Holland, CNN

Paul French is the author of books including "Midnight in Peking: How the Murder of a Young Englishwoman Haunted the Last Days of Old China," and "Through the Looking Glass: China's Foreign Journalists from Opium Wars to Mao."

Northeast of Beijing's resplendent Summer Palace lie the ruins of another stately structure, burned to the ground by European forces during the Second Opium War.

Once an elaborate network of pavilions, palaces, bridges and gardens, Yuanmingyuan -- "The Garden of Perfect Brightness," known simply as the Old Summer Palace in English -- is now little more than collections of rubble amid a network of tranquil lakes. In 1860, Britain's High Commissioner to China, Lord Elgin, ordered troops to destroy both the Summer Palace and Old Summer Palace to avenge the killing of several British envoys to Beijing. By striking sites of cultural and imperial significance, Elgin wanted to chasten China.

But with the Old Summer Palace still in ruins, he instead created a shrine that, more than a century on, is used by the country's leadership to remind its people of past foreign aggression.

Visitors at the Old Summer Palace's ruins in May 2020. Credit: Ju Huanzong/Xinhua/Getty Images

Each year, tens of thousands of visitors arrive to see its broken pillars and stone bricks, which dot an unkempt landscape of grass and weeds. They are potent symbols of China's "century of humiliation," the term Beijing uses to describe the period from the start of the Opium War in 1839 to the founding of the People's Republic in 1949.

Over the decades, scholars and experts in China have suggested that the palace be rebuilt in order to celebrate the grandeur of China's past, thus banishing, rather than indulging, the memory of subjugation. The site could, ultimately, emulate the success of the neighboring Summer Palace, which was since rebuilt and has become one of China's most popular visitor destinations.

However, the National Cultural Heritage Administration (NCHA), the government agency responsible for protecting cultural relics, ruled out the latest restoration proposal in November.

The site's value lies in its "historical status of being destroyed by foreign aggressors," the agency said in a statement. "The site and its ruins serve as a warning to our descendants that they shall never forget the national humiliation." In a country where vestiges of the past are either zealously restored to their former glory or cleared to make way for new developments, the decision to leave the palace in ruins is conspicuous in its inaction. To some critics, the announcement was both a pointed political gesture and a symptom of patriotism that is not simply pro-China, but anti-foreign.

A masterpiece of design

From the early 18th century, the Old Summer Palace grew into an exclusive getaway resort for the ruling elite of China's Qing dynasty. Its architectural splendor has since been compared to France's Palace of Versailles.

"It was actually a combination of five garden residences of the Qing emperors," said Ying-chen Peng, a professor and Chinese art specialist at Washington D.C.'s American University, in a phone interview. "And in each garden residence, you have clusters of buildings and even artificial lakes, ponds and water systems. It really was a gem of Chinese architecture."

A temple in the ruins of the Old Summer Palace, pictured circa 1860. Credit: Hulton Archive/Getty Images

Although construction started during the reign of the Kangxi Emperor in the early 1700s, the complex underwent a major expansion under his grandson the Qianlong Emperor's rule. As well as increasing the complex in size, he also sought to diversify its architecture, which until then was typical of the country's north, according to Peng.

"He treated it as a miniature (version) of his empire. He made several trips to southern China ... and he was enchanted by its beauty," she said of the emperor's so-called "inspection tours," during which he would visit temples and mausoleums on official business as he consolidated power across the vast empire. "After he returned from these trips, he would order his architects to replicate famous scenes or sites that he had seen and appreciated."

Examples offered by Peng include Ruyuan (Garden of Ease), a replica of a garden in China's former capital, Nanjing, and Anlanyuan (or Tranquil Wave Garden), which was based on a garden of the same name in Haining, Zhejiang province.

More unusually for the time, Qianlong also commissioned Jesuit missionaries to design several European-style palaces and fountains. These structures represent what Peng called "hybrid" architecture, which saw Western stone facades built over traditional Chinese wooden frames. (Because stone has proven more durable than wood, the remains of these Italian baroque-style buildings are now among the most prominent of the Old Summer Palace's ruins, despite constituting a small minority of the original structures).

The ruins of a Western-style mansion pictured by German photographer Ernst Ohlmer in the 1870s, more than a decade after the European assault on the Old Summer Palace. Credit: Ernst Ohlmer

"Even though they were missionaries, they were actually sort of 'Renaissance men' by training -- musicians, painters or even engineers," Peng said. "So, for the court, they were not treated as missionaries, but as people who could realize the Emperor's fascination with exotic cultures."

The palace also served as a storage site for some of the nation's most treasured art and artifacts. When Anglo-French soldiers arrived on Elgin's orders to ransack it, they stole many of the items before burning the buildings to the ground. Perhaps most famous among the looted treasures were a dozen bronze animal heads, representing the 12 animals of the zodiac, which China has long sought to reclaim from overseas. (More than half have now made their way back to the country via auctions and donations, with their return often depicted in Chinese media as something of a national quest -- and even inspiring a 2012 Jackie Chan action movie on the subject. Five of the statues remain missing to this day.)

Meanwhile, the nearby Summer Palace (sometimes called the "new" Summer Palace, to avoid confusion) has benefited from multiple rebuilds since being ransacked. Nearly 30 years after the initial assault, Empress Dowager Cixi, then China's de facto supreme leader, ordered some of its damaged imperial structures to be rebuilt, and gave them the name Yiheyuan ("Garden of Good Health and Harmony").

The revamped complex and its lavish gardens survived further turmoil and were added to UNESCO's World Heritage List as a "masterpiece of Chinese garden landscape design" In 1998. The Old Summer Palace, however, was left to stagnate.

Restoration debate

By the early 20th century, the Old Summer Palace had become a repository for building materials. Nearby structures were often made from, or at least decorated with, debris taken from the ruins. During Mao's rule, which saw famines associated with the disastrous Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution campaigns, farmers encroached on the land in desperate attempts to grow more food. It later became known as a place where artists lived and worked in the 1980s and early 1990s -- or " squatted ," as the authorities saw it. They were eventually kicked out.

Since the start of China's reform era in the late 1970s, however, a number of grand plans have been floated to restore the Old Summer Palace. In 1984, a proposal to partially restore several pavilions emerged, and in the 1990s, there were also plans to use foreign investment to fund a miniature replica of the Old Summer Palace on the site, though neither scheme transpired. A restoration plan was finally approved in 2000, though archeological and environmental experts were "quick to denounce it," according to a 2006 editorial in the Australian National University's China Heritage Quarterly.

"The contretemps about whether the park be preserved as it was, partially restored, partially rebuilt or fully restored raged in the print media for some months, and every time a new incident involving the gardens occurs the familiar battle lines are redrawn and the debate unfolds anew," it read.

Visitors to the Old Summer Palace can still enjoy a boat trip on the complex's network of lakes and waterways. Credit: Adrian Bradshaw/EPA/Shutterstock

The latest reconstruction proposal was championed by Yan Jianguo, a Beijing-based lawyer and delegate in China's legislature, the National People's Congress (NPC). In May 2020, at the NPC's annual meeting, Yan argued that his vision for the project, which would include the extensive restoration of buildings and gardens, was essential for "educational and patriotic purposes."

China's leaders did not agree. And neither, perhaps, would the Chinese public. Although conducted around a decade ago, before the most recent rebuild proposal had emerged, an online poll by Sina news found that 77% of respondents opposed a rebuild, with many reportedly citing the potential cost of the project.

Having said that, price concerns have hardly been prohibitive when it comes to major heritage projects in China. For instance, since 2005, the central government has allocated 1.9 billion yuan ($294 million) to a long-term project to restore the Great Wall section by section. The entire ancient town of Dukezong in Shangri-la county, Yunnan province, was meanwhile rebuilt at a cost of 1.2 billion yuan ($186 million) after a 2014 fire, according to Chinese state media.

But the expense involved in rebuilding the entire Old Summer Palace could be uniquely astronomical. In 2008, a full-size replica of the complex -- essentially a large movie set with some surrounding landscaping -- was built at Hengdian World Studios in Zhejiang province at reported cost of 30 billion yuan ($4.6 billion) . And restoring the Beijing original would be "definitely more expensive than that," Peng speculated.

An aerial view of a replica Old Summer Palace built at Hengdian World Studios at a reported cost of 30 billion yuan ($4.6 billion). Credit: Jie Zhao/Corbis News/Getty Images

Looking to the future

For Peng, the debate is not merely about whether to restore the palace, but how it might be done. She welcomed the rejection of the most recent proposal on the grounds that too many questions remain unresolved.

"When we talk about reconstruction in architecture, it's actually a package. It is not only about the structures per se," she said.

"How do we deal with the interior?" she offered as an example. "Are we going to leave it empty, or are we going to try to replicate the interior design and furnish it with authentic items? If the project is to pursue that path, it would definitely be much more expensive and also controversial, because to what degree can we then call it an authentic construction?"

Other proposals have suggested simply building a museum to display and protect some of the treasures once housed at the palace. One structure on the site, the old Zhengjue Temple, was in fact recently rebuilt in order to exhibit one of the returned zodiac animal heads, while other government efforts have focused on landscaping and renovating the man-made lakes.

The Zhengjue Temple, one of the few parts of the Old Summer Palace to have undergone restoration. Credit: Li He/Xinhua/GettyImages

Writer and historian of the Qing dynasty Jeremiah Jenne, who has been based in Beijing since 2002 and regularly visits the Old Summer Palace with students, believes that a complete rebuild is not required. But, he said, the history of the ruins could nonetheless be better explained to visitors. There is no central plaque or memorial, he noted, suggesting this could be achieved using virtual reality technology, which many museums are now using worldwide.

"Ruins have power, allowing you to use your imagination, which can add poignancy to the visitor experience," he said.

Experts from Tsinghua University have gone some way toward recreating the Old Summer Palace in digital form. According to state media , researchers studied more than 10,000 historical files to make more than 4,000 design charts and 2,000 digital architecture models. Combined, they show at least 60% of the original structure.

Visitors walk among the ruins of the Old Summer Palace in 2008. Credit: Michael Reynolds/EPA/Shutterstock

This kind of digital reimagining may be as close as we can get to experiencing the original splendor of the imperial complex, given that the most recent proposal for the Old Summer Palace -- among the most extensive and ambitious plans to restore the ruins to date -- appears to be dead in the water, But it probably won't be long before another plan surfaces and reignites the debate of what to do with the site, and how to reinterpret China's "century of humiliation."

"I'm just glad that we have seen the dimension of the discussion grow more and more diverse," Peng said, "because in the '80s and '90 it was just seen (in terms of) the shame of China's past. Now, there's a new take that sees it as (part of) the glory of China in the 18th century ... so it will be interesting to observe how it will be discussed in the future, and how those discussions reflect the Chinese mentality."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Challenging binaries and stereotypes, "Swing" is a pop-up series that paints a nuanced portrait of America through photography of the day-to-day lives of overlooked people and communities.

As a child, while visiting family in Texas, photographer Kennedi Carter remembers Black cowboys riding their horses on the side of the highway. That image stayed with her over the years, as the North Carolina native began her career taking emotive photographs of Black life as well as striking editorial images. (Last December, Carter notably became the youngest photographer to shoot a British Vogue cover.)

She eventually returned to the powerful memory, starting an ongoing series, "Ridin' Sucka Free" about Black riders in American cities, such as Houston and Philadelphia.

Cowboy culture has long been associated with White men in rural America. In "Ridin' Sucka Free," Kennedi Carter takes portraits of Black men, women and children who ride and care for horses. Credit: Kennedi Carter

Over the past decade, images of Black equestrians have entered the popular imagination, as African American cowboy culture has been reassessed in art, film, fashion and music. Artists like Lil Nas X and Solange, for instance, have tapped the symbolism and style of the American West. In 2012, the Quentin Tarantino Western flick "Django Unchained" starred Jamie Foxx, in a genre typically associated with White leads. In 2017, an exhibition at the Studio Museum in Harlem titled "Black Cowboy" showed a rich visual history of the subject, featuring work by photographers Deana Lawson and Ron Tarver. And last year, multiple photographs of stoic Black cowboys and cowgirls on horseback during Black Lives Matter protests went viral.

"There's just something larger than life about riding horses," Carter said over video. "Literally, because they're taller than you; they're bigger than you. And I think it's so interesting, even thinking about how Black people weren't even allowed to ride around on horses for a period of time," she added, referring to slave-era state laws barring African Americans from raising or riding horses in the antebellum South. "There's just this freedom that I see whenever I see a horseman."

Horse riding is an "escape in terms of finding solace and happiness in (the) outdoors and through animals," said Carter. Credit: Kennedi Carter

"Ridin' Sucka Free" shows Black communities carrying on an equestrian tradition that has long been overshadowed in history and pop culture. Rodeos and ranching is almost exclusively associated with White men, evoking an idealized view of masculinity in rural America. Yet historians estimate that one in four cowboys were Black, and, according to the Texas State Historical Association, they took on a number of varying rider's roles, from horsebreakers to rodeo performers to federal peace officers. Carter's photographs don't play into the tired tropes of the American West, but show horseback riding as an act of care and leisure for men, women and children.

Visualizing solace and freedom

The series began on a trail ride in Houston, Texas, where Carter took portraits of men in tank tops, sneakers and gold chains with their horses, against the earthy tones of nature. The next location was Strawberry Mansion, a North Philadelphia neighborhood in Pennsylvania that has struggled with violent crime, but is home to the horsemanship nonprofit Fletcher Street Urban Riding Club.

Carter's series began on a trail ride in Houston, but with additional shoots in Philadelphia and New Orleans, she now has a larger vision of different communities around the US. Credit: Kennedi Carter

Carter described the riding club's block as a haven, a "no violence zone," she said. "People ride dirt bikes up and down the streets. And then kids will come play with the horses; they'll come after school, or if they're skipping school, they'll come there."

It was there that Carter herself learned how to ride. She got on horseback again in New Orleans, where she added black-and-white images of women and children to the series.

Each community has its traditions and reasons for why they ride. In Texas, Carter notes that it's tied to the state's history agriculture and farming; but in Philadelphia, she said, "they were riding for fun, and as a form of escape."

That difference resonated with her, and she wanted to capture that feeling of joy and freedom in an activity tied to agriculture, a practice that once had dark connotations for African Americans. "I feel like Black people especially try to distance themselves as far as possible from agriculture, and the outside. Sometimes I think it could be some type of post-racial trauma," she said. "But to see people still working outdoors, doing agricultural work, riding their horses -- it feels almost ancestral to me."

"There's just something larger than life about riding horses," said Carter. Credit: Kennedi Carter

As she widens the project -- she has her sights on the Compton Cowboys, as well as making images in the mountainous regions of the Pacific Northwest -- she hopes to carry on this sense of solace.

"Horse riding, since it's not a necessity, is often something they do just to feel good," she said of the people she's photographed. "Thinking about the optics of freedom is something that's really cool to me as well -- and I think Black horsemen or Black equestrians in general, are people (who) practice that constantly."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Scarlett Conlon, CNN

There are times in every successful designer's career when they find something they created at the center of a viral sensation. For Max Mara's creative director, Ian Griffiths, discovering that Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi had ignited a global frenzy by wearing his red "Fire Coat" for her infamous showdown with Donald Trump in 2018 was one of those moments. It was not, however, quite as he had imagined it.

"It was 7 in the evening and I got the phone call from our American communications office. I had just got home from work and was in the middle of getting changed with my trousers around my knees," laughed Griffiths on the phone from his office in Reggio Emilia, northern Italy. "They needed urgent confirmation the coat was ours, then more and more calls came in to give quotes. I spent the whole evening shuffling around my apartment with my trousers around my ankles because I didn't have time to take them off!

"That gives you an idea of how out of the blue it was."

The moment may have caught the down-to-earth Griffiths off guard, but Max Mara was hardly a leftfield choice for Pelosi, who had worn the same coat to President Obama's second inauguration in 2013. The Italian brand, which is famed for its camel coats and marks its 70th anniversary this year, has always been about "making real clothes for real women," said British-born Griffiths, who joined the label straight out of school in 1987 and has remained there ever since.

Nancy Pelosi wearing Max Mara. Credit: Marvin Joseph/The Washington Post/Getty Images

The designer recalled an early meeting with the brand's late founder, Achille Maramotti: "He told (me) his intention was always to dress the wife of the local doctor or lawyer; he wasn't at all interested in dressing princesses or countesses in Rome. He chose so wisely because over the last 70 years those women (have risen up) and Max Mara went with them. Now rather than the wife of the doctor, they are the doctor, if not the director of (an) entire healthcare trust. "

Britannic style with an Italian accent, Max Mara's AW21 collection is for the "self-made queens," writes the show notes. Credit: Max Mara

Griffiths can count Kamala Harris among the high-flying women who admire his creations. The US Vice President generated headlines for the brand last November when she was photographed wearing one of its grey military-inspired "Deborah" coats on the campaign trail in Philadelphia.

"She looked like a figure from the American War of Independence, with the flags in the background and raising her arm in the air ... it was such a powerful image," said Griffiths. With both Harris and Pelosi, he continued, "it appeared they were not simply wearing (the coats) as a utility, but in a way that really made a statement (and) as a vehicle to say something I absolutely agree with." It was, he admitted, incredibly rewarding.

Vice President Kamala Harris speaks during a drive-in get out to vote rally in Philadelphia, 2020. Credit: Michael Perez/AP

Celebrating a legacy

Griffiths is acknowledging the brand's landmark anniversary this year by paying tribute to strong, independent women like Harris and Pelosi. In keeping with Maramotti's original vision, he may not be concerned with royalty per se, but he is intent on making clothes to empower women to rule the world.

It seems only fitting that Griffiths is helping Max Mara mark its 70th birthday with a special anniversary collection . Unveiled digitally at Milan Fashion week Thursday, the Fall-Winter 2021 line is as empowering as one has come to expect from the Italian label.

"Celebrating this tremendous event, I was thinking about the Max Mara woman as a triumphant self-made queen in a moment of jubilation at her ascent," he enthused.

The digital presentation kicked off with behind-the-scenes images of a model being enrobed in a Max Mara coat before taking to the circular runway inside the Triennale di Milano. The imposing curved space, which reminded Griffiths of London's Regent Street, was decked out in flags featuring symbols from the brand's archive to give the flavor of a coronation or parade. Among the symbols was a retro exclamation point that the designer discovered on 1950s Max Mara advertising from the brand's archive.

The symbol "captures the entire spirit of the collection," he said. "How (else) do you describe the sense of exhilaration and epic adventure of this 70-year ascent?"

Since its beginnings in 1951, Max Mara was obsessed with a love of all things "authentically -- bordering on eccentrically -- British," Griffiths added. For this collection he looked to tractor-driving, helicopter-piloting, pioneering women by way of kilts ("traditional but also rooted in punk culture"); quilted coats made from pure camel hair; utilitarian jackets executed in sumptuous alpaca; organza shirts "which are dramatically jaunty"; and chunky socks and walking boots.

According to the show notes, the collection is an "urban country-mix" with cocooning aran knits and slouchy tartan skirts. Credit: Max Mara

It is a collection of "unconservative classics," he explained, which is also an apt description of the designer himself. Part free spirit, part quintessential gentleman, Griffiths is a former club kid turned creative commander of one of the world's oldest, most sophisticated luxury houses -- and he has a charming penchant for pocket squares. Given that he spent most of the UK's Covid-19 lockdown at his home in the Suffolk countryside, his collection's bucolic inspirations appear all the more personal.

"It's inevitable that a lot of my story goes into there," he said, pointing to the recent pictures on his Instagram account. "Those images of my experiences being in the countryside over the summer, having long walks with my dogs, the way I used to dress 30 years ago, punk culture, the idea of an independent rebellious spirit, refusing to accept convention -- they are all ideas that are central to my thinking. Primarily, (however), I channel it so that it appeals to the Max Mara woman, as it's all about her."

The new collection shown at Milan Fashion Week reimagines Max Mara's trademark camel coat. Credit: Max Mara

The pandemic's impact on Max Mara's customers was also an important consideration, Griffiths said.

"It's made me think very hard about who (she is) and appreciate even more greatly the struggles she has been through, which have been thrown into even sharper relief by what's happened over the last year," he said. "I want to show her emerging from this hardship triumphantly.

"It's our 70-year celebration but it's also a collection that's timed for a moment next winter, 2021, when all over the world, restrictions will start to be lifted and people can enjoy the world they live in and celebrate."

The upcoming collection is, he affirmed, a "double celebration, in a sense". In Griffiths' enthusiasm for design, sartorial expression and hope, Max Mara has much to celebrate, too.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

In many parts of the world, cleansing one's body has become an individual, daily ritual -- a quick, steamy shower in the morning or a longer bath to unwind at night. But historically, our bathing habits have been imbued with deeper meanings.

In Ancient Greece, bathhouses were a place for men to wash after sport or swap philosophical discussions (some even contained libraries), while in the Middle Ages, men and women in Europe gave up bathing altogether, for fear it would spread disease. Perfumes and cleansing ointments replaced steam and water, with elaborately adorned bottles and containers linking affluence to health. Fast-forward to the 1960s and '70s, where bathhouses in New York City became safe havens for gay men to relax, socialize and seek pleasure.

Rembrandt's intimate and sensual take on the Old Testament subject "Bathsheba at Her Bath," painted in 1654. Credit: Musée du Louvre

Through objects and artworks, the book "Body. Gaze. Power: A Cultural History of the Bath" charts the evolution of bathtubs and bathing accoutrements across cultures and eras, reflecting each period in their design and purpose.

"The bath can seem like a frivolous or amusing topic, but in fact it turns out to be a very particular place and time for socialization, where one exposes oneself -- we literally get naked -- where we interact with ourselves, our bodies and our intimacy, but, in the context of public baths, also with others," writes curator Camille Faucourt in the book. "This space-time has no equivalent in our daily social interactions."

A place for purity and gender roles

The phrase "cleanliness is next to godliness" originates from an 18th-century sermon, but the connection between good hygiene and religious purity is ancient.

In "Body. Gaze. Power," curator Florence Hudowicz refers to ancient Greek playwrights who implied a person's virtuosity or debauchery was based on the temperature of water they preferred to bathe in. In a Greek pottery work from around 425 BC, the god Eros flies above a female bather. She signals that washing oneself "was also practiced before marriage in order to purify the body of the bride and ensure her future fertility," write Hudowicz and Faucourt.

Though in Ancient Egypt, architectural remains show men and women may have bathed together, Ancient Greeks and Romans were separated by gender. Depictions of their routines in art show athletic, nude men scraping the dirt away after vigorous exercise. Women's routines were shown as more private -- sometimes clothed or nude, surrounding a cauldron of water.

A detail of a pottery work attributed to Athenian vase painter Onesimos circa 500 BC. It shows the routines of Ancient Greek athletes, who applied oils before training in the sun, followed by bathing and vigorous scraping with a strigil tool. Credit: bpk/RMN-Grand Palais/Hervé Lewandowski/Hatje Cantz

Ancient Greeks and Romans were fastidious about hygiene, but early Christians like Saint Augustine in the 4th century "were wary of 'ephemeral things,'" writes Faucourt, "one of which was most certainly the body." By the Middle Ages, the church was staunchly against the "loose morals" of bathhouses, which no longer kept men and women separate and often facilitated prostitution.

The plague that surged and waned across Europe beginning in the 14th century, eventually became the death knell of bathing for hundreds of years. In the 16th century, the belief took hold that steaming or submerging skin in water opened up pores to disease. Public steam baths closed and people took up waterless cleansing routines, applying ointments to the feet, hands, mouth and genitals. Smells were hidden with perfumes and elaborate bottles became status symbols for the wealthy.

"The delicate materials from which they were made and the exceptional quality of their ornamentation are indicative of the constant care devoted to maintaining one's appearance and bodily hygiene," writes Faucourt.

The wealthy commissioned artworks around bathing as well, tapping Rococo artists including Jean-Antoine Watteau and François Boucher to paint teasing nude female figures extensively washing themselves.

The Roman goddess Diana became a popular figure to paint in Rococo art because of myths that include her bathing rituals. Boucher painted "Diana Resting after her Bath" in 1742. Credit: Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons

By the 19th century bathing began returning to Europe and America, spurred on by new knowledge from microbiologists who identified germs and the hygienic benefits of soap, but it would take until the end of the century before anyone but the wealthy could afford entire rooms dedicated to the practice. It also took generations to shake the idea that submerging oneself in water could enable disease.

However, European attitudes toward bathing were far from universal. In the Middle East, Faucourt notes there have been fewer fluctuations in attitudes surrounding bathing. From the Ottoman Empire until today, the hammam -- the Turkish bath -- has remained popular, though its practical use has declined with the rise of home bathrooms.

A place for power and vulnerability

Bathhouses have long held political implications, too. In Ancient Rome, they were sprawling complexes for socializing, but also sites of expensive architectural splendor "(that) served to establish and affirm an emperor's power," writes curator Hendrik Bündge in "Body. Gaze. Power."

In a person's home, however, the bathtub is one of the most vulnerable places. "When you are naked, you are vulnerable; that's why the shower scene in Alfred Hitchcock's 'Psycho' is so shocking," writes Bündge.

"In the eyes of the revolutionaries, Marat immediately became a martyr of freedom after his assassination," writes Alain Chevalier in "Body. Gaze. Power." "Rather than hide the circumstances of his death, they chose to glorify them." Credit: bpk/RMN-Grand Palais/Franck Raux/Hatje Cantz

One of the most famous artworks from the French Revolution shows the aftermath of a scandalous political crime, set in the bathroom. In Jacques-Louis David's 1793 painting "The Death of Marat," French revolutionary and journalist Jean-Paul Marat lies murdered in his tub, his hand still holding an inked quill, the bathwater filled with his blood. His assassin, the royalist aristocrat Marie-Anne Charlotte Corday, intended to murder him publicly but instead came into his home and stabbed him while he washed. David, who shared a friendship and political ideologies with Marat, painted the scene just four months later, martyrizing his subject.

A century and a half later, during World War II, photojournalists Lee Miller and David E. Scherman recognized the bathtub as a site where power could be subverted and monopolized through photography. On April 30, 1945, the day Munich was liberated from Nazi rule, Miller and Scherman entered Hitler's empty apartment and photographed Miller in his bathtub. In one photo, she sits, nude and defiant, gazing past the camera, with a framed photo of Hitler propped on the ledge behind her. Her boots, muddied with the dirt of the newly freed Dachau concentration camp, have tracked all over his bath mat. (The Nazi leader, hiding out in his Berlin bunker, would kill himself that day.)

"The images' message is clear: the relations of power had changed," writes curatorial assistant Carolin Potthast in the book. "The US-Americans had advanced into the enemy's most intimate sphere. They had seized it occupying it with their bodies. Here, the bathtub becomes a stage for a shift in political power."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Challenging binaries and stereotypes, "Swing" is a pop-up series that paints a nuanced portrait of America through photography of the day-to-day lives of overlooked people and communities.

In the coal-mining towns of southeastern Ohio, nestled in the Appalachian mountains, photographer Rich-Joseph Facun has worked on a visual study of a region that has been stereotyped for decades. Appalachia has often been viewed one-dimensionally, saddled in associations related to poverty and opioid use, and deemed "Trump Country" during the 2016 election.

Yet Facun's series on the "Little Cities of Black Diamonds," named for their once-booming coal industry, shows a more nuanced and alluring take on rural Ohio, which became his home. The forthcoming book, "Black Diamonds," was successfully funded on Kickstarter and will be published in spring 2021 by Fall Line Press.

"Black Diamonds" is an alluring portrait of an Appalachian town. Credit: Rich-Joseph Facun

Facun is a photographer of indigenous Mexican and Filipino descent who grew up in Mississippi and Virginia and put down roots in Ohio after taking a job at Ohio University, where he studied visual communication. During his time there as a student, he lived in a "bubble," he explained over video.

"I really didn't have ... any knowledge of what rural Appalachia was like," he said. "You can drive maybe five or 10 minutes in any direction and be in the country. But I wasn't even aware of that. It wasn't even on my radar."

When Facun moved to "Trump Country" during a period of political divide, he wanted to better understand his community and neighbors. Credit: Rich-Joseph Facun

He returned to the area 15 years later with his wife and children to homestead in the country. They settled in during the 2016 election season, and as then-candidate Donald Trump's rhetoric against Mexico became more inflammatory, Facun began to grow increasingly uneasy as a person of color in a nearly all-White area. He realized he didn't know his community; it was an unfamiliar feeling given his previous stints working for local newspapers

Despite crossing over many state borders up and down the eastern half of the United States, the popular narrative about Appalachia is that of a deep-red, insular region. Facun was concerned about the sense of growing hostility and polarization in the country and worried it was happening in his own backyard.

"People were pointing the finger at Appalachia saying, 'They're all voting for Trump and it's their fault. It's middle America's fault,' " he said. "I still had not met my neighbors, or any of the surrounding communities. I was just uncertain. Am I safe? Or am I living in this little bubble in the country?"

Encounters with strangers

Facun's resulting survey of Appalachia doesn't reduce the region to its politics, but instead is an exercise in making connections and understanding his home.

His is a portrait of "community and cultural identity in a polarized political climate," as Facun noted on the book's Kickstarter page. Lush and quiet, "Black Diamonds" shows the beauty of Ohio's foggy, wooded landscapes and a deep sense of intimacy with its residents, despite the fact that they are brief encounters.

Facun's series is a perspective rarely seen in the photo world -- a visual exploration of a mostly White community by a photographer of color. Credit: Rich-Joseph Facun

In each portrait, a stranger becomes familiar. There's Erik, heavily tattooed and pierced, who Facun passed by on a brisk winter day while leaving his doctor's office. Then there's Kaylee, who had been crowned at the Miss Moonshine pageant during the long-running New Straitsville Moonshine Festival in Perry County.

Many of the images were made on meandering drives, and though not every interaction was positive, Facun overwhelmingly felt a sense of hospitality and warmth.

"I really found a great admiration for the people who are born and bred Appalachian," said Facun. "They have this really amazing resourcefulness about them. And I think that's a very admirable trait."

Facun's images are a study of place, atmosphere and cultural identity. Credit: Rich-Joseph Facun

"Black Diamonds" is also a unique series in the photo world. Countless White photographers have documented communities of color for major publications, photo books, photo awards and personal projects, but a BIPOC (Black, indigenous and people of color) photographer setting out with his camera to explore a predominantly White area is much rarer.

"It's a problem on many levels when history is being documented predominantly by white males," Facun said. "It's a problem (that) our visual history is not being shown through the eyes of a diverse community."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Megan C. Hills, CNN Contributors Oscar Holland, CNN

The emancipation of slaves is central to the story of the American Civil War. But as curator and photographic historian Deborah Willis discovered growing up in the 1950s and '60s, the Black people who served in the conflict are often ignored by the history books.

As she would later learn, almost 180,000 Black soldiers fought for the North in the name of ending slavery. By the end of the war, a tenth of the Union Army was made up of free African American men.

"When Black soldiers were fighting for their emancipation, they were fighting for not only their own (freedom), but that of their families and other Black people," Willis said in a video interview. "They felt the cause was necessary to fight."

By the end of the war in 1865, 40,000 Black Union soldiers had been killed, of whom three-quarters had died from infection or disease. Many of their individual stories have been lost, but Willis' research uncovered moving tales of Black love, patriotism and bravery. Her recently published book , "The Black Civil War Soldier: A Visual History of Conflict and Citizenship," shines a light on these forgotten soldiers and their families through a rich archive of rarely-seen photographs.

A carte de visite of Lieutenant Peter Vogelsang, who served with the 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment. Credit: Collection of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture

"Erasure appears in many ways," said Willis, who is a professor and department chair at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts.

In the case of thousands of African American Civil War soldiers, she explained, their narratives weren't "hidden" -- they were shared in diaries and letters. Many Black soldiers also paid to have photographic portraits taken that depicted them as patriotic free men. They can be seen dressed in military regalia, posing proudly with the American flag or holding the weapons they fought with.

In her book, Willis presents almost 100 of the images, which date from the 1840s to 1860s, alongside family correspondence and news articles, offering an intimate account of the conflict. She also included the stories of Black medical workers, servants and cooks -- including those in the South, where thousands of enslaved African Americans were taken to war as laborers or forced to serve White soldiers.

Willis' book challenges readers to bear witness to their varied experiences.

"I wanted this book to be kind of a memory album of sorts -- the memory of the individuals who wrote articles in the newspapers or who wrote diaries and diary entries, but also (those) who shared the visual experience of photography," she said.

African American hospital workers, including nurses, at a hospital in Nashville, Tennessee, July 1863. Credit: National Archives

A new medium

Early cameras first arrived in the United States in 1839, and by the time the Civil War began in 1861, commercial photography was taking off.

Before leaving for war, some soldiers took portraits with loved ones as mementos in the event they didn't return. One picture in Willis' book, set in a romantic brass frame, shows a husband and wife sitting beside each other. Another shows a saber-wielding soldier sitting beside his wife, who is dressed in a voluminous gown.

Commercial photographers also set up temporary studios in tents near the army camps, creating what Willis called "spaces for people to reimagine themselves." Soldiers would sometimes get photos taken to send home to their families, folding them up with love letters or notes sent home from the front lines.

"We don't talk about Black love in the 19th century," Willis said. "We talk about survival which is, yes, a part of it. But having an opportunity to see a love story that's a mother and son, or a patriotic story of a man who's interested in his citizenship and freedom -- that kind of love is something I wanted to explore in this book."

Portrait of an unidentified African American soldier in uniform, c. 1860s. Credit: Library of Congress

While the Union's Black soldiers were fighting for the same cause as their White counterparts, their platoons remained segregated. So, too, were the war's makeshift photography studios. "There were certain days that Black people could go into studios, and on Thursdays and Saturdays at midday, (they) would say, 'coloreds only,'" Willis said. "And then other days were open to Whites."

In the South, meanwhile, African Americans had hardly any opportunity to be photographed -- and not only because of their status in the Confederacy. Early camera equipment was not readily available in Southern states, Willis writes in her book, and the few photographers there raised their fees "to compensate for the high prices of photographic materials and the inflated Confederate dollar."

'Significance of the moment'

The uncovered photographs include ambrotypes, images made on chemically treated glass plates, and tintypes, a much faster innovation that imprinted pictures onto thin metal sheets dipped in a silver nitrate solution. Some of these photographs appear in elaborate protective cases lined with red velvet or brass frames engraved with American flags, eagles and stars.

An early form of paper photograph known as a "carte de visite," which was often used as a formal calling card, was also increasingly popular in the Civil War era. Examples in Willis' book include portraits of famed abolitionist Harriet Tubman, who served in the Union Army and rescued enslaved people through a secretive network called the Underground Railroad; Nicholas Biddle, a Black man believed to be the first person wounded in the conflict after a racist mob hurled a brick at him; and Thomas Morris Chester, the first African American war correspondent for a major daily newspaper.

A portrait of Harriet Tubman, who rescued enslaved people during the American Civil War. Credit: Collection of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture

Photographers typically charged between 25 cents and $2.50 ($6 to $60 in today's money), depending on the size of the image, according to Willis' research. There were additional fees for hand-painted details, such as an American flag.

Given that Black Northern soldiers were paid less than their White counterparts -- just $10 per month, with a further $3 deducted for uniforms, compared to the $13 and free clothing enjoyed by White soldiers -- having a photograph taken was relatively expensive. It was thus a "self-conscious act," Willis wrote, adding that it "shows the subjects were aware of the significance of the moment and sought to preserve it."

For Willis, however, the pictures and stories are as much to do with the present as the past. The historian hopes to help younger generations visualize "a broader story" about Black people's role in the Civil War, sharing experiences of Black American history that go beyond the narratives of slavery.

"The absence of those stories dehumanizes young people," she said, adding: "How can they reflect on the past without creating a future for themselves if it's only about a struggle?"
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Oscar Holland, CNN

Thousands of historical images from across Ireland are being brought to life in color for the first time, thanks to a new AI-led photo project.

Combining digital technology with painstaking historical research, professors John Breslin and Sarah-Anne Buckley at the National University of Ireland, Galway, have been able to turn photos, originally shot in black in white, into rich color images.

The collection spans centuries and regions of Ireland, as well as the country's diaspora. It includes portraits of key figures like Oscar Wilde and poet W.B. Yeats, as well as defining moments in history, like the Titanic setting sail from the Belfast shipyard where it was constructed.

A town fair in Ballybricken, County Waterford, in 1910. Credit: Courtesy of Merrion Press

Yet, some of the most compelling photos depict everyday scenes -- people herding pigs, spinning wool or packed onto the back of horse-drawn carts. And while poverty is evident in pictures of barefoot villagers crowding around for a photo, or of Dublin's working-class tenement buildings, there are also well-to-do family shots and depictions of upper-class pastimes like fox hunting.

"There were many different social classes in Ireland, as in many countries, so I think it's important to show the full range," said Breslin in a phone interview from Galway, on the west coast of Ireland. "We have a mixture of the wealthier classes and the gentry, and then you've got people who are just trying to survive and gather water and turf (peat) to burn on their fires."

The project, "Old Ireland in Colour," now has dedicated social media accounts with tens of thousands of followers. A new book of the same title is also bringing together more than 170 of the images, painting a compelling picture of life on the island from the 1840s through to the 1960s.

An entire section of the book is dedicated to the Irish revolutionary period, which spans from the early 1910s to 1923. This image shows Dublin's city center in ruins following the Easter Rising of 1916. Credit: Courtesy of Merrion Press

Deep learning

The project began when Breslin started experimenting with old photographs of his grandparents for a personal genealogy project. After discovering an AI-powered colorization tool, DeOldify, he started applying the technique to photos from archives and libraries across Ireland.

Using a process known as deep learning, AI software can be taught how to colorize. The "training" involves analyzing thousands of normal color photos, as well as black and white versions of the same images, to help it understand which colors correlate to different shapes and textures, explained Breslin, who specializes in engineering and computer science.

Then, when the software encounters an image that only exists in black and white, it knows "what the colors should probably be," he said. "So, for example, the grass or trees or the sea -- it knows from those textures and shapes that they should be green or blue."

Revolutionary statesman Éamon de Valera addresses a crowd in 1917. Credit: Courtesy of Merrion Press

AI has its limitations, however. There were certain idiosyncrasies to life in Ireland that the US-developed software was not trained to recognize.

"An average kind of color (of a roof), around the world, might be a terracotta, an orange or a kind of a brownish-type tile," Breslin said. "Whereas in Ireland, the roofs were typically slate, which is gray or black."

This is where his collaborator, Buckley, who specializes in Irish social history, came in. The pair researched everything from clothing and pigments available in Ireland at the time, to the uniforms worn by various military units, before manually changing colors and shades based on what they found.

The project also features photos of Irish people overseas, such as this 1911 image from an expedition to Antarctica. Credit: Courtesy of Merrion Press

For a photo of revolutionary politician Constance Markievicz, they even consulted passenger records from New York's Ellis Island -- where she was processed among the millions of Irish immigrants arriving in America between the 1890s and 1950s -- to determine that her true eye color was blue.

Colorization debate

Despite the painstaking approach taken by the two researchers, photo colorization remains controversial among academics. Some historians believe software like DeOldify can produce misleading results that obfuscate, rather than enhance, the content of old photographs.

But the practice is "nothing new," Breslin said, adding that people have been colorizing photos "since the advent of photography," albeit without the help of AI or other software like Photoshop. He also argued that his images exist in addition to, not instead of, the originals.

The eviction of farmers by their landlords -- as depicted in this scene, from the village of Woodford -- was the source of huge controversy in 1880s Ireland. Credit: Courtesy of Merrion Press

"We're not vandalizing the negatives," he said. "You can always go back and find the original photograph, and throughout the book we provide pointers to the original collection."

In making old images more accessible, Breslin hopes his and Buckley's project can help engage people who may not otherwise be interested in history. If the success of their book so far is anything to go by (though not released in North America until next month, it was among Ireland's best-selling titles in 2020), he may well be right.

"We're being bombarded with so much information, knowledge, bite-sized media and content, so, for the younger generation particularly, it can be hard for history to compete," Breslin said. "It's important to be able to relate more to our history, and colorization definitely makes things more relatable."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN Contributors Video: Ed Scott-Clarke, Tem Doran, Alex Sears, Angelica Pursley, CNN

When visitors walk into the Pantheon in Rome and encounter its colossal dome, they may experience the same theatricality as its guests nearly 2,000 years ago.

"Anyone who steps inside the Pantheon immediately feels the crushing weight of human history, but also the incredible lightness of human creativity," said John Ochsendorf, professor of architecture at MIT and former director of the American Academy in Rome.

Ancient Roman architects designed a portico for the Pantheon that referenced Greek architecture. But the building's interior is nothing the Greeks could have imagined. Credit: Marilla Sicilia/Mondadori Portfolio/Getty Images

"You come into this grand space and you look up and you see the sky or a passing cloud. And you think: 'How could they have done this nearly two millennia ago?'"

The Pantheon is the oldest building in the world that's still in use today. Since the 7th century, it has been a Roman Catholic church.















1 / 8 Moscow, Russia -- St Basil's Cathedral was built during the 16th century by Ivan IV or, as he was nicknamed, Ivan the Terrible. The structure's design and color was modified throughout its history. Credit: Julian Finney/Getty Images

Built around 125 A.D. by the Roman emperor Publius Aelius Hadrianus, it was actually the third iteration of the structure. The first Pantheon caught fire around 80 A.D. and was rebuilt shortly after, but it was struck by lightning and burned down again around 110 A.D. The buildings' ill fate led to rumors that the Pantheon was cursed.

The facade of the completed structure riffed on ancient Greek motifs, with a portico entrance featuring a pediment -- a triangular top -- and two rows of Corinthian columns. The interior was sweeping and airy, capped by a dome that to this day -- is still the largest unsupported concrete dome in the world.

What was it used for?

Pantheon means "all gods," and though it's commonly thought the structure was a site of worship dedicated to Roman deities, its original purpose is actually unknown.

With scant mentions of it in Ancient texts, historians have been left somewhat in the dark. Though it could be a temple, Roman buildings were typically multi-purpose structures, said Lynne Lancaster, an architectural historian and humanities educator. "And so what actually went on in the Pantheon is hard to say."

The Pantheon may have been used for a variety of purposes, but historians aren't quite sure what took place inside. Credit: Pino Pacifico/REDA&CO/Universal Images Group/Getty Images

Legends say it's the very site where Rome's founder, Romulus, ascended to heaven. Others believe the Pantheon was where the Roman emperor could communicate with the gods. Whatever the case, like many Roman architectural feats, the imposing structure was a show of might, an "important symbol of imperial power," said Luca Mercuri, the Pantheon's current director.

Indeed, Roman architecture of the time embodied wealth, strength and dignity. Centuries later, Neoclassical architects would reference the Pantheon's portico and dome combination to imbue their buildings with those same values, from the US Capitol in Washington, DC., to the Somerset House in London.

How was it built?

The Pantheon was an architectural marvel of the Roman Empire.

The oculus -- Latin for "eye" -- stretches 30 feet across, opening the structure to the heavens. The sun beams through the oculus, and when it storms, the rain comes down like a waterfall into the interior.

The Pantheon's dome and oculus were a feat of engineering -- Medieval religious leaders believed the architectural achievement was evil. Credit: Andreas Solaro/AFP/Getty Images

"The oculus at the center seemed to tempt fate and leave (the Pantheon) open to the sky," said Ochsendorf. "But it also showed a mastery of geometry and construction -- that they could build domes on that scale and leave an oculus open at the center, in a way (that was) almost showing off."

During the Middle Ages, religious leaders, who were incredulous of the feat, cast doubt on the holiness of the Pantheon, believing it to be the work of the devil.

But it wasn't Satan; it was engineering.

Though white, yellow, purple and black marble was imported from around the Mediterranean, it was concrete -- a Roman invention -- that allowed architects to do away with load-bearing columns and introduce spacious domes.

Along with the entry door, the oculus is the only natural source of light in the building. Credit: Alessandra Tarantino/AP

One trick to make a large dome stable was to use progressively lighter stone in the concrete mix as it reached the top. Heavy brick could be used at the base, with spongy, light volcanic rock around the oculus.

Though the Pantheon has revealed some of its design secrets, Lancaster said she still finds magic in the details. As the day progresses, the sun flickers around the dome's interior, casting light over its sunken grid like a giant sundial.

"It's one of the few places in the world (where) you can actually watch the Earth turn."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Megan C. Hills, CNN

This article was updated with the final sale price and other details following the auction's conclusion.

A series of love letters, handwritten by President John F. Kennedy to his Swedish mistress , sold at a Boston auction house Wednesday, fetching over $88,000.

The intimate letters -- addressed to Gunilla von Post, an aristocrat he met weeks prior to his 1953 marriage to Jacqueline Bouvier -- reveal Kennedy describing their time together as a "bright memory of my life."

The eight-page collection , which included one full letter and two partial messages, came from Von Post's personal collection and was initially expected to fetch over $30,000. Von Post passed away in 2011 and, prior to her death, penned a 1997 memoir about her relationship with the former president titled "Love, Jack."

Written between 1955 and 1956, the love letters predate Kennedy's presidency. He was serving as a senator in Massachusetts at the time, and the notes were written on United States Senate letterhead.

This photo shows a love letter that John F. Kennedy wrote to a Swedish paramour a few years after he married Jacqueline Bouvier. Credit: Nikki Brickett/AP

In them, Kennedy reflected on the pair's romantic trip to Sweden and responded to news that Von Post was set to wed. The future president told Von Post he was "anxious" to see her, calling her "wonderful" in one letter. In another, he signed off simply as "Jack."

Von Post and Kennedy first met in the summer of 1953 in Cannes, just weeks before Kennedy and Bouvier's September 12 wedding. According to RR Auction's lot listing, they later "spent a very blissful and intimate week consummating the relationship" in Sweden in August 1955 -- almost two years into his marriage.

The auction house said that "efforts on Kennedy's behalf to end his marriage and to bring her to the United States" were "thwarted by his father, his political ambitions, and Kennedy's and von Post's mutual sensitivity to the miscarriage suffered by Jacqueline in 1955."

Another example of the letters up for auction is pictured here. Credit: Nikki Brickett/AP

In a letter dated February 1956, Kennedy appeared to respond to news of Von Post's own marriage to landowner Anders Ekman. He wrote, "I must say I was sad to learn that, after all, you are not coming to the U.S. and you are marrying a farmer."

Referring to the pair's trip to Sweden, he continued, "I was planning to come back again next summer to see you...& now what will happen. In any case let me know what you are going to do."

"If you don't marry come over (to America) as I should like to see you. I had a wonderful time last summer with you. It is a bright memory of my life -- you are wonderful and I miss you," he concluded.

This photo shows an envelope that John F. Kennedy addressed to his Swedish paramour. Credit: Nikki Brickett/AP

The pair would only see each other one more time, in 1958 at a Waldorf Astoria gala, the auction house said. Both attended with their partners and Von Post was pregnant at the time.

The letters were part of a larger sale of presidential memorabilia, which also includes autographed photos and personal letters written by Abraham Lincoln. Another significant piece of Kennedy history also featured: a draft of the speech he wrote to announce his presidential candidacy in 1960. The three-page manuscript sold for over $276,000.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jacopo Prisco , CNN Written by

Read more unknown and curious design origin stories here

Like many of history's greatest ideas, Tetris came about quite unintentionally.

Alexey Pajitnov was a software engineer at the Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow, tasked with testing a new type of computer, the Electronika 60. To do so, he wrote a simple game based on a puzzle from his childhood. It would help assess how powerful the computer was -- and provide a bit of fun.

Little did he know that the resulting game would go on to become one of the greatest, most addictive and most successful of all time.

It was June 6, 1984, and Tetris had just started its journey from behind the Iron Curtain.

The original version of Tetris.

Tetris is a puzzle game in which geometric shapes called "tetrominoes" fall down onto a playing field, and the player has to arrange them to form gapless lines. Pajitnov took inspiration from pentomino, a classic puzzle game consisting of all the different shapes that can be made by combining five squares -- 12 in total -- with the goal of arranging them in a wooden box like a jigsaw puzzle.

To simplify things, he knocked that down to four squares, thus reducing the number of shapes from 12 to seven. He called the game Tetris, combining the Greek numeral "tetra" (meaning four) and tennis, his favorite sport.

Pajitnov himself was immediately hooked. "I couldn't stop myself from playing this prototype version, because it was very addictive to put the shapes together," he said on the phone from Seattle, where he now lives.

Tetris was inspired by pentomino, a classic board game. Credit: Shutterstock

But creating a video game in Soviet Russia at the height of the Cold War was far from easy. It was only through the sheer brilliance of its design that Tetris was transformed from a quirky test program into a worldwide phenomenon.

Word of mouth

Although Tetris became immediately popular among programmers with access to an Electronika 60, the machine had no graphical capabilities -- and less memory than today's calculators. Pressed with requests to create a version of the game for the IBM PC, a more widespread computer with better graphics, Pajitnov assigned the job to Vadim Gerasimov, a 16-year-old student on a summer job at his office (today an engineer at Google). The game spread quickly. "It was like a wood fire. Everyone in the Soviet Union who had a PC had Tetris on it," said Pajitnov.

Pajitnov wasn't making any money off the game, nor did he intend to. Ideas were owned by the state and the very concept of selling software as a product was unfamiliar to him. People were just sharing Tetris through word of mouth and by copying it onto floppy disks.

Then, Pajitnov heard rumors that the game might have crossed borders and was being played in other Eastern bloc countries. In 1986, he got a message via telex -- a forerunner of the fax machine -- from Robert Stein, a salesman for a Hungary-based software company called Andromeda. Stein, who had seen Tetris in Hungary, wanted to secure the rights to sell it as a computer game in the West. He offered significant money in advance.

"My English was really bad at that time, so I put together some kind of positive answer, saying we were very glad to receive the proposal and that some agreement could be made," said Pajitnov. He knew that doing business directly with a Western firm could have landed him in jail, even before making any money, so he started investigating how he could sell the rights to Tetris through the state.

Stein, however, interpreted his response as a green light and immediately started producing the game. But as he was preparing to launch, he received another telex from Elorg -- short for Electronorgtechnica, the Soviet organization that oversaw software and hardware exports. It said that the rights had not been officially granted and that his launch was illegal.

Eventually, Stein cleared the rights, and Tetris was released as a commercial PC title in the UK and the US in 1988. The game played up its Soviet origins through Kremlin-themed illustrations and Cyrillic characters. But the misunderstanding between Pajitnov and Stein showed how tricky it would be to export a video game from Soviet Russia to the West for the first time -- an issue that led to years of confusion and legal battles, and is even rumored to have landed on the desk of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.

Pajitnov and his son with the UK and US PC versions of Tetris in 1989. Credit: Wojtek Laski/Hulton Archive/Getty Images

The Game Boy

Tetris was selling well on computers, but the big money in the games sector was being made elsewhere: consoles. Henk Rogers, a Dutch video game developer and businessman living in Japan, was the first to realize that Tetris was a perfect match for the Game Boy, a new handheld system released by Nintendo in Japan in early 1989. The console was about to launch in North America and Europe too, and Rogers set out to convince the company to bundle a copy of the game in the box, a common practice outside of Japan.

"I made a handshake deal with Minoru Arakawa, the founder of Nintendo of America, to have Nintendo include Tetris in every Game Boy," said Rogers in a phone interview. "He said, 'Why should I include Tetris? I have Mario.' And I said, 'If you want little boys to buy your Game Boy, then include Mario. But if you want everyone to buy your Game Boy, then you should include Tetris.'"

Rogers set out to obtain the necessary permissions, and soon realized what a challenge that would be. He had already published a version of Tetris in Japan, for the popular Nintendo Famicom home system, only to discover that there were half a dozen companies all claiming to own the rights to the game. "So I got on a plane and went to Moscow on a tourist visa to track down the source of the rights, Elorg -- and talk my way into it," he said.

Once in Moscow, Rogers made little progress until he hired an interpreter, who swiftly took him to Elorg.

"She knew immediately where everything was, so that was fishy. They're not supposed to talk to foreigners, and I wasn't supposed to talk to the Russians, let alone people inside the government. So I broke all kinds of rules by being there. They interrogated me for two hours. I thought they were trying to figure out whether they were gonna send me to Siberia or not," he said.

But among the officials in the room was Alexey Pajitnov, who immediately took a liking to Rogers. "Alexey was the only guy in the room who actually knew anything about games," Rogers recalled. "I explained how business worked, and we became friends. A week later, I left Moscow with a signed agreement for Tetris on the Game Boy."

Henk Rogers and Alexey Pajitnov in Moscow's Red Square.

The Game Boy version of Tetris sold 35 million units and helped the console become one of the most successful of all time. It is still considered by many -- Pajitnov included -- to be the best version of Tetris, and it created an unprecedented synergy between hardware and software, epitomizing the gaming mantra "easy to learn, hard to master."

Delayed royalties

Despite the game's success, Pajitnov was still not making any money from it. "There was a lot of legal trouble, and when the question of ownership and the original source of the game came up, I decided that I wanted everything to go smoothly and I granted the rights to the Computer Center of the Soviet Academy of Sciences for 10 years," he said.

The legal trouble culminated in a skirmish between Nintendo and Atari over the home console rights for Tetris. A judge ruled in Nintendo's favor in late 1989, dealing a lethal blow to Atari, which had already produced hundreds of thousands of now useless copies of its version of the game, under the tagline "Tetris: The Soviet Mind Game." Nintendo took a different approach, opting for the slogan "From Russia with fun."

Pajitnov left Moscow for Seattle in 1991, with the help of his friend Henk Rogers. And when his deal over the rights expired in 1995, he finally started receiving royalties for the game. "And they've been fine so far," he said.

Pajitnov and Rogers in 2018.

In 1996, Pajitnov and Rogers founded the Tetris Company, to handle licensing for Tetris and its spinoffs. In 2005, the Tetris Company bought Elorg -- which after the fall of the Soviet Union had transformed from a state-owned company into a private one -- gaining total control of all Tetris rights worldwide. The company has even standardized and trademarked the names and colors of every Tetris piece -- officially called Tetriminos , rather than the generic tetrominoes, although they have many unofficial nicknames

Tetris has been the subject of several scientific studies. One found that playing the game can be effective in fighting off cravings for food and even drugs, while another noted an increase in the thickness of some parts of the brain in people who had played regularly. Playing Tetris for prolonged periods of time can lead to players dreaming to about the falling pieces or interpreting real-world objects as tetrominoes and mentally re-arranging them -- a phenomenon known as "the Tetris Effect."

To date, Tetris has been released on over 65 platforms, a world record , with more than half a billion downloads on mobile devices, according to the Tetris Company. Pajitnov has personally worked on over 100 variants of the game.

The latest, released in early 2019 to coincide with the game's 35th anniversary, is an online multiplayer version called "Tetris 99," which can be played by up to 99 players simultaneously. Since 2010, an eSports tournament based on the 1989 Nintendo Entertainment System version of Tetris has seen the world's best players gather in Portland, Oregon. Some of the matches, which can surpass 30 minutes in length, have garnered over 10 million views on YouTube.

"It hasn't lost any of its play value and nothing has come to replace Tetris," said Henk Rogers, explaining the game's enduring popularity.

"It's like 'Happy Birthday.' There have been lots of songs that come and go, but 'Happy Birthday' is it still always sung in the same way. Tetris has become the 'Happy Birthday' of computer games."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Oscar Holland, CNN

When Hugh Nini and Neal Treadwell came across an old photograph at an antique store in Dallas, Texas, they saw something of themselves reflected in the image.

Taken around 1920, it showed two men in front of a house, posing in a loving embrace at a time when being gay was not only frowned upon but effectively illegal.

"It represented us, so we bought the photo, took it home and had it on our desks for six or nine months," Treadwell recalled in a phone interview from the couple's home in New York City. "It was a random find, and we never thought we'd find another one."

Yet, in the two decades since, the pair discovered far more -- in fact, by scouring auctions, junk stores and flea markets, they've amassed an archive of almost 3,000 images of men in love.



















1 / 10 A thin paper photograph, known as a cabinet card, dating back to around 1880. Scroll through to see more images from "Loving: A Photographic History of Men in Love, 1850s-1950s." Credit: Courtesy Nini-Treadwell Collection/5 Continents Editions

Captured between the mid-19th century and just after World War II, and taken across five continents, the collection comprises portraits and candid shots of couples lying in bed, picnicking on grass and posing beside their cars. Nini and Treadwell may not know the circumstances in which the pictures were taken, but they believe the subjects' body language and mutual gazes are, unmistakably, those of romantic lovers.

Now, they have published more than 300 of the pictures in the book "Loving: A Photographic History of Men in Love, 1850s-1950s." Together, they offer intimate glimpses into romantic lives that would likely have remained hidden.

"This book means, for the first time, that these people, these couples, get to speak for themselves," Nini said. "They couldn't do it when they were alive, but they can do it now, and I think that's really powerful."

An image believed to be from the turn of the 20th century. Same-sex marriage was legalized in the United States more than 100 years later. Credit: Courtesy Nini-Treadwell Collection/5 Continents Editions

Given that many of the images come from a time when taking, developing or keeping such photos could pose a significant risk to one's personal safety -- or even freedom -- the pictures also represent individual acts of bravery, he added.

"These couples did something very risky because they really cared about each other. They memorialized their feelings with these photographs, and then had to hide them forever," he said.

Forbidden love

The photos show young couples that could have only dreamed of the freedoms afforded to Nini and Treadwell, who wed unofficially in 1992 (and then legally 14 years later, after Massachusetts became the first US state to permit same-sex marriage).

Nonetheless, their collection shows historical examples of men exchanging rings and partaking in informal wedding ceremonies. In one image, believed to be from the turn of the 20th century, a young pair are seen holding a sign reading, "Not married but willing to be."

As well as showing the evolution of attitudes, hairstyles and fashion through the decades, the images also chart the development of photography as a medium. The collection's oldest pictures were made using early forms of camera, and include ambrotypes, which were produced on glass, and daguerreotypes, which appeared on metal plates.

As well as posed portraits, the collection contains pictures of couples lying in bed and having picnics. Credit: Courtesy Nini-Treadwell Collection/5 Continents Editions

The archive travels through to the emergence of paper photography and then photo booths, which, like the various shots taken in the reflections of mirrors, eliminated the need to confide in a photographer.

And while Nini and Treadwell know next to nothing about their subjects, they know even less about where the physical photos have been in the decades since.

"Some of the pictures have creases in them, so perhaps they were folded and put in a wallet, while some are pristine, where they had been tucked in a book or hidden away in a drawer," Treadwell said.

"It's astonishing to us to wonder what that journey was -- not only for the couple but for the photograph being passed along. Was it shared by friends? Was it celebrated by a family? How did it make its way into our hands?"

An undated image believed to have been taken in the US. Credit: Courtesy Nini-Treadwell Collection/5 Continents Editions

It is, therefore, left to the viewer to imagine the stories behind each photo. And the breadth of positive responses to the collection is testament to the universality of love, the pair said.

"It's very heart-warming and gratifying to know that it's meaningful, and that this spans from someone who's 18 or 20 right up to grandparents who are looking at (the pictures) because their grandchildren are gay. Or it's an elderly gay person, or straight people -- the whole gamut," Treadwell said.

"The message of our book is not about sexuality at all," Nini added. "Our position is that love doesn't have a sexuality -- it's universal."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Marianna Cerini, CNN

Ever since HBO Max released the first promotional image from "Sex and the City" spinoff "And Just Like That..." in early July, fans and fashion obsessives have been dissecting the returning characters' looks, sans Kim Cattrall's Samantha.

Is Carrie her stylish old self? What's the consensus on Miranda's silver-gray hair? And doesn't Charlotte just seem very Charlotte in her blouse, pencil skirt and micro Lady Dior handbag?

The hype around the photo -- and every snapshot teased since -- is testament to the original show's cultural clout. Running on HBO from 1998 to 2004, SATC radically changed the conversation around female sexuality, friendship and modern-day womanhood (although, two decades later, some critics have suggested that not everything has aged well). Just as importantly, the show redefined the role fashion could play in a TV series -- and influenced how we dress along the way.

Carrie Bradshaw's tulle skirt was the defining feature of her wardrobe, appearing in the show's opening sequence. Credit: AA Film Archive/Alamy Stock Photo

"The show was the first to name-drop designers and brands on a regular basis," said Cameron Silver, a fashion stylist and vintage expert in a phone interview. "It taught a generation about designer fashion, and had a tremendous impact on our knowledge of style. Many viewers learned how to say the name Manolo Blahnik by watching the series."

Over the years, Carrie's tiered tulle skirt, Miranda's bucket-hat-and-hoodie combo, Samantha's crop tops and Charlotte's preppy dresses have seeped into our collective consciousness. The four best friends' sartorial choices were often eclectic, expensive and envelope-pushing, and they inspired some of the most notable fashion statements of the past two decades, like the naked dress , exposed bra straps and sweatpants with heels.

But without SATC's longtime costume designer Patricia Field at the helm, can her successors, Molly Rogers and Danny Santiago, emulate the fantasy closet that defined the original series?

Here are five takeaways from what we've seen so far.

Each character had an instantly recognizable sense of style unique to them. Credit: Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy Stock Photo

A missed opportunity for nonconformist dressing?

The looks revealed so far offer a mixed bag of styles. There are hits: Carrie's voluminous polka-dot skirt by Carolina Herrera, Charlotte's Emilia Wickstead shirt dress and Miranda's matching silk tie-dye blouse and skirt by Gerard Darel.

But there are misses, too. As put-together as every outfit appears to be (in what is, admittedly, a relatively small sample of costumes), none really break new ground -- something the original show did consistently. Kim Cattrall's absence also leaves us speculating what Samantha's take on sexy 60-something dressing (she was older than the other characters) might have added to the show.

"It's all very prim and polished," said Rebecca Weinberg, who worked with Field as a costume designer on the original show, in a phone interview. "There aren't many surprises."

The styling may also offer more of a costume-like take on high fashion than today's audiences have the appetite for (think of how Field's full-on styling for "Emily in Paris" failed to wow). In 2021, one can't help but wonder whether a 50-something-year-old Carrie would still sport Manolos and chunky Mary Janes pumps at a time when, it could be argued, stilettos aren't particularly on trend.

Sarah Jessica Parker on the set of "And Just Like That..." this August wearing a Carolina Herrera skirt. Credit: James Devaney/Getty Images/GC Images

"What made the impact of 'Sex and the City' fashion so compelling and enduring was how the show blended high-end stuff with thrift and budget finds," Weinberg said. "It created this perfect mix of high (and) low that's become so ubiquitous when it comes to street style and fashion in general. It reflected the way we dress in real life, just in a more elevated way."

But, for now, the reboot's styling doesn't quite reflect that high-low combo, Weinberg said.

"There are plenty of big names, but I don't see a lot of smaller, sustainable or indie labels alongside them yet -- which you'd imagine Carrie would have embraced," she added. "I think that's a missed opportunity."

Old gems and vintage pieces shine

Eagled-eyed fans have already spotted shout-outs to some of the original's most recognizable pieces.

In one new photo, Sarah Jessica Parker is seen carrying a purple sequin Fendi Baguette bag , a cult favorite among the canon of iconic Carrie Bradshaw outfits. In another, she sports the same blue satin Manolo Blahniks she wore to her courthouse wedding with Mr. Big (Chris Noth). Then there's the oversized Chanel rose pin that first appeared in Season 3, following her second break-up with Big, and a pink bird-like headpiece that clearly nods to the feather fascinator she wore to (not) marry him in the 2008 SATC movie.

And, like in the original show, vintage still reigns. In one snapshot, Charlotte dons a ruffle organza top from Givenchy's Autumn/Winter 1996 collection and a classic black Chanel cross-body. Elsewhere, Miranda is seen holding a vintage Bottega Veneta white woven clutch.

"It certainly makes sense that the characters are wearing vintage, because it was something they did the first time around," Silver said. "As their style has evolved and they've aged, it's only natural that they would have more pre-loved pieces in their closets today.

"Also, vintage has become even more predominant in stylish women's wardrobes, at any age, particularly post-pandemic," he continued. "As these are women on the cutting edge of fashion, the fact they're embracing retro style was to be expected."

Parker and Cynthia Nixon on the set of "And Just Like That..." in July, with Parker wearing the vintage Fendi baguette bag. Credit: James Devaney/GC Images/Getty Images

Vintage clothes may also hint at environmental concerns, according to Victoria Bazalinchuk, the 23-year-old Ukrainian teacher and aspiring stylist behind @justlikethatcloset , an Instagram account that identifies all of the reboot's garments.

"I see it more like an homage to a sustainable trend that has been circulating for quite a few years now," she wrote in an email. "And I love this intention."

Whether that means we'll also see eco-friendly designers -- like Stella McCartney or Gabriela Hearst, for instance -- remains to be seen. But despite the dominance of fast fashion since SATC concluded, we are unlikely to see any of it here (though fans momentarily lost their minds when @justlikethatcloset erroneously credited one of Carrie's dresses to Forever 21 before another SATC fashion account, @everyoutfitonsatc , later clarified it was a thrift find).

The outfits are all over Instagram

We don't know if Carrie is now big on social media, or whether Miranda regularly checks her Twitter (though we like to think Samantha would have been pretty big on Instagram). But one thing is certain: Their outfits already have a huge following online. Bazalinchuk's Instagram account has amassed nearly 80,000 followers in just one month, with the listed items often selling out within hours.

Kristin Davis seen on the set of "And Just Like That..." in July, wearing the vintage Givenchy ruffle top from 1996. Credit: James Devaney/GC Images/Getty Images

"When I saw that SATC was making a reboot, I knew immediately that we all needed this account," Bazalinchuk said. "I know the rush around SATC fashion, and how we all had to wait to know what the ladies wore (in the original series). So this time I didn't want that to happen, because by the time the show airs, most of the clothes will be sold out."

As soon as an ensemble drops online, Bazalinchuk starts sourcing it for her followers. Some brands have even begun contacting her, while fellow fans have also helped identify tricky items. But does such extensive documentation damage the show's fashion appeal? Silver thinks so. "There's a chance that by the time the show airs, we'll have tired of the looks already," she said.

Weinberg agrees. "The idea of having the entire wardrobe available on Instagram before the series is even out is definitely a sign of how times have changed. It's cool, but it also doesn't leave much space for that sense of anticipation we used to have -- the surprise of what an outfit might represent in a certain context, or for a certain storyline."

Have 'it' bags been replaced by... totes?

Carrie may not have taken to Veja and Converse sneakers, but she seems to have swapped designer bags for totes.

Parker has been spotted on set carrying two different varieties of tote bag -- both bearing the logo of public radio station WNYC -- which she's worn with multiple outfits. It is not clear whether she was in character or not, although according to Page Six, Carrie is rumored to have a new career as podcaster, which would explain her new accessory. But the trade-off definitely has fans wondering if Birkins and Gucci belt bags will make appearances (though the vintage Fendi Baguette suggests Carrie might just be mixing it up).

Is the fashion-obsessed former columnist keeping it real? Is she coming to terms with being under-accessorized? Is this an environmental decision? Or, in a more calculated move, is she just signaling her identity as a public radio supporter and member of New York's intelligentsia?

Parker sports a WNYC tote on the set of "And Just Like That..." earlier this month. Credit: Raymond Hall/GC Images/GC Images

The men seem to be wearing the same suit

From Big to Steve Brady (​​David Eigenberg), SATC sometimes struggled with male character development. The men generally served as narrative devices for the women's stories -- perhaps intentionally so -- and their style was often two-dimensional, too.

The reboot may be no exception, which could be why every single guy on the show appears to be wearing a Paul Smith suit, according to Bazalinchuk's @justlikethatcloset account.

Chris Noth wore a sharp blue suit on set of 'And Just Like That' this August. Credit: Jason Howard/Bauer-Griffin/Getty Images/GC Images

Steve is in a gray one next to Miranda. Carrie's gay best friend Stanford Blatch (Willie Garson) wears a royal blue number . Anthony Marentino (Mario Cantone) sports a black version of pretty much the same look. And while Harry Goldenblatt (Evan Handler) is seen in a Hugo Boss two-piece, the silhouette is almost the same.

"It's as if the men are an afterthought, again, which is definitely surprising," said Silver. "One of the things that has really changed since this show began is that men's fashion is much more prominent and much more creative. I would have expected something a bit different. Or at least a wider choice of resources in terms of brands."

Another missed opportunity then -- or, maybe, another stylistic decision to keep the attention on the show's real sartorial icons.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Jacqui Palumbo, CNN

Eleven Pablo Picasso artworks that were on display at a Las Vegas restaurant for over 20 years will hit the auction block this October, just two days before what would have been the artist's 140th birthday.

Part of MGM Resorts' sizable art collection, the pieces had long been a fixture at Picasso, a Michelin-starred French and Spanish eatery in the Bellagio that is inspired by its namesake's life and work.

The collection -- which includes paintings, works on paper and one ceramic work -- has a combined top estimate of $104.2 million, according to Sotheby's auction house, which is organizing the sale.

Picasso's "Femme au béret rouge-orange" depicts the model Marie-Thérèse Walter. They began an affair in the late 1920s and had a child together. Credit: Courtesy Sotheby's and MGM Resorts

"It's an encyclopedic collection of Picasso's work, featuring works from 1917 to 1969 -- so virtually the duration of his entire career," said Brooke Lampley, Sotheby's chairman and worldwide head of sales for global fine art, over the phone. "It gives a beautifully comprehensive view of the incredible diversity and richness of his career."

It will be the first time Las Vegas has hosted one of Sotheby's marquee evening sales, which are typically held at the auction house's New York headquarters.

A varied collection

Among the 11 works is "Femme au béret rouge-orange," an oil painting of Marie-Thérèse Walter, a young French model with whom the artist had a years-long affair in the late 1920s and 1930s. Picasso's extensive portraits of Walter, who was the mother of his daughter Maya, are marked by vivid colors and a sense of intimacy.

"I just love the Marie-Thérèse period, because it's the most unusually sincere and romantic period of Picasso's career," Lampley said. She noted that some of the artist's stylistic choices, including the double Cubist-style face and Walter's beret, are reminiscent of his famed paintings of another romantic partner, the photographer Dora Maar

"You can see the integrated influences of the two muses at this time," Lampley added.

"Nature morte au panier de fruits et aux fleurs," a painting from 1942. During this period Picasso "painted with a really heavy application of paint, almost reminiscent of Van Gogh," said Sotheby's Brooke Lampley. Credit: Courtesy Sotheby's and MGM Resorts

Other works in the sale include 1969's "Buste d'homme," a painting from Picasso's late period that once hung behind the Las Vegas restaurant's bar; "Nature morte au panier de fruits et aux fleurs," a still-life painted during the Nazi occupation of Paris; and "Aiguière -- Visage," a white terracotta vessel he made in 1954.

A new location

The Picasso auction will be the "largest and most significant" fine art sale ever to take place in Las Vegas, according to Sotheby's. The move is part of MGM's attempts to reposition the city -- known for gambling and entertainment -- as "a broader art destination," Lampley said.

It comes at a time when the ongoing pandemic is radically shifting both the art market and the hospitality and travel sectors. Last August, MGM Resorts laid off 18,000 employees -- a quarter of its workforce -- amid a 61% decline in Las Vegas visitor numbers in July 2020 compared to the previous year. This month, MGM Resorts International reported a bounce-back in its second-quarter earnings due to an increase in travel.

The sale, from the corporate art collection of MGM Resorts, includes paintings, works on paper and this terracotta vessel. Credit: Courtesy Sotheby's and MGM Resorts

In a press release, MGM said that auctioning off the Picasso works would help its goal of "deepening diversity and inclusion" within its art collection. Some of the proceeds will be invested back into the art market, according to Sotheby's.

The resort group's chief hospitality officer Ari Kastrati said in a statement: "We are committed to creating an even more inclusive collection that maintains the breadth of our existing portfolio while giving a greater voice to artists from under-represented communities."

MGM declined to provide a timeline for the initiative. "We want to be thoughtful and reflective about how we move forward," a spokesperson said via Sotheby's, which confirmed that the group's collection still contains 12 other Picasso artworks that will replace the auctioned items at the restaurant.



Top: "Buste d'homme" hanging behind the bar at Picasso, which opened in 1998.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Stephanie Bailey, CNN

Positioned between Africa, Europe and Asia, Dubai is open to artistic and cultural influences from around the world. This has led to a vibrant, emerging local arts scene.

Until recently, this scene has been led by private galleries showing local artists, but now the Dubai government is building its first institutional art collection from scratch -- and there's a twist.

Dubai won't be buying any art -- it will be borrowing it. National art collections and museums were popularized in Europe during the 18th and late 19th century, and typically, these collections are built over long periods of time by purchasing or being gifted works. But Dubai aims to fast-track the process.

The initiative was developed by Dubai Culture & Arts Authority and Art Dubai and will include a digital museum, as well as annual physical exhibitions of selected works -- the first of which will be held at Dubai's Etihad museum later in the year.

The idea is to foster a collective culture and create a canon of art history that has not been present in the Middle East, according to Art Dubai -- without having to rely on government funding.

"Dubai Collection is the first initiative of its kind globally," said Benedetta Ghione, Art Dubai's executive director. "Patrons (contributors) are invited to lend their works to the Dubai Collection for a period of 10 years, while remaining legal owners of their pieces." However, the physical artworks will only be loaned for the times they are on display.

A new model

So far, 87 works have been selected as part of the first curation process. Most are from Emirati artists or artists from the wider Arab world. Ghione says a curation committee, made up of experts, selects which artworks are chosen to best represent the art of the region.

The Last Tashahhud, by Moath Alofi, shows the mosques "scattered along the winding roads leading to the holy city of Medina, Saudi Arabia." Credit: Courtesy of A.R.M Holding

The collection includes work from Emirati artists such as abstract painter Abdul Qadar Al Rais, who is known for combining geometric shapes with Arabic calligraphy, and conceptual artist Mohamed Ahmed Ibrahim.

"Dubai collection will build a comprehensive database of artworks, artists and art collectors, as well as help document what is still a relatively young contemporary art scene," said Muna Al Gurg, chair of Dubai Collection's curatorial committee.

Al Gurg believes that by borrowing artworks, Dubai will be able to develop a collection faster than by buying them.

"Creating a national collection is often a lengthy process of navigating an ever-changing art market and diplomatic negotiations with stakeholders ... but through our loan-based model we expect to be able to develop several exhibition concepts in the first few years within launching the initiative," said Al Gurg.

She adds that having temporary exhibitions, rather than a permanent display, can be an inspiring way to show a collection. "At this stage in the development of the initiative, we see the temporary exhibition as the preferred format for engaging the public in person," she said.

This untitled piece is by Algerian-born artist Baya Mahieddine (1931-1998) who was known simply as "Baya." Credit: Courtesy of His Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum

Janet Rady, a specialist in modern and contemporary Middle Eastern art, says the Dubai collection is likely a response to others in the region, such as Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi, promoting art from a government level.

While Dubai is home to nonprofit Jameel Arts Center, as well as commercial galleries, such as those in art hub Alserkal Avenue , the city lacks institutional collections.

"It's a nascent art scene, it's still quite private," said Rady. "There's no real museum as such that's open permanently to show modern and contemporary Arab art so in that sense, I think it's definitely filling a gap. It's perfectly standard in the market to validate your works by having them shown in a museum."

A digital museum

Part of the Dubai Collection initiative is a digital museum, which will allow more people to see the art, and will include educational materials.

Rady says the digital museum could help provide international exposure. "One of the problems is the visibility of the Middle Eastern art world to people outside the Middle East," she said, adding the collection could encourage young people to get into the arts.

Al Gurg adds that while the digital museum is an important element of the collection, artworks usually have the most impact when viewed in person.

"Although Dubai's art scene seems relatively young, its vibrant, multicultural and innovative nature very much reflects the spirit and identity of its home," said Al Gurg. "Looking further ahead, we hope to further grow the Dubai Collection with the aim of highlighting even more artists and stories."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Christobel Hastings, CNN

When it comes to bad luck, there are few superstitions as pervasive in Western culture as that of Friday the 13th. Like crossing paths with a black cat and breaking a mirror, the notion of a day that can bring misfortune is deeply embedded -- even if believers can't quite explain why.

There's even a name to describe the irrational dread of the date: paraskevidekatriaphobia -- a specialized form of triskaidekaphobia, a fear of the number 13.

While Friday the 13th may feel like a rare phenomenon, our Gregorian calendar means that the 13th of any month is slightly more likely to fall on a Friday than any other day of the week. It is not, however, a universal superstition: In Greece and Spanish-speaking countries, it is Tuesday the 13th that is considered a day of bad luck, while in Italy, it is Friday the 17th that is met with fear.

This month, however, there is only one in the calendar: Friday, the 13th of August.

The makings of a superstition

The Last Supper seemed to put a curse on the number 13: The 13th and most infamous guest to arrive, Judas Iscariot, was the disciple who betrayed Jesus, leading to his crucifixion. Credit: Roberto Serra/Iguana Press/Getty Images

Like many superstitions that have evolved over time and across cultures, it is difficult to pinpoint the precise origins of Friday 13th. What we do know, though, is that both Friday and the number 13 have been regarded as unlucky in certain cultures throughout history. In his book "Extraordinary Origins of Everyday Things," Charles Panati traces the concept of the cursed back to Norse mythology, when Loki, the god of mischief, gate-crashed a banquet in Valhalla, bringing the number of gods in attendance to 13. Deceived by Loki, the blind god Hodr was tricked into shooting his brother Balder, the god of light, joy and goodness, with a mistletoe-tipped arrow, killing him instantly.

From Scandinavia, Panati explains, the superstition then spread south throughout Europe, becoming well established along the Mediterranean by the start of the Christian era. It was here that the unsettling power of the numerals was cemented through the story of the Last Supper, which was attended by Jesus Christ and his disciples on Maundy Thursday. The 13th and most infamous guest to arrive, Judas Iscariot, was the disciple who betrayed Jesus, leading to his crucifixion on Good Friday.

Hundreds of the Knights Templar were arrested on October 13, 1307, and many were later executed. Dan Brown's "The Da Vinci Code" popularized the erroneous theory this is the original of the Friday the 13th superstition. Credit: /Hulton Archive/Getty Images

In Biblical tradition, the concept of unlucky Fridays, stretches back even further than the crucifixion: Friday is said to be the day that Adam and Eve ate the forbidden fruit from the Tree of Knowledge; the day Cain murdered his brother, Abel; the day the Temple of Solomon was toppled; and the day Noah's ark set sail in the Great Flood.

It wasn't until the 19th century, however, that Friday 13th became synonymous with misfortune: As Steve Roud explains in "The Penguin Guide to the Superstitions of Britain and Ireland," the combination of Friday and the number 13 is a Victorian invention. In 1907, the publication of Thomas W. Lawson's popular novel "Friday, the Thirteenth" captured the imagination with its tale of an unscrupulous broker who took advantage of the superstitions around the date to deliberately crash the stock market.

In the 1980s, superstition went pop with the launch of the "Friday the 13th" slasher franchise, starring hockey-masked killer Jason Voorhees. Credit: Alamy

Fast forward to the 1980s, and a hockey-masked killer by the name of Jason Voorhees in the slasher flick franchise "Friday the 13th" ensured notoriety. Then came Dan Brown's 2003 novel "The Da Vinci Code," which helped popularize the incorrect claim that the superstition originated with the arrests of hundreds of members of the Knights Templar on Friday, October 13, 1307.

An alternative history

Given the mass of doom-laden lore, you'd be forgiven for thinking that Friday 13th is indeed ominous. If we dig deeper, though, we also find evidence that both Fridays and the number 13 have long been regarded as a harbinger of good fortune. In pagan times, for instance, Friday was believed to have a unique association with the divine feminine. The first clue can actually be found in the weekday name Friday, which is derived from Old English and means "day of Frigg." Both Queen of Asgard and a powerful sky goddess in Norse mythology, Frigg (also known as Frigga) was associated with love, marriage and motherhood.

Frigg gave protection to homes and families, maintained social order, and could weave fate as she did the clouds. She also possessed the art of prophecy, and could bestow or remove fertility. On the other hand, Freyja, the goddess of love, fertility and war with whom Frigg was often conflated, was endowed with the power to perform magic, predict the future, and determine who would die in battles, and was said to ride a chariot pulled by two black cats. These goddesses were worshiped widely across Europe and, because of these associations, Friday was considered a lucky day for marriage by Norse and Teutonic people.

The Venus of Laussel clutches a crescent-shaped horn bearing 13 notches -- a potential reference to lunar and menstrual cycles. Credit: Education Images/Universal Images Group/Getty Images

The number 13, meanwhile, has long been regarded as a portentous number by pre-Christian and goddess-worshipping cultures for its link to the number of lunar and menstrual cycles that occur in a calendar year. Fertility was prized in pagan times, and artwork would often draw connections to menstruation, fertility and the phases of the moon.

Take the Venus of Laussel, an approximately 25,000-year-old limestone carving depicting a voluptuous female figure cradling her pregnant stomach with one hand, and holding a crescent-shaped horn bearing 13 notches in the other. Many scholars believe the figurine may have represented a goddess of fertility in a ritual or ceremony, while the 13 lines are typically read as a reference to the lunar or menstrual cycle, both of which symbolize feminine power.

Rewriting a reputation

As Christianity gained momentum in the Middle Ages, however, paganism stood at odds with the new patriarchal faith. Not only did its leaders take objection to the worship of multiple gods and goddesses, but the celebration of Friday, the number 13, and the goddesses who invoked love, sex, fertility, magic and pleasure were deemed unholy.

So revered were these deities, though, that making people relinquish them proved a real challenge. But Christian authorities persisted with their campaign, branding both the deities and the women who worshiped them witches.

"When Norse and Germanic tribes converted to Christianity, Frigga was banished in shame to a mountaintop and labeled a witch," Panati writes. "It was believed that every Friday, the spiteful goddess convened a meeting with eleven other witches, plus the devil -- a gathering of thirteen -- and plotted ill turns of fate for the coming week."

Early in her career, Taylor Swift would often perform with the number 13 -- which the singer considers lucky -- written on her hand. Credit: Larry Busacca/Getty Images

These days, of course, Friday the 13th still haunts the Western imagination. But with conversations around the role misogyny has played in silencing powerful women throughout history now in the mainstream, perhaps the narrative of this unlucky date and the female deities associated with it might soon be rewritten.

The tide may have already started to turn: Take Taylor Swift, who considers 13 her lucky number and, early in her career, often performed with the number written on her hand.

"I was born on the 13th. I turned 13 on Friday the 13th. My first album went gold in 13 weeks. My first No. 1 one song had a 13-second intro," she told MTV in 2009. "Every time I've won an award I've been seated in either the 13th seat, the 13th row, the 13th section or row M, which is the 13th letter. Basically, whenever a 13 comes up in my life, it's a good thing."

With more endorsements like this, fortune, rather than fear, might well become the legacy of Friday the 13th.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Rosalind Jana, CNN

Delving into the archives of pop culture history, " Remember When? " is a CNN Style series offering a nostalgic look at the celebrity outfits that defined their eras.

Remember when Gwyneth Paltrow turned up at the MTV Video Music Awards wearing a luxurious red velvet suit over an unbuttoned blue shirt, her blonde hair tucked behind her ears?

It was 1996 and Paltrow's star was firmly on the rise. That same year, the then-23-year-old had appeared in "Emma," playing Jane Austen's meddlesome protagonist with vim (the New York Times described her as "resplendent... gliding through the film with an elegance and patrician wit that bring the young Katharine Hepburn to mind"). Over the next few years, she would go on to star in major box office hits, including "The Talented Mr. Ripley" and "Shakespeare in Love," the latter winning her a slew of awards, including the 1999 Academy Award for Best Actress.

In the two decades since, the baby-pink Ralph Lauren gown she wore to accept her Oscar has attracted plenty of column inches. But it's only recently that her red velvet suit has been treated to the same attention.

Gwyneth Paltrow pictured in her red velvet Gucci suit. Credit: Kevin.Mazur/INACTIVE/WireImage/Getty Images

A return to hedonism

This suit -- sensual, tactile, ruby red -- was from Gucci's Autumn-Winter 1996 show. Designed by Tom Ford , who joined the Italian brand in 1990, it was first worn with a velvet scarf by Floridian model Trish Goff.

Like many family businesses that became luxury behemoths, Gucci started life in the 1920s as a leather goods company. It initially sold saddles and equestrian accessories before turning its focus to luggage and, eventually, handbags. By the time Ford came on board, however, it was on the brink of financial ruin.

Former Bergdorf Goodman president Dawn Mello had been tasked with turning the brand's fortunes around. But it was her Texas-born recruit who would go on to spearhead the label's renaissance.

Initially asked to look after women's ready-to-wear, Ford was made creative director in 1994 following Mello's departure. With full control of the brand, he ushered in a new look for the heritage label: one that was slinky, sultry and unabashedly provocative.

Tom Ford is applauded as he walks down a runway in 2003. At the time, Ford was creative director of both Gucci and Yves Saint Laurent. Credit: Michel Dufour/French Select/WireImage/Getty Images

Ford, who had trained as an architect and later cut his teeth at Perry Ellis, would hold the top job at Gucci until 2004. He took much of his hedonistic inspiration from the Halston-era world of Studio 54 , putting his models in jeweled silk blouses and velvet flares. He laid clear the erotic potential of clothing -- something he continued pushing through a series of infamous Gucci campaigns (including a 2003 ad featuring a model with the brand's "G" logo shaved into her pubic hair).

To the fashion world, his tenure was a breath of fresh air.

"More than any other designer, Tom Ford will go down in history as the man responsible for dressing the final years of the 20th century," British critic Susannah Frankel observed in the Independent newspaper in 1999. "The knowingly super-slick, super-sexy, hard-edged glamour the Gucci label has come to signify is perfect end-of-millennium fodder."

Revisiting the suit

With the era's fashion in the midst of a revival, social media is now revisiting the looks of some of its most glamorous standard-bearers -- from a resplendently maned Julia Roberts to Liz Hurley in that Versace dress

It's a moment in which Instagram accounts like @tomfordforgucci have thrived. Delving into the visual history of Ford's tenures at Gucci and Yves Saint Laurent, which he helmed from 1999 to 2004, the throwback account has introduced his fashion editorials and catwalk looks to a new audience hungry for bold sensuality.

Paltrow is one of a range of starlets whose fresh-faced party snaps and '90s red carpet appearances now flood social media. And as a result, her VMAs red suit is now an increasingly covetable item, with one recently selling on luxury resale site 1stDibs for more than $8,000.

To celebrate Gucci's 100th anniversary in April, the label's current creative director, Alessandro Michele, even sent a near-perfect replica of the suit down the runway, though he replaced the original velvet scarf with a leather-and-silver body chain.

A model wears a revised version of Gwyneth Paltrow's red velvet suit at the 2021 Gucci 'Aria' show. Credit: Daniele Venturelli/Getty Images for Gucci

It is tempting to try and diagnose the reasons behind revived interest in the era's fashion -- and the women who wore it. Perhaps it embodies what we now see as a time of innocence -- a pre-9/11, largely pre-internet decade that seems distant from our own, but just close enough for it not to have slipped entirely into the realms of history.

Or maybe we are possessed by a nagging sense that design was more exciting or daring in the past, especially in the wake of a pandemic that has interfered with our understanding of both time and style. (Sharp tailoring and Ford's "hard-edged glamour" are all the more appealing after a year wearing sweatpants.)

But regardless of the reasons, Paltrow's suit demonstrates that anything in fashion can be revived and returned to the spotlight. After all, it was Ford who had plundered the '70s to create something fresh for the '90s in the first place.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Written by Megan C. Hills, CNN

When Roberto Dillon began collecting retro video games more than 12 years ago, he scoured auction sites and connected with niche groups of hobbyists to amass a personal archive that is now hundreds of titles strong. But at the time, there was a consensus among collectors that buying old games was "a sort of fad," said the academic and game developer.

Most collectors were simply "nostalgic" for their childhood games, Dillon explained in a video interview. "There was no idea that games could become artifacts of the past that we want to conserve and preserve."

But this appears to be changing. In early August, an unopened copy of "Super Mario Bros," released in 1985, set a new world record when it sold for $2 million on the collectibles website Rally. Produced for the original Nintendo Entertainment System (NES), it was the third vintage title to smash the record for the world's most expensive game in under a month.

A few weeks earlier, a sealed copy of "Super Mario 64," from 1996, became the most expensive video game to sell at auction, fetching $1.5 million . In doing so, it broke a record set two days prior by an $870,000 copy of 1987's "The Legend of Zelda."

A copy of "The Legend of Zelda" became the most expensive video game when it sold for $870,000 at auction last month -- but the record stood for just two days. Credit: Courtesy Heritage Auctions

The market for vintage games is rapidly evolving, with auction houses taking notice and game-grading services, like Wata Games, providing certification for the emerging market. (Wata had given the record-breaking Mario game a near-perfect score of 9.8 out of 10, based on the condition of the box, cartridge and manual). An expert nod of approval can now transform a yard sale copy of "Pokémon" into an investment worth hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Cultural artifacts

Collecting is not just Dillon's hobby, it's also part of his job. He's the founder and curator of Singapore's James Cook University Museum of Video and Computer Games, which charts the sector's evolution through a 400-strong collection of game memorabilia.

Retro video games have become a kind of modern relic, Dillon said -- one intertwined with nostalgia, pop culture and technological history.

"They really show us how technology evolves with the kinds of tastes that we had years ago in gaming," he said.

A customer buys newly released "Pokemon" games in 1999 in Tokyo. Credit: Yoshikazu Tsuno/AFP/Getty Images

But not everyone who held onto their old Nintendo or Sega titles will be sitting on a fortune. Many factors dictate the value of a video game, from the number of units produced and the region the game was released in, to whether the cartridge comes in its original box with all the manuals intact.

The "holy grails" are unopened, shrink-wrapped early editions of iconic titles. "If you open it, the value of the game halves," Dillon explained.

The emergence of professional grading and classification has transformed the space, making it easier for buyers to assess the condition of their purchases. And while game collecting was, in the past, a hobby confined to eBay, Reddit, Facebook groups and forums, interest from high-profile auctions houses is helping boost prices by opening the market to new collectors, from traditional art investors to comic book and trading card enthusiasts.

According to Illiana Bodnar-Horvath, head of marketing at luxury collectible auctioneer Macey and Sons, interest in retro video games reflects online investors' growing appetite for "non-traditional assets," such as sneakers , trading cards and non-fungible token (NFTs).

"Recently, we have seen a surge in more eclectic requests from our clients looking for unique and rare collectibles," she said over email, adding: "We believe people will always invest in traditional assets such as stocks and real estate, but alternative assets are exactly that."

Rather than games with limited production runs, it is classic titles from the most popular franchises that attract the highest bids. Dillon said this may be partly because new collectors are more willing to invest in well-known characters that appeal to their sense of nostalgia, such as Mario, Cloud Strife from "Final Fantasy VII" or "Zelda" protagonist Link.

The $1.5 million copy of Super Mario 64. Credit: Courtesy Heritage Auctions

At Heritage Auctions' July sale, which generated $8.4 million -- including the aforementioned "Super Mario 64" and "Legend of Zelda" sales -- Mario titles dominated the top lots , alongside early games from the "Final Fantasy" and "Tomb Raider" series.

But the laws of supply and demand still apply. However common these titles once were, finding near-mint condition copies in their original unopened plastic wrapping and box is another story. And other factors can boost the asking price: The $2 million "Super Mario Bros" NES cartridge, for instance, came in a special " hangtab " display box, while the $870,000 "Legend of Zelda" game was a rare early production copy.

The future of collecting

With today's games industry moving toward digital-only sales -- either via third-party platforms like Steam or directly through PlayStation Network and Nintendo Direct -- owning physical games may eventually become a thing of the past.

Related video: The story behind Pac-Man and his ghosts

But game developers already have one eye on the next generation of nostalgic investors. Some have created digital collectors' editions containing exclusive artwork, soundtracks or add-ons. Others are sprucing up their physical offerings: Ubisoft recently released an $800 "Legendary Edition" of the game "Assassin's Creed: Origins," which included a 29-inch-tall resin statue of its main character, lithographs signed by studio artists and a hand-drawn world map, among other collectibles. Fewer than 1,000 copes were released worldwide.

As digital sales become the norm, Dillon envisions these limited-edition physical games becoming the next big collectibles. "Twenty years from now, today's kids will have disposable income and they (will) want to recreate a collection of games from when they were young ... they look for the collector's editions that were launched back in the day, but they didn't own."

But Dillon won't be selling his games anytime soon. "I still hope that I can pass my collection to someone, somewhere, and that someone will appreciate it," he said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@