(CNN) — If you follow luxury resorts or travel influencers on Instagram, odds are good that you've seen at least one "floating breakfast."

In case you're not familiar with them, here's what to know: they're your typical upscale hotel room service breakfast -- think toast, fruit, coffee and the like -- served in a pool or hot tub instead of in bed. Usually, they're placed on large platters or colorful baskets, then accessorized with bright tropical flowers to make them even more photogenic.

These breakfasts are particularly popular in Asia and the Pacific, especially at warm-weather private villa resorts in places like Thailand , Fiji and the Maldives

Nearly everyone agrees that the trend began in Bali, although no specific resort seems to get the credit for coming up with the idea first.

Gorgeous scenery plus yummy food equals perfect social media bait. Shutterstock

While these breakfasts have become more common on resort menus over the last five years, the coronavirus pandemic has made them more popular than ever as hotel guests are avoiding buffets and communal dining rooms.

"Across the course of the past year, in-suite dining has become extremely popular, especially for those seeking solace in the safety and comfort of their suite," Jann Hess, general manager at Amanjiwo in Bali, tells CNN Travel. "The floating breakfast is a popular choice."

After all, the floating breakfast needs a pool to float in -- and a private plunge pool is a much better choice than a shared pool where a splashing kid might make the whole thing topple over.

Beyond the 'gram

Though the gorgeous colors and dramatic plating of floating breakfasts make them perfect for social media, asking people to stand in the pool before they've fully woken up or had caffeine seems like a potential recipe for disaster.

Are these breakfasts just made to be shared online and discarded, or do people genuinely enjoy eating them?

James Booth, a Sydney-based reporter for DMarge.com , admits to wondering the same thing before trying one at an upscale resort in Bali in 2019.

He tells CNN Travel that, for him, the lush meal worked better in concept than in execution. Though Booth had pre-scheduled a specific time for the breakfast to arrive, he ended up oversleeping about 20 minutes, meaning he'd missed the optimal window for consuming it.

Related content Romantic retreats: 11 Fiji resorts worth crossing the Pacific for

"I realized that because it was a humid environment, leaving your breakfast out was maybe not ideal," he says.

Although the food was already getting cold, he was determined to get an Instagram shot of the fancy setup before chowing down. The hotel's staff had wisely placed the trays in a separate section of the pool, but he moved them into the larger area in order to stage the scene.

That ended up in trays floating off in different directions and him, still bleary-eyed, trying to corral it all.

"I was too embarrassed to ask for help," he confesses, "so I spilled everything everywhere. The coffee had a bit of pool water in it, and the bread was soggy."

Still, Booth is careful to pin the blame on himself and not on the resort employees who organized the meal.

"I think it's a bit violent to jump in the water first thing when you wake up," he says.

If he were going to do the experience over again, he'd make a couple of changes, namely drinking the coffee first so he'd be alert enough not to knock anything over and finding a spot in the pool where he could sit down to eat instead of have to stand around awkwardly.

Floating the idea

Floating breakfasts are a popular amenity at Koh Samui's Cape Fahn Hotel. Courtesy of Cape Fahn

The floating breakfast has quickly become yet another luxury hotel amenity, like afternoon tea or a turndown treat. Amid the pandemic, domestic travelers taking advantage of affordable staycations have also embraced floating breakfasts.

Timo Kuenzli, general manager of Koh Samui's all-pool-villa Cape Fahn Hotel, says that nearly 100% of their guests over the past year have ordered one.

"We can definitely see that the Asian market is way more into having Instagrammable moments to capture than other markets," he says.

In addition to the photos being beautiful, they also serve as a free marketing tool -- people see the breakfasts online, check out the location tag, and then want to get in on the experience themselves when they stay at Cape Fahn later.

Related content 10 amazing Asia-Pacific private island retreats

And due to its growing presence, resorts have to keep upping the ante in order to make their offering stand out.

The Six Senses Uluwatu in Bali (pictured above) serves theirs in a red heart-shaped basket. The Anantara in Koh Phangan, Thailand, has a floating "sunset sushi" extravaganza. Cape Fahn is working on a floating afternoon tea experience.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — Occupying a special place in adventure lore, mountain huts have been offering a roof over travelers' heads since the dawn of exploration.

If you can reach them, they provide a thrilling and wild escape from civilization down below -- a place to marvel at starry night skies and then wake up to breathtaking panoramas.

Their isolation offers added reassurance at a time when avoiding crowds is favored option.

Here are some of the most impressive ones to inspire your next expedition for when the time is right to conquer mountains again.

Desolation Peak Lookout, Washington State (6,102 ft, 1,860 m)

There are few better places to escape the world than a solitary house overlooking the gorgeous North Cascade Mountains.

This rugged, spartan landscape inspired "On the Road" writer Jack Kerouac to sojourn here for 63 days during the summer of 1956, resulting in the short story "Alone on a Mountaintop" and book "Desolation Angels."

The windswept hut in question is a historic fire lookout with larger-than-life panoramas. It's one of the best spots to marvel at the twin peaks of Hozomeen Mountain as well as a perfect place for existential soul searching.

It can be reached via the Desolation Peak Trail. Check the National Park Service website for detailed instructions.

Grands Mulets hut, France (10,010 ft, 3,051 m)

Worth the ascent alone: Grands Mulets. FFCAM / Armelle Squinabol

Located on the way to the Mont Blanc mountain range, the Grands Mulets refuge offers showstopping views of the Alps.

Set at an altitude of 3,051 meters, the hut's first reincarnation was built in 1853 to serve mountaineers exploring the alpine peaks.

Related content Remote Big Bend sheds a different light on the US frontier

Today it is one of the most popular mountain huts in the country thanks to its strategic position and marvelous surroundings. Standing above the imposing Bossons glacier amid a snowy wonderland, Grands Mulets is almost worth an ascent on its own.

Visitors can book the refuge using the official website . It has 68 beds and is open from the end of March to the end of July.

Brandenburger Haus, Austria (10,751 ft, 3,277 m)

For experts only: Brandenburger Haus. Katerina Kalinova

Standing in the very heart of the largest glacier system in the Eastern Alps, Brandenburger Haus is an almost surreal sight.

A little gray dot devoured by the gorgeous snowy landscapes, it was constructed back in 1909 to serve the German Alpine Club.

Currently, it enjoys a righteous place among the most stunning refuges in the Alps, offering a welcoming stop on the way to the summit of Dahmannspitze mountain.

Visitors should be aware that it's in the expert-only league of mountain huts as the journey to reach it goes through complicated glacier routes. More details at the hut's official website

Konkordia hut, Switzerland (9,350 ft, 2,850 m)

Glacier adjacent: Konkordia hut. Valais/Wallis Promotion

One of the most legendary alpine huts in the world, Konkordia was built in 1877. Anyone reaching this place may have to constantly remind themself that they're not dreaming, such is the power of the panoramas on offer.

Related content Tiny cabins become hot property for pandemic getaways

The mighty Konkordiaplatz glacier and towering mountain tops can be seen from this fantastic observation point.

There's also a worrying reminder of climate change. Back when the Konkordia hut was built, it was just 50 meters from the glacier. Today it stands 200 meters away as the natural wonder has melted away over the years.

Anyone staying here needs to reserve ahead of time via the official website

Monte Rosa hut, Switzerland (9,459 ft, 2,883 m)

Above the glaciers: Monte Rosa hut. ETH Zürich / Tonatiuh Ambrosetti

Reflecting the beauty of its magical surroundings with an aluminum covering, Monte Rosa may be one of the most well-designed and futuristic mountain huts in the world.

Inaugurated in 2009 replacing an old stone-clad refuge, this has been a travelers' favorite ever since due to its comfort, sleek looks, outstanding location and the easy ascent to its door.

It's a stunning place to spend a night above the glaciers, taking in the magnificent mountain view.

Rifugio Re Alberto, Italy (8,599 ft 2,621 m)

Beneath the towers: Rifugio Re Alberto. Rifugio Re Alberto

Rifugio Re Alberto is the kind of place that seems more fantasy video game location than real-life.

But there's no end-of-level boss to fight, just eye-wateringly gorgeous landscapes including the Vajolet Towers, the most precious jewels in Dolomites' crown.

Waking up with the first rays of sunlight in the company of these jagged peaks is a wish-list experience that makes Re Alberto one of the most exceptional places on Earth.

The refuge is open only during the summer months and requires reservations. More info on the hut's website

Luxmore hut, New Zealand (3,560 ft, 1,085 m)

Simple pleasures: Luxmore hut. Department of Conservation, NZ

With fantastic views over Kepler Mountains and Lake Te Anau, Luxmore hut is one of the Fiordland National Park's highlights and is a must-visit for anyone into wilderness tourism.

Its setup is pretty simple: 54 bunks, water supply, fuel for heating and some cooking facilities. Perfect for a digital detox.

A trip to the Fiordland National Park also offers the chance to see Kepler Mire, which stood in for the mysterious Dead Marshes in the "Lord of the Rings" trilogy of movies.

The New Zealand National Parks website has details about visiting this hut.

Rabothytta hut, Norway (3,937 ft, 1,200 m)

Nordic nowhere: Rabothytta hut. Svein Arne Brygfjeld

Modern architecture meets the barren Northern Norway landscapes at this amazing hut located in a glacial back of beyond.

Managed by the Norwegian Trekking Association, the striking, stylish building is a gateway to the Okstindan mountain range in Helgeland.

While it's far away from the tourist-frequented fjords or Lofoten Islands, Rabothytta offers total isolation in an unexplored land -- the ultimate place to get away from it all.

Castle Mountain hut, Canada (7,850 ft, 2,390 m)

Small wonder: Castle Mountain hut Alpine Club of Canada

Some mountain refuges are built to accommodate large numbers of people drawn to the hills during peak season.

And then there's Castle Mountain hut.

This tiny six-person house, situated halfway to the top of the spectacular Castle Mountain in Canada's Banff National Park, serves as a base for rock climbers as well as providing wonderful views of the Canadian Rockies.

Anyone lucky enough to find themselves here will find it minimally equipped with a propane stove and lantern.

Because what else do you really need to enjoy nature's wonders?

The Alpine Club of Canada website details the practicalities of reaching the hut.

Lloyd MacKay hut, Canada (8,900 ft, 2,720 m)

Ideal isolation: Lloyd MacKay hut. Alpine Club of Canada

The scenery on offer at the Lloyd MacKay hut is truly unforgettable.

Located amid the mightiest peaks of the continent, this modest refuge is guaranteed to be a highlight of any journey to the heart of the Jasper National Park in Canada.

With only six beds and humble yet functional furniture inside, Lloyd MacKay hut is an isolated and spartan bucket list spot.

Refugio Emilio Frey, Argentina (5,577 ft, 1,700 m)

Patagonian perfection: Refugio Emilio Frey. EMPROTUR / Chiwi Giambirtone

Fairly easy to reach on a day hike, Refugio Emilio Frey is a treasure of Argentina's superb Nahuel Huapi National Park.

It's home to one of the most striking panoramas in all South America, with a turquoise lagoon reflecting the sharp Patagonian peaks.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — Shanghai 's already-hot hotel scene just keeps getting hotter.

The J Hotel Shanghai Tower, which opened on June 19, isn't just another high-end property.

It claims to be the highest hotel in the world. The J Hotel occupies the top floors of the Shanghai Tower -- which at 632 meters (about 2,000 feet) is the tallest building in all of China

Aside from impressive bragging rights, what is the hotel actually like? The J has 165 rooms, of which 34 are suites. There's 24/7 personal butler service, an indoor swimming pool, toiletries by Hermes and Diptyque, magnolia petal-shaped bathtubs, a luxe spa with a focus on Reiki treatments and full Chinese tea sets in every room.

The 632-meter Shanghai Tower is China's tallest building. J Hotel Shanghai Tower

The hotel has four suite types, with the most expensive being the 380 square meter Shanghai Suite. Besides the bedroom, this suite includes a parlor, study, kitchen, physiotherapy area and a room just for getting dressed. (The hotel did not reply to CNN Travel's request for a price.)

Jin Yan, one of the hotel restaurants, is decked out in traditional Chinese red. Hector Retamal/AFP/Getty Images

The least expensive room goes for 3,601 RMB (about $557) per night, while the J Suite -- one notch less posh han the Shanghai Suite -- costs 67,628 RMB per night (about $10,467).

There are also seven different places to eat within the hotel including a Cantonese restaurant called Heavenly Jin on the top (that would be 120th) floor. There are also restaurants offering Japanese food, Italian food and afternoon tea.

The J Hotel is owned by Jin Jiang International, one of China's largest state-owned hotel and tourism companies.

Civilizations have been building towards the sky for centuries and modern technology has only fueled this fascination. From the Empire State Building to the Burj Khalifa, each new skyscraper pushes the limits of possibility.

Despite the global travel slowdown amid the coronavirus pandemic, competition for the newest, best and highest hotel isn't going anywhere.

The Ritz Carlton in Hong Kong lays claim to having both the highest hotel pool and highest hotel bar in the world.

A view of the J Hotel's pool. Hector Retamal/AFP/Getty Images

In Dubai , there's an ongoing battle for the title of tallest hotel in the city and on the planet.

The 356-meter (1,168 feet) Gevora Hotel was officially recognized as the world's tallest hotel by the Guinness Book of World Records in 2018.

It's worth noting the title of tallest hotel is typically applied only to buildings used wholly as hotels, unlike the J Hotel, which only occupies an upper section of the Shanghai Tower.

Hot on Gevora's heels is the still-under-construction Ciel Tower, which will have 1,042 rooms and reach a height of 360.4 meters when it's completed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — Summer travel can be so inviting. There are fewer clothes to pack. Days are long for outdoor adventures. Al fresco dining abounds. And you can't overstate the simple joy of basking in the sun's soothing rays.

But sometimes you can get way too much of a good thing in summer as people in the Western United States can tell you. Too much heat is not just unpleasant. It's deadly.

Whether you're playing it safe or simply prefer relatively cooler temps over hot spots, here are nine places that usually make for cool travel escapes in summer. Keep in mind all the cautionary guidance about travel -- especially if you're not fully vaccinated or you're crossing international borders.

1. Switzerland

Mountainous Switzerland always provides a cool spot somwhere. Dent Blanche, left, is next to the Matterhorn in the Swiss Alps. Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images

Wedged in the snow-capped Alps, Switzerland recently opened to US travelers and is accessible to Europeans and selected other nations around the world.

Should the major cities such as Geneva, Zurich and Bern become too hot for you (which is unlikely, especially at night), escape to the higher altitudes for an Alpine hike. Even in mid-July, temperatures on the 5 Lakes Walk near the Matterhorn can stay on the cool side.

If you want something less strenuous, take a boat tour of idyllic Lake Brienz

2. San Francisco

Alcatraz Island can be seen from the Russian Hill neighborhood in San Francisco. Brontë Wittpenn/The San Francisco Chronicle/Getty Images

"The coldest winter I ever spent was a summer in San Francisco."

The quote oft-attributed to Mark Twain is nice summation of the weather there. Summer isn't even its warmest season -- that honor goes to fall. While much of the Northwest has been baking this year, the city's microclimate has kept things cool.

You can explore neighborhoods such as hilly Russian Hill (home to crazy crooked Lombard Street) or head out to nearby Muir Woods for some serious tree time. Don't forget a light jacket.

3 . Anchorage, Alaska

A cool sight: Spencer Glacier in Chugach National Forest. Ray Bulson/Alamy

Alaska isn't necessarily the year-round ice block you may think it is. It can get surprisingly warm at times in Anchorage. But compared with the Lower 48, it's still usually a relatively cool escape in summer. (In mid-July, CNN Weather forecasts the hottest day to be 76 F (24 C).

4. Iceland

Seljalandsfoss waterfall is a spectular sight in southern Iceland. Sven-Erik Arndt/Arterra/Universal Images Group/Getty Images

With a name like Iceland, you'd better be cool -- unless you're near a lava flow or soaking in a hot spring. Average July highs in the capital of Reykjavík are 14 C (57 F).

Take advantage of summer to head out to the highlands , which are often closed again by late September, to see waterfalls and glaciers. Or roam about Reykjavik looking for unusual delicacies such as kæstur hákarl ("treated shark") or Svið, or smoked sheep's head.

5. Dubai

A skier competes during DXB Snow Week at Ski Dubai last year. Francois Nel/Getty Images

No, we haven't lost our minds. Dubai is indeed a hot desert emirate. But it offers year-round snow skiing and other winter activities. How can that be?

It's all thanks to Ski Dubai . When you're rolling in oil money, you can build a mammoth indoor ski park and draw folks from all over the world. Along with the skiing, you can have penguin encounters, ride snow slides or take a chair lift for a bird's-eye view.

If you get too cold, warm up with a sand safari

6. Air-conditioned destination malls

You can retreat to destination malls such as CentralWorld in Bangkok and spend a full day indoors and never get bored. Lauren DeCicca/Getty Images

Online shopping has delivered a big blow to many malls, but there are big destination malls in the USA and around the world that can still satiate your shopping and entertainment appetites in glorious, air-conditioned comfort.

Minnesota's Mall of America is a kids' climate-controlled playground paradise with everything from an aquarium to the Nickelodeon theme park.

Even hot, steamy Bangkok offers a cool respite if you go to malls such as CentralWorld , where there's an ice skating rink.

Stay aware of any local mask-wearing requirements when you visit enclosed public locations. Even if you're fully vaccinated, some locations still might ask you to wear a face mask.

7. Caves for tourists

You can see stalagmites, stalactites and formations called curtains in the Postojna Caves. Jure Makovec/AFP/Getty Images

Caves have long provided a natural escape from extremes of heat and cold , with most maintaining a nearly consistent temperature year-round. So when it's hot on the surface, head underground. A few ideas:

-- Mammoth Cave National Park , Kentucky: The longest known cave system in the world has an average temperature of 54 F (12 C). Bring a jacket for your tour.

-- Eisriesenwelt Cave , Austria: You go from cool to downright cold here. This is an ice cave and one of Salzburg's favorite things.

-- Postojna Caves , Slovenia: See stunning formations from the comfort of an underground train.

8. Fresh-water swimming holes

An old stone bridge spans the Voidomatis River. Antony Bouchagier/Alamy

There are all kinds of fresh-water swimming holes around the world that provide an exhilarating plunge even when it's insufferable hot on land. A couple of examples:

-- Barton Springs ; Austin, Texas: Residents and visitors can escape the notoriously brutal Texas heat in this naturally fed pool, where the water is always 68 to 70 F (20 to 21 C). On a cold winter morning, the pool actually provides a relatively warm place to swim.

-- Voidomatis Springs , Vikos Gorge, Greece: These spring-fed pools can be found on the Voidomatis River, deep in the Vikos Gorge in northern Greece. Be aware they can run dry in late summer.

9. Cold-water beaches

A couple walks the shore at Coast Guard Beach in Eastham on Cape Cod. Craig F. Walker/The Boston Globe/Getty Images

Even if the sun is out in force, some beaches have cool water ocean currents that make for chill air and bracing -- even shocking -- dips. A few of them are:

-- Nazaré, Portugal : This charming spot on the Portuguese coast north of Lisbon is known for surfing, but the waves are generally biggest in winter. The Atlantic is usually calmer here in summer. The water temperature in mid-July was 16 C (61 F).

-- Cape Cod, Massachusetts : A favorite for New Englanders and beyond, the average July water temperature on quaint Cape Cod is around 67 F (19 C). That's a lot better than June, when the average is just 59 F (15 C).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — In June 2020, the people of Britain put their differences aside to condemn a brazen act of aggression against their country.

An American expat known only as "Michelle" had posted an instructional TikTok on how to make "British tea." A collective groan could be heard from Land's End to John O'Groats, as Michelle and her daughter blasted a mug of water in the microwave, added a free pour of sugar, half an udder's worth of milk -- then briefly flashed a teabag at the resulting slop.

It was the most disrespectful flouting of Anglo-American conventions since a group of iffily-dressed Bostonians lobbed a consignment of loose leaf into the harbor.

But why are us Brits so comically precious about this unassuming brown liquid?

A bit of history: The thoroughly un-Britishness of tea

Tea is the Britishest thing ever, until you take two seconds to Google it. It's grown, of course, in China, India, Africa, Sri Lanka... the list goes on, but aside from a few tiny producers, Britain's not on it.

The world's biggest tea-quaffing nation per head? Turkey. The teabag? Dreamed up by an American.

English spy James Bond loathes a cuppa so much that in the novel "Goldfinger" he snaps in a sexist/jingoist tirade: "I don't drink tea. I hate it. It's mud. Moreover, it's one of the main reasons for the downfall of the British Empire. Be a good girl and make me some coffee."

The Brits' first fling with tea was thanks to a Portuguese woman; Catherine of Braganza arrived in England in 1662, making her tipple of choice a must-have fashion accessory among fawning aristocrats. (Royalty has gulped the stuff ever since, with Twinings being Elizabeth II's label of choice.)

The East India Company quickly muscled in on this trend and monopolized trade using Indian-grown leaves, often produced via indentured labor. Thumping great taxes led to widespread smuggling, not to mention that whole Boston Tea Party escapade.

In 1784, Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger decided to bring in the Commutation Act, slashing tea taxes from 119% to 12.5%. Suddenly, the caffeinated thirst quencher was for the many not the few -- and subsequently buoyed by zippy clipper ships (another American invention), an explosion of Sri Lankan plantations, and a temperance movement that would tut loudly if you so much as pictured a small glass of beer.

Related content Why drinking tea might just help in a crisis

Tea's benefits

But tea really won the hearts of the people because it was good for them. Thanks to the boiled water, it staved off cholera -- not to mention the British weather. Sweetened with milk and sugar, it revived and energized laborers. And served with bread and cheese as high tea, it became a staple of working-class life -- a thrifty stand-in for the evening meal.

High tea was subsequently dolled up by Anna Russell, Duchess of Bedford. "She started taking tea and sandwiches between lunch and dinner in the 1840s, and began one of our most delightful traditions," says Bekki Clover, training excellence manager at Bettys , a chain of tearooms that's been serving Yorkshire for over a century. "Soon the duchess was joined by her friends, and by Edwardian times afternoon tea, served on the finest china and silverware, had become a byword for elegant socializing."

The tea has never stopped flowing since. Mad Hatters partied with it. Literate chimps urged us to quaff more of it. Novelists claimed it was the magic key to unlocking their imaginations. The Doctor said it was "just the thing" for healing the synapses -- presumably after a tiring day fighting Daleks.

Speaking of TV shows, the UK regularly still cadges electricity from France to power up millions of electric kettles for nationwide brew-ups during ad breaks. They must think we're mad.

How to make tea properly: The art (and science) of the perfect cuppa

Michelle of TikTok was trolling us by the way. Watch her crackpot recipe for "British eggs" (strikingly similar to British tea) and you'll understand. But while the microwave stunt proved that Brits revere tea as much as they do David Attenborough, it also highlighted a glitch in the Matrix -- no one can agree on how to actually make it.

Water temperature

Mrs Beeton (essentially the Victorian Nigella Lawson) insisted tea was brewed in an earthen pot with boiling water, and could benefit from a pinch of carbonate of soda. George Orwell wrote an entire essay, "A Nice Cup of Tea", which reels off 11 key rules for brewing up (teabags, he moans, "imprison" the leaves).

Kate Halloran, tea innovation manager at Taylors, says that if using a pot, you should warm it up first by giving it a quick swirl with boiling water.

Everyone has their own tea ritual. But can we use science to give us a definitive answer?

Brewing time

Dr. Stuart Farrimond has spent years researching what makes a good cuppa, and knows all the crimes we're guilty of.

One big sin is not brewing up for long enough. Farrimond's advice is to pour just-boiled water into a mug with a teabag, then go and occupy yourself with something else for five minutes, allowing it to brew fully. You'll thank yourself shortly.

"After the wait, you will find that the richly flavored tea will also be in the optimum temperature range for savoring all the flavors," says Farrimond, "There are more than 30,000 flavor molecules in tea, all of which need time to emerge." (By the way, don't try to cheat by squeezing the bag: you'll end up with a bitter brew.)

As well as releasing more flavor, leaving the bag in longer means more antioxidants and a ballsier hit of caffeine. "A cup brewed for 30 seconds has 35 milligrams of caffeine, whereas with a five minute brew, you get 50 milligrams of caffeine," says Farrimond.

Plus, the drink will have cooled to around 37°C (body temperature) -- optimum for sipping.

Related content 31 of England's most beautiful places to visit

Tea bag or loose leaf?

But should we be using a teabag at all? "Loose leaf tea will probably give you the fullest taste as the best quality leaves are traditionally kept back for this," Farrimond explains, "That said, because over 95% of tea drunk in the UK comes from teabags, my research has focused on teabag tea."

Any mainstream teabag will do the trick, although Yorkshire Tea, Twinings, PG Tips and relative newcomer Teapigs are frontrunners, as far as British taste buds are concerned.

Proper vessels

A china mug or porcelain cup is ideal for serving your brew in; one major no-no, warns Farrimond, is a Styrofoam cup -- the kind you get at football matches and roadside cafes. The synthetic material of these mops up flavor molecules, rendering the tea bland. Scum caused by hard water is also guilty of toying with the nuances of tea. If you're in a hard water area, using a filter is a must. Special hard water teabags are worth considering too.

Then there are factors the average tea drinker wouldn't think of. Even the color of your vessel can affect taste; for example, your brain associates a red mug with berries and ripeness -- tricking you into thinking the tea is sweeter than it really is. Overall, the more you like your cup or mug, the more you're likely to enjoy drinking from it. Guard your favorite chinaware with your life.

Related content How a champion barista makes a perfect cup of coffee

The milk question

As for *that* milk question? "Hotly debated," says Farrimond. "The story goes that traditionally milk was added first to protect the fine bone china from shattering when pouring in the hot tea." Yet he recommends adding milk second, especially if brewing from a teabag in an individual cup: "It gives longer for the tea to brew properly.

"It's also easier to judge how much you're adding, so that you can get the milkiness to your liking," adds Farrimond.

In truth, of course, the perfect cup of tea is whichever one gives you the most pleasure. The important thing as a Brit is that once you've decided how you take your tea, you must die on that hill.

Where to drink tea in Britain

High tea has more or less evaporated from the British way of life, but its ritzy cousin afternoon tea lives on as an occasional treat. And while many tea rooms like Bettys still offer tea served a la Duchess of Bedford, the genre has been doing its fair share of experimenting lately.

At the Coed-Y-Mwstwr Hotel in Wales, afternoon tea comes with miniature fish & chips and lamb kofta as standard.

The Waldorf Astoria Edinburgh got creative during the pandemic with a touch of Harry Potter wizardry, offering delivery of cakes shaped like golden snitches and sorting hats to select local zip codes.

At W London , drag queens dish up Darjeeling with a side of edible glitter balls once a month.

In fact, it's been suggested that plain old black tea might not be exciting enough for the modern drinker -- perhaps one reason Yorkshire Tea launched a "Jam & Toast" brew in 2020. But Kate Halloran of Taylors -- the company behind Yorkshire Tea's blends -- thinks reports of the common cup of tea's demise are exaggerated: "Millions of people enjoy a traditional brew as an important part of their day," she says, "so I don't think it's going out of fashion."

In this complicated age, perhaps it's time to return to the basic pleasures of a cup of tea. Sip one at the Bridge Cafe in London's suburb of Acton, where defeated candidates from the UK version of "The Apprentice" TV show come to drown their sorrows. Or slurp it from a flask while rambling through Jane Austen country (tea crops up in many of her books, and she personally bought the family's supply direct from Twinings to avoid inferior batches tainted with arsenic).

For the most satisfying brew of all, you needn't travel further than your own kettle: "For me," says Halloran, "a cup of tea is best enjoyed at home, either watching the football or curled up with a good book."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hong Kong (CNN) — Before the pandemic, Hongkongers were among the most well-traveled people on Earth.

In 2019, residents made 94.7 million departures, according to the Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department.

The year prior, they spent an estimated $26.5 billion -- making it the world's 11th largest tourism market in terms of spending, based on United Nations figures.

Japan, Taiwan, Thailand, South Korea and mainland China made regular appearances on weekend itineraries and business routes, while Europe, North America and Australia lured Hongkongers for longer getaways.

But since the pandemic began, residents have been effectively grounded due to a mix of travel bans and one of the world's longest quarantines.

Fully inoculated arrivals must undergo self-funded quarantine in a government-approved hotel for 7 to 21 days, as of August 9

Hope for any forthcoming travel bubbles has waxed and waned at the same time. Authorities dangled the possibility of an agreement with Singapore twice before shelving it indefinitely in May.

On the other hand, Hong Kong's safety measures have kept infection rates low, with just 12,020 total cases and 212 deaths in the city of 7.5 million as of August 10.

And while thankful to be safe, some residents feel jealous, dejected and outright angry as they watch other parts of the world reopen.

"At first, I felt lucky to be living in Hong Kong. I felt proud of how we handled the pandemic as a city and fortunate that we didn't have serious home lockdowns. But now the pendulum has swung in the opposite direction," Liza, an employee at an international bank who was born and raised in Hong Kong, tells CNN Travel. (She did not want her last name used because of her employer's media policies.)

"Whether to see family abroad or to take a break from our very busy, stressful lives, travel is extremely important to me. It's the reason I work and save money -- to have something to look forward to."

An enviable safety record

Over the past 18 months, many have looked to Hong Kong as an example of how to contain Covid-19 effectively

When the first case emerged in the city in January 2020, the community set the tone by donning masks, working from home, heightening sanitization measures and social distancing.

In March 2020, while the US and Europe confronted devastating outbreaks, the Hong Kong government rolled out a slew of safety measures: the city shut the borders to non-residents, limited gatherings to four people, halved restaurant capacity, extended school closures and temporarily shut down clubs, karaoke lounges, bars, gyms and beauty salons.

A couple takes in the Hong Kong sunset on July 30, 2020. Anthony Kwan/Getty Images

Since then, officials have flicked restrictions off and on in the face of second, third and fourth waves.

Some rules -- like compulsory mask-wearing and group dining limits -- have been widely accepted as prudent.

Others, such as a ban on birth partners in delivery rooms, surprise district-wide lockdowns, beach closures and rapidly changing travel restrictions, have drawn intense debate.

"Coming off the back of the 2019 protests , then experiencing pandemic restrictions ... It affected my mental health much more than I thought it would," says Liza.

"We took travel for granted before. I am grateful that we are safe here, but I think the restrictions err on the side of being overly cautious."

Singapore out of reach

In the summer of 2020, avid travelers saw a glimmer of hope.

The government announced that a quarantine-free Singapore travel corridor would be coming down the runway, set to launch in November 2020.

However, just before it took off, officials scrapped the plan due to a sudden jump in infections in Hong Kong.

Like a boomerang, the government re-tightened social distancing restrictions and prohibited all arrivals -- including Hong Kong residents -- from the UK.

Hong Kong residents wait in line for Covid-19 tests on January 31, 2021. Paul Yeung/Bloomberg/Getty Images

Authorities lifted the UK ban in May 2021, only to reinstate it on July 1 due to a Delta variant surge, then lift it again on August 9.

Hong Kong and Singapore resumed talks on the long-awaited travel bubble in 2021. But the plan fell through for a second time in May, this time due to an outbreak in Singapore.

Complicating matters, Hong Kong is nowhere near its vaccination goal of inoculating 70% of the population by September.

Despite rolling out an efficient, well-organized campaign in February, the city has fully inoculated just 40.4% of residents as of August 10.

"It's a travel issue, but also a vaccination issue. You can't have one without the other," Liza says.

"I get pretty frustrated when I see just general apathy and so much misinformation. A former co-worker said they were not getting vaccinated because a psychic on TV told them not to.

"That makes me angry because it is unlikely we will have the freedom to travel again until more people get vaccinated."

An evolving situation

Until August 9, all arrivals had to undergo a self-funded, compulsory quarantine ranging from 14 to 21 days in a designated quarantine hotel

"It is designed to be prohibitive. So yes, it is to keep us safe, but also to stop us going in the first place," says Liza.

In April 2021, the government relaxed restrictions for fully inoculated residents and rolled out further adjustments on August 9, which opened the border to some fully vaccinated non-residents.

The city has also simplified its risk tiers from five to three: low, medium and high.

For low-risk destinations -- New Zealand, Australia, mainland China and Macao -- residents and non-residents can enter Hong Kong as long as they present negative PCR Covid-19 tests within 72 hours of departure and a confirmed hotel quarantine booking.

Fully vaccinated travelers must undergo a seven-day quarantine, versus 14 days if unvaccinated.

Both Hong Kong residents and fully inoculated non-residents can enter Hong Kong from medium-risk destinations, such as the US, Singapore, France, Germany and Canada.

Hong Kong International Airport on March 24, 2020, hours before non-residents were banned from entering the city in a bid to halt the coronavirus. Anthony Wallace/AFP/Getty Images

Non-vaccinated residents will need to quarantine for 21 days, while the fully vaccinated face a 14-day quarantine followed by seven days of self-monitoring.

Fully vaccinated travelers can shorten quarantine to seven days, followed by seven days of self-monitoring at home, if they present a positive serology antibody test conducted within the past 91 days, or 13 weeks.

While the government has lifted blanket travel bans from high-risk places -- such as the Philippines, Indonesia, Russia, South Africa, Nepal, Ireland, India and the UK -- only fully vaccinated Hong Kong residents are allowed to board flights to the city.

In addition, arrivals need to quarantine for 21 days in a designated hotel, followed by seven days of self-monitoring.

Among the updated policies, authorities also eased restrictions for children under 12, who may finish their quarantine period at home as long as the entire household is fully vaccinated.

The Hong Kong government insists its requirements, including multiple tests before boarding flights, on arrival and during and after quarantines, represent a science-based approach. "These measures are adjusted when appropriate with a view to building an anti-epidemic barrier to prevent the importation of cases," it said in a statement.

It said it would continue to assess risks and a "basket of factors" before changing testing, boarding and quarantine requirements.

CNN Travel contacted the Hong Kong government for additional comment but did not hear back before publication.

A roller coaster of emotions

The ever-changing rules and regulations have been head-spinning and frustrating for many would-be travelers.

Among them is Maisie Fairweather, an elementary school teacher from the UK, who taught in Thailand before relocating to Hong Kong in 2019.

Fairweather traveled all over Southeast Asia before the pandemic, frequently taking long weekends away with her partner and friends.

After a trip to the Philippines during Lunar New Year in 2020, Fairweather had her first taste of travel in a pandemic world.

"We'd had an incredible trip with friends, but suddenly everything got quite scary quite quickly," she says. "Our flight back was canceled, I believe because of case numbers in Hong Kong and China, and we ended up having to travel to Taiwan to get home."

That would be her last trip for 18 months. She says the current restrictions are "infuriating, heartbreaking and cruel," because they keep families apart.

Related content World's oldest zoo panda turns 35

"By far, the most difficult has been the cut off between family and friends around the world," she adds.

When the Hong Kong government reduced quarantine for fully vaccinated travelers arriving from the UK earlier this summer, she hoped to have a chance to finally visit family.

Fairweather booked flights home and couldn't wait for the reunion. Suddenly, the Hong Kong government extended quarantine back up to three weeks, regardless of vaccination status.

Then on July 1, it banned flights from the UK, derailing her long-awaited trip. Though the ban was lifted on August 9, Fairweather says it's too late to travel now due to the new school year starting on August 16.

Hong Kong aims to inoculate 70% of its population by September. Lam Yik Fei/The New York Times/Redux

"It's incredibly frustrating. It feels like for every step forward, we take two steps back. I have to stay positive though and hope that these new changes pave the way for a family reunion at Christmas," she says.

"I want to stress that I am very grateful that I am safe and healthy in Hong Kong. I realize how lucky I am. But myself and countless others were left crushed -- and friends who had already left were stranded."

The most damaging part of the travel restrictions, she adds, is not the restrictions themselves but the constant changes.

"You don't dare plan anything or get your hopes up. And it seems never-ending. Just when you think there's progress, it all disappears again," she says.

Before the pandemic, Fairweather thought she'd live in Hong Kong indefinitely. But the travel restrictions are making her question that future.

"I feel frustrated, angry and hopeless sometimes. I know so many people now who have left Hong Kong to return to the UK or elsewhere ... and maybe that's our future, too. I would never have considered leaving before the pandemic.

"But now, all I can think about is that first hug with my mum -- there will not be enough tissues for all those tears of happiness!"

'Standing still in a little bubble'

When he sees people from other countries like the US and UK traveling freely, Ivor Ngo feels a pang of jealousy.

For Ngo, a sales and marketing manager born in Hong Kong, travel is one of his favorite pastimes. He used to fly to Europe for a couple of weeks every year for work and took shorter trips around Southeast Asia and Japan at least twice a year.

"This is the longest I have stayed in Hong Kong since I was 18," he says.

"My friends and I used to say that people in the US or UK were irresponsible for traveling ... But now, we understand that there is nothing we can do to make this virus go away. We believe that if we do everything we can to protect ourselves and others, we should be able to travel."

Related content Hong Kong's Tiananmen Square museum moves online following June closure

If the lengthy quarantine restrictions for vaccinated residents continue, Ngo says he may move away from Hong Kong.

"I am already exploring opportunities to relocate to other countries. At 31, I am at an age where I can afford to -- and should embrace new adventures."

While home to many parks, hiking trails and beaches, Hong Kong is more compact than other places in Asia-Pacific. Unlike Australia, Thailand or mainland China, where residents can enjoy more domestic travel opportunities, Hongkongers do not have as many options.

And many of the usual domestic tourism sites, from the fishing village of Tai O and the Shek O beach to the outlying islands and Sai Kung, have been overrun with residents looking for a break.

A woman and child exit a Hong Kong tram on June 26, 2021. The city has reported few Covid cases in recent months. Vernon Yuen/NurPhoto/Getty Images

"Knowing you can do all that out there, but you're trapped in Hong Kong instead ... That is just not living," says Ngo.

Liza agrees. "When I see the rest of the world learning to live with this horrific virus, I feel like my freedom is being taken away," she says.

"I don't care about going to a restaurant. Or a gym. I care about being able to travel to see family and friends, and have a mental break from this intense time. We would probably be thinking about leaving if we didn't have so many roots here."

It's as though Hong Kong is "just standing still in a little bubble", she adds. While the city has successfully kept people safe, it has been emotionally and psychologically very challenging.

"People can continue as 'normal' because we aren't in lockdown, but this is not normal."

Responsible or overly restrictive?

While thankful the government lifted flight bans from the UK, some Hong Kong residents feel the compulsory 21-day quarantine for fully vaccinated residents is still too prohibitive.

"We could do seven days in a hotel room with a baby, then seven days home quarantine with monitoring and several tests," says Liza, who has a six-month-old. "But I think 21 days is too much. We need to find a way to live with this moving forward."

Iris Law, a wellness coach and author born in Hong Kong, says she feels the restrictions are justified, though 14 days would be more palatable for vaccinated residents arriving from higher-risk areas.

"Quarantine requirements and travel bans are not something that most people would welcome, but I do feel that they are necessary to be implemented due to the long incubation period of Covid-19, possible severity of the sickness and the fast-spreading new variant," says Law.

Related content Delta variant travel restrictions: The latest news and trends for concerned tourists

"Stats tell us that these controls that we have in place have proven to be more effective in controlling the spread than countries with looser rules.

"Especially in Hong Kong, where it's very densely populated, I do believe that the various regulations have prevented us from a complete lockdown so far."

Pre-pandemic, the Hong Kong native frequently traveled for holidays and work, particularly to Japan, where she visited five to six times a year. And while she misses traveling, she says safety should be the top priority.

With new variants emerging abroad and low vaccination rates locally, Law does not think it would be safe to open the borders anytime soon.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dubai (CNN) — Off the coast of Dubai, a property developer is planning to create up to 500,000 square meters of coral reef.

Kleindienst Group, the developer behind the Heart of Europe megaresort , which forms part of a network of man-made islands called "The World," has set up The Coral Institute there, to nurse and regenerate corals.

It is using a technique known as "fragmentation," where pieces of coral are cut with a small electric saw, allowing each coral to potentially regenerate hundreds of times.

The pieces of coral will be then stored in water tanks, monitored and nursed by a team of marine biologists until they grow enough to recreate a reef.

l e v a r t

"The Coral Institute will hold and protect the genetic stock of corals ... around the Arabian Gulf," Josef Kleindienst, the chairman of Kleindienst Group, tells CNN.

A 2018 study found that 73% of corals in the UAE have been wiped out by bleaching, largely due to climate change and human activity.

Kleindienst says that Heart of Europe's goal is to show that development and marine life can co-exist in a sustainable environment. The corals will contribute to making the site eco-friendly and they also will become a landscaping feature of the luxury hotels, 4,000 residential properties and over 50 tourist attractions at the Heart of Europe, including the iconic Floating Seahorse Villas
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — Inflight dining was far from its glory days even before Covid ensured everything was plastic-wrapped and pre-ordered.

On long-haul international flights, the question "chicken or fish" is often met with resigned acceptance of a nuked, tiny meal in an aluminum foil tray. A limp salad -- with half a cherry tomato. A roll so hard it could be confiscated by the TSA as a weapon. An underwhelming main that could be both chicken and fish. And who even eats yogurt for dessert at dinner?

Domestic flights? Let's not even go there.

But imagine being asked if you'd rather have the chilled Beluga caviar or smoked Nova Scotia salmon to start? Maybe the Tournedos Rossini (a legendary combination of filet mignon, foie gras and black truffle) for your entree?

And would Madame like to choose American or European cigarettes to finish her meal?

Back in the golden era of air travel, inflight dining menus were a whole different ball game. Even in Coach.

One woman who knows this more than most is Anne Sweeney. She flew as a flight attendant with Pan Am from 1964-1975, criss-crossing the globe:

"All of Pan Am's flights were international and we went to every continent except Antarctica. I loved Morocco; other favorites were London -- where I was based for six years -- Paris, Beirut, Bangkok, Tahiti and Hong Kong, where I was based from 1967-68."

Related content What it was really like to fly on Concorde

Scrambling eggs -- in coach

It's clear that food service was the crucial part of the inflight experience -- one that demanded real cooking skills -- even at the back of the plane.

"Our five-week training program spent about 70% of the time on food and service training because we didn't just pull something pre-cooked out of a drawer," says Sweeney. "The 'galley girl' in first class had to set up carts and cook individual entrees as well as a roast beef. We also cooked eggs to order for breakfast. And one of the worst galley tasks was actually scrambling eggs in coach!"

Pan Am flight attendant Susanne Malm, a colleague of Anne Sweeney, prepares scrambled eggs in the galley in-flight. Courtesy Anne Sweeney/Pan Am Museum Foundation

Understandably, those in business and first class -- the pointy end -- would get even better culinary creations, in some cases catered by legendary restaurants. But even the dishes served in coach would make today's fliers green with envy.

"While Pan Am's first class service was superb and created by Maxim's of Paris, it should be noted that the economy meals were great too," recalls Sweeney.

"We heated vegetables and a meat entrée in the galleys -- they came on frozen and always had a sauce. Entrées that I remember dishing out 120 times on a full 707 (veggies were another 120 turns of the wrist) included chicken vol-au-vent, beef bourguignon, Cornish hen, beef stroganoff and more."

While based in Hong Kong, Sweeney also flew exclusively on R&R operations that Pan Am set up for the US government, taking troops from Saigon, Da Nang and Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam to Bangkok, Hong Kong, Taipei, Kuala Lumpur and Penang. A different type of inflight meal again -- but one that was always welcomed:

"The menu was always steak, potatoes, vegetables, ice cream and milk. Bottles of ketchup were passed through the cabin. Not very elegant -- but certainly appreciated."

Inflight dining down under -- since the 1930s

Other dishes on global airlines from the golden age of flying wouldn't seem out of place in Michelin-starred restaurants today. Australian national carrier Qantas celebrated its centenary last year and has chronicled inflight meals since the 1930s, as David Crotty, curator at Qantas Heritage Collection, explains:

"Qantas began inflight meal service with the Empire flying boats in 1938, between Sydney and Singapore. The Rose Bay hotel was our first inflight meals kitchen, although hot food was packed in large flasks and not heated on board. Stewards were employed as cabin crew."

Among a number of firsts, Qantas introduced frozen food to Australia and in 1948 their first female cabin crew began flying. They also produced special menus for Christmas and for events such as the 1954 tour by the British royal family, where fliers tucked into dishes including "poached snapper with hollandaise sauce" before "grilled French lamb cutlets with Saratoga potatoes."

Australian airline Qantas began its inflight meal service back in the 1930s. Qantas

Says Crotty, "In the 1950s and '60s international flying was expensive and the menus reflected this with many elaborate meals described in French, but by the 1970s, things were more relaxed as flying became increasingly democratic with the Boeing 747."

Flying from London to Auckland on Qantas meant stops in Rome, Bombay, Hong Kong and Melbourne -- with an astonishing diversity of food and drinks served along the way. "Strasbourg foie gras in pastry crust with duck galantine" sounds tempting -- and decadent enough -- but it was just one of four appetizers on just one leg of the flight. Your entree could have been "breast of pheasant in sour cream" or maybe "cutlet of veal with ox tongue and almonds."

It wasn't just down under however, where the skies were decidedly gourmet.

Related content 10 oldest airlines in the world

The Golden Samovar

Back in the late 1960s, Alaska Airlines launched its Golden Samovar service to celebrate "Alaska's colorful Russian heritage." As their publicity at the time explained:

"Lovely stewardesses in their elegant, long black maxicoats welcome you aboard. Authentic Russian balalaika melodies set the mood as hostesses serve a beverage from the samovar -- the Bolshoi Golden Troika, (a mix of coffee, vodka and liqueurs) created by the house of Seagram. Russian menus feature caviar, veal Orloff, tartlet Odessa and more."

The service complimented Alaska Airlines' brief operation of charter services to the former USSR and continued in subsequent years "due to popularity with passengers."

With that Golden Troika concoction, we can see why.

On American Airlines, vintage photos show roast beef being sliced and served to order from a trolley, while even kids kicked back with burgers as part of a full meal service.

Children enjoying the service on American Airlines. American Airlines

Back in the early 1960s, its Royal Coachman menu -- what is it with British royals and inflight dining? -- featured a bugler heralding the arrival of beef consommé, sauteed breast of chicken in wine and a fruit tartlet.

Aboard Singapore Airlines at 35,000 feet, the trolleys would came laden with platters of salads and hors d'oeuvres, cheese plates, decadent-looking desserts -- and yet more roast beef.

It even launched a "banquet in the sky," where first class passengers were treated to a dinner service "with a choice in the main course (entrée) of quail Angostura bitters, crayfish etouffée or beef wellington with Périgueux sauce -- in other words with Madeira and black truffle. Those flying from LA to Tokyo -- and then on to Singapore -- could enjoy broiled lobster tail, veal loin apricot or marinated tenderloin.

It sure beats a bag of pretzels.

And if you'd think that special meals and dietary requirements have been a pretty recent addition inflight -- then think again.

Former Pan Am flight attendant Anne Sweeney -- still working today, at her own public relations firm in New Jersey -- recalls the variety of meals on offer:

"There were vegetarian meals for Indian passengers, salt-free, diabetic, kosher. The Mormon Church was a big client of Pan Am and they sent their missionaries on our flights -- sometimes up to 50 young men in white shirts and black ties with short hair. They really stood out in the '60s and '70s! They had to have juice and water -- no booze, coffee or tea."

One element that Sweeney clearly didn't miss, however, was in-flight smoking:

"Smoking is not my favorite subject since I never smoked, but like several women who participated in a study from Dartmouth Medical School, I suffered from the effects of second-hand smoke. In First Class, we offered complimentary mini-packs of Marlboro, four to a pack. Crew members would take the leftovers off the plane and either smoke them or use them as tips in the hotels where we stayed."

As other vintage menus show, such as from BOAC -- the forerunner to British Airways -- menus would often end with the line "Packets of 20, English and American, plain or filter tip."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — Tokyo is considered one of the world's top food cities , drawing travelers from around the world who spend their days sampling renowned Japanese dishes, from sushi to ramen.

But for those who flew into the city to compete or work at the Tokyo Olympics, most local restaurants are off limits.

While Japan is still closed to international travelers, the athletes, coaches and journalists permitted to enter the country for the Games have to follow a strict set of safety rules and are not permitted to leave the vicinity of their accommodation for a 14-day period unless approved for an exception.

Luckily, Japan's 24-hour convenience stores, many of which are attached to hotels, are arguably the best in the world and offer an unbelievable array of foods and drinks.

Ask anyone who has traveled to Japan and they will likely have a story about a memorable visit to a konbini -- the abbreviated name for convenience stores in Japanese.

Thanks to a series of social media posts from journalists and athletes, they've been pushed into the limelight at the Tokyo Olympic Games not just for their fine offerings but for their top-notch customer service as well.

Related content The latest on the Tokyo Olympics

Case in point: 7-Eleven came to the rescue after a sports reporter for Canada's CBC network in Tokyo called out for help on her Twitter account . The issue? She wanted to learn the correct way to unwrap a package of onigiri, a Japanese rice ball.

The post, featuring a video of Anastasia Bucsis failing to open her onigiri without tearing apart the exterior seaweed, gained 82.2k likes and was retweeted over 34.6k times since being posted on July 27.

In response, 7-Eleven Japan posted a how-to video explaining the correct way to open the cleverly designed packages on its Twitter account.

"Today, we would like to introduce how to open a package film of rice ball for the customers who are visiting Japan from overseas," the post said.

Devin Heroux, another CBC journalist, delighted many Japanese as he documented his discovery of a 7-Eleven attached to the hotel he is staying in.

"Now, having never been to Japan before I was unaware of how different the experience at Sev (as we called it back in Saskatoon where I grew up), and where I'd go to get Slurpees, was going to be," Heroux wrote on the Canadian public broadcaster's website

"All I pictured in my head were hot dogs that had been sitting in an oven for too long, and cheese for nachos that probably, maybe, was safe to eat."

Heroux had an eye-opening experience -- not only were the options aplenty, they were also appetizing.

Related content 25 Japanese foods we love -- from tempura to miso

His tweets on his hotel convenience store journey have amused many, from konbini newbies to veterans, attracting comments from Japanese who thanked him for his appreciation for konbini food and offered their own advice on which snacks he should sample next.

A day before winning the bronze medal, 13-year-old Sky Brown of Great Britain shared a photo of an onigiri from 7-Eleven on her Instagram account. From Sky Brown/Instagram

Heroux wasn't the only one singing the praises of Japan's convenience stores. Andrew Keh, reporting on the Games for the New York Times, also wrote about his foray into his nearby 24-hour stores.

"We can't traverse the galaxy of food outside the Olympic limits, but a conbini (sic) contains a culinary world unto itself, a bounty of bento boxes, fried meats, sushi, noodles galore and all manner of elaborate plastic-wrapped meals and rare snacks," Keh wrote in a report for his employer.

The athletes are posting about the delights of the konbini, too. On Tuesday, 13-year-old skateboarder Sky Brown -- who won Great Britain a bronze medal on Wednesday -- shared an image of a pickled plum, shiso and sesame onigiri from 7-Eleven on one her Instagram stories.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — Every Friday, Ross Harrington, a car dealership service manager in Melbourne, heads to a local lunch shop to pick up a couple of deep-fried dim sims, kicking off his weekend dim sim routine.

Harrington is the founder of Dim Sims 4 Lyfe , a Facebook community made up of about 5,000 dim sim enthusiasts who share their experiences and innovative recipes -- dim sims on pizza, for example.

They aren't alone in their obsession.

Dim sims, or "dimmies," are a variant of the traditional Chinese dumpling. Served in a variety of ways, including steamed and fried, they first gained popularity in the 1940s and have since become an iconic dish in Melbourne and beyond.

So who invented them? Turns out it's complicated.

Chinese Australian businessman William Chen Wing Young is often credited as being the father of dim sim.

Elizabeth Chong, Chen's daughter and a well-known Chinese Australian cooking show presenter, tells CNN Travel otherwise.

"It's often been erroneously recorded that he invented the dim sim and had a restaurant called Wing Lee. He did not invent the dim sim," says the 90-year-old celebrity chef.

"But yes, if it weren't for my father dim sim wouldn't be what it is. It wouldn't be an Australian fast-food icon."

The origins of dim sim

Australia's dim sim story began in 1942, when Chen realized that a number of elderly Chinese men who had come to Australia to work during the gold rush of the 1800s were left jobless.

"They were like the leftovers from the goldfields days. They didn't make it back home to China and were too old for heavy works," says Chong.

At the same time, Chen noticed how popular Cantonese dim sum had become in Australia. ("Dim sum" refers to the whole collection of dumplings and delicacies served with tea. Among the many dim sum dishes, siu mai -- a flowerpot-shaped pork and prawn dumpling -- was especially popular.)

Dim sims, which come in many shapes and sizes, are usually fried or steamed. iStockphoto/Getty Images

Chen came up with an idea: If he could mass produce siu mai, these men could sell them on food trucks and earn a living.

But siu mai was too much of a mouthful for Australians to pronounce back in the 1940s. Chen called it "dim sim" instead -- which has the same meaning as dim sum, but in a different Canton dialect.

"So he kind of combined philanthropy with the business," adds Chong. "They started with four women making them by hand -- my mother was one of them. Then the popularity grew and we started to employ more and more ladies."

Chen called the business Wing Lee -- Wing was his middle name and Lee was his wife's maiden name.

But the hearty dumplings weren't propelled into stardom until his son stepped in, albeit accidentally.

A day of slacking launches dim sim to the masses

"At that time, my eldest brother Tom checked into the business. My father asked Tom to deliver a box of dim sims to an elderly Chinese gentleman who lived in Cheltenham (a Melbourne suburb)," says Chong.

"While my brother was on his way to deliver them, he decided it was such a fine day, he'd stop and say hello to his good friend Joe, a Greek guy who owned a fish and chip shop near the Mordialloc area."

The two friends ended up going fishing. Chong says when they got back, Tom told Joe, "I've got a box of these dim sims. If you like, I'll cook them in your shop and you can have them for lunch."

Ross Harrington, founder of a Facebook community dedicated to dim sims, says he eats them every weekend. Courtesy Ross Harrington

Joe decided to deep fry them, as "that's the only way you could (cook them) in a fish and chip shop," says Chong.

Joe said they were wonderful so Tom, instead of continuing with the delivery, left the box of dim sims there.

"Before the next day was over, Joe rung Tom at Wing Lee and said every one of his mates were asking where he got these dim sims," says Chong.

As their popularity increased, the factory couldn't keep up with demand.

So Chen engaged a German engineer to design the first ever dim sim machine to churn out these delights by the thousands.

"I was a little girl then," recalls Chong. "I remember my father talking into late nights with the engineer about how he wanted the pastry done and how the machine should churn all the ingredients."

The results were an immediate hit, she says, making Wing Lee Dim Sim the first Chinese factory to commercialize a fast food for the masses.

"Every fish and chip shop was clamoring for them. Supermarkets were now asking for them. So it wasn't long before dim sims become an institution at every fish and chip shop in Victoria," says Chong.

Dim sim vs. siu mai

Chef Mak Kwai Pui, owner of Hong Kong's most famous dim sum restaurant, shares a few essential dining tips.

Though similar, dim sim isn't the same as the siu mai you would normally find in a Chinese restaurant.

Dim sims are bigger. They have thicker skin to withstand freezing and delivery. The ingredients also differ.

"It was during World War II when meat was scarce. As my father was supplying the munition factory with dim sims for lunch, he was granted a few more food coupons. But it was only a limited amount so he had to change the recipe," says Chong.

"I think the meats he used were pork and veal. He had to fill up with more vegetables, like celery and English cabbages. We didn't have Chinese cabbages. And a bit of onion for flavors. It's still delicious."

Chong remembers fondly how Australians embraced her father's dim sims.

"At one time, a lot of young Australians traveled to London. We used to get letters back at Wing Lee that said, 'Please can you send us some dim sims?' So I think the dim sims -- which means 'to touch the heart' in Chinese, really did touch the hearts of the Australians.

"It's an Aussie thing now. People would buy fish and chips and have a dozen fried dim sims, too," says Chong.

'It's a part of Australian history'

Harrington, 52, says he had his first taste of dim sim when he was 10 years old. For him, it was an acquired taste.

"I wanted to see what all the fuss was about. It was steamed and loaded with soy sauce; I didn't like it. I persevered and eventually grew to love them," Harrington tells CNN Travel.

"As you get older, things that you grew up with either disappear or become unattainable. Dim sims haven't changed and eating them as an adult brings back fond childhood memories. Everyone has a story of where they get their favorite dim sim from."

With that in mind, he started the Dim Sims 4 Lyfe Facebook group.

Dim sims on the barbie? Why not. Courtesy Ross Harrington

"Through Dim Sims 4 Lyfe, I have experienced a lot of good dim sims through recommendations from other group members. More importantly, I have brought a lot of people together from all walks of life, to celebrate something so simple yet something that means a lot to so many.

"I feel that if I can maintain the popularity of the dim sim, then I can help to ensure that some of these original Chinese restaurants can remain in business and as new generations take over it will give them a reason to keep them going. They need to be preserved as part of our Australian history," says Harrington.

Harrington's favorite dim sim memory took place about 30 years ago, when his wife took him to the South Melbourne Market to try their famous dim sims.

"They were big and peppery. I stood in line behind about 30 people to get my order and it was worth the wait," he recalls.

These days, after a dim sim lunch on Friday, or "Fryday" as Harrington calls it, he will also have dim sims at the football matches during the weekends. He says he sometimes makes his own dim sims with "premium ingredients to perfect the ultimate taste."

"The dim sim is definitely an iconic Australian dish," he says. "The dim sim reminds Australia that we have always been a country that welcomes others and isn't afraid to adopt new cultures and cuisines."

What happened to the original dim sim company?

Elizabeth Chong was awarded the Queen's Birthday Honour medal in 2019 for her services to Australia's hospitality sector. Asanka Ratnayake/Getty Images

Chen's company, Wing Lee, failed to achieve the longevity of the Australian dumpling he created. After he retired in the late 1950s, the company was put on the stock market and taken over by two other brands, Marathon and Chien Wah.

Shops and factories -- big and small -- have since created their own versions of dim sims.

But over the years Chong and her family have continued to impact the Australian food scene in other ways.

She started a Chinese cooking school in the 1950s, first as a small class for neighbors. She has since taught more than 35,000 students.

Then she was a popular Chinese food show presenter in the 1990s and 2000s, one of the very first Asian faces to promote Chinese cuisines on television. in 2019, she received the Queen's Birthday Order of Australia award for her services to the hospitality sector and promotion of Chinese cuisine.

"There is a Chinese restaurant in almost every corner of Australia. Although Chinese food is always loved, it is not always understood. I put a different face on it and showed people that Chinese food was much more than just something to fill the stomach," says Chong.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — If the "baking elf" hadn't spent the pandemic whipping up sweet confections, Frances Hohl might not have gained 25 pounds.

But the magical pastry chef -- aka Hohl's 19-year-old daughter, Casmere, who was doing college remotely -- calmed her Covid anxiety by baking fabulous creations almost every night: Strawberry shortcakes and chocolate chip cookies and French macarons and lemon meringue pies. She once even made a wedding cake. Never mind that no marriage was taking place.

Hohl couldn't ignore her daughter's efforts. Nor did she want to. "Wedding cake is my favorite," says Hohl, 56, a writer in Steamboat Springs, Colorado.

And that is how, 11 months into lockdown, Hohl found herself at Movara, a fitness resort in Ivins, Utah, trekking through rust-colored canyons with sand so thick she was practically wading in it. Her calves ached. Her shoulders throbbed. Blisters erupted between her toes. Still, in the afternoons she did strength or cardio classes, along with massages and other body treatments -- all in an effort to take off the pounds she had amassed.

"I just felt so uncomfortable in my body," says Hohl.

Many people felt similarly after a year spent ordering takeout, bingeing Netflix and working from home -- often facing enormous stress, anxiety and depression. According to a March research letter published in JAMA Network Open, Americans gained more than half a pound every ten days of lockdown.

Movara Fitness Resort in Ivins, Utah, was recently sold out 18 weeks in a row. Courtesy Movara Fitness Resort

And the urge to drop pandemic pounds extends beyond the United States.

Slimmeria , a weight loss, detox and fitness retreat operator in the United Kingdom, has been sold out since May. "I think due to the Covid situation people are taking their health very seriously and started practicing self help," says Slimmeria owner Galia Grainger.

, is seeing the same thing. Caroline Sylger Jones, the founder of retreat guide and review site Queen of Retreats , is seeing the same thing.

"Most of our UK and European retreats that have been able to run have sold out this summer, although everyone says bookings are last minute," she says. "Definitely people are looking to lose their lockdown weight and get fitter."

Now that the world is opening up, weight loss and fitness resorts are reaping the benefits of those goals.

Looking to lose the 'Covid 19'

Hilton Head Health , in South Carolina, has seen a 30% increase in new inquiries since mid-February, with a six- to eight-week waiting list. Due to customer demand, The Ranch in Malibu, California, recently launched The Ranch 9.0, a nine-day experience that adds two days to its signature week-long program. And We Care , in Desert Hot Springs, California, is so busy that they're considering opening a branch on the East Coast.

Movara in Utah was recently sold out 18 weeks in a row.

"And there's no sign of it slowing down," says Elaine Hartrick, Movara's general manager. "Guests arrive each week talking about how they've gained the 'Covid 19' or the 'Covid 25' or 'Covid 30'. People recognized obesity as a risk factor for complications from Covid, and they wanted to change their lifestyle so they wouldn't become another statistic. It was a wake-up call for so many people."

Related content Find out which countries are welcoming US tourists back

Caren Kabot, the founder of Solo Escapes , a travel company that focuses on spa and wellness, says people are also looking to rest and reset after a year of confinement.

"They're like, where do I start? What do I need to do? I say, plan at least one week where you can focus on creating balance in your life while shedding a few extra pounds."

Fit Farm offers fitness and weight loss programs in Tennessee. Courtesy Fit Farm

'It was so calming'

Tiffany Benjamin, 41, took that further and booked a month-long stay at Fit Farm , in Castalian Springs, Tennessee.

"We e-learned three kids and stayed inside for a year and several months, and I just ate and drank and gained about 60 pounds," says Benjamin, who runs a foundation for a company in Indianapolis. "I wasn't feeling great, my pants didn't fit. I hadn't lifted anything other than a donut box. I thought, just to go someplace to not have to pick up anybody's socks and to be given a schedule of what to do sounds great."

Each morning she woke up at 6 a.m. for a pre-breakfast workout, along with eight to 10 other guests. The remainder of the day consisted of five to six hours of workouts and workshops on everything from nutrition to the 5 Love Languages , along with three healthy meals and two snacks. Think adult summer camp, but with cooking classes, interval training and unsweetened bug juice.

The camaraderie was as important as the physical fitness. At all of these resorts guests eat meals together, and work out as a group.

"Everybody was sort of on the same mission, no matter where they were in terms of health and weight," says Benjamin. "We were there to be kind to ourselves and each other. I watched the sunrise over the horizon. I petted a horse. I went hiking. It was so calming and I didn't have to make a lot of decisions."

Fit Farm retreats take place at Rock Springs Retreat Center in Castalian Springs, Tennessee. Courtesy Fit Farm

Pandemic stress takes a toll

Stress and anxiety are two of the biggest reasons why many people gain weight in general, and specifically during lockdown, says Katie Rickel, a licensed clinical psychologist and the chief executive of Structure House , in Durham, North Carolina.

"Stress, habit and boredom, and that describes the pandemic," says Rickel, adding that Structure House is booked solid three months out. "All the reasons people went to food was accentuated. Covid also sensitized people to just how delicate our health is and helped people reprioritize just how controllable health behaviors are."

Jacob Norry, 25, went to Structure House for five weeks in November. A graduate student in marine biology in Fort Lauderdale, Norry has struggled with binge eating for years. Last August he broke his ankle and his weight shot up to 280 pounds. He fell into a deep depression.

Related content Travel to the Caribbean during Covid-19: What you need to know before you go

"Covid didn't help," he says. "I live alone and not having people come over was hell."

A family friend suggested Structure House, which offers treatment for compulsive overeating, and Norry decided to go. He lost 20 pounds, most of which he has kept off.

"They really help rebuild your relationship with food," he says. "When I went into Structure House my goal was, 'I want to get back to 175.' Now my goal is, 'I want to be healthy.'"

Participants exercise during a Fit Farm retreat. Courtesy Fit Farm at Rock Springs Retreat Center

'We needed something different'

Getting healthy is what brought Laura and Danielle Prioleau to Movara. The mother-daughter duo from Twentynine Palms, California, spent nine weeks there.

"Before the pandemic I had lost nearly 60 pounds and was doing really well," says the twenty-something Danielle, who is completing her graduate studies in marriage and family therapy.

"But during the pandemic I gained weight and wasn't really getting out. I wanted to support my mom and make this a joint effort. We both wanted a lifestyle change and were tired of the dieting rigamarole. Nothing was sticking. We needed something different."

She was able to work remotely; her mother, a comptroller for a non-profit organization, took time off from work to go to Movara. "Being at home, with three kids who came home from college -- I was just cooking and playing board games," says Laura Prioleau.

Laura has lost almost 35 pounds and Danielle has dropped about 30 pounds.

These vacations don't come cheap. Rates for a new participant at Structure House start at $3,050 for a one-week visit, and about $2,500 a week in a shared one-bedroom apartment if you stay four weeks. The Ranch runs $8,600 for seven days and $10,800 for nine. At Fit Farm, a double starts at $2,399 for one week. Movara begins at $1,995 per person in a shared room ($2,569 in a single) for a week.

But many people who can afford this kind of retreat feel they're worth the investment -- though there are no guarantees they'll keep the weight off.

Because though most resorts offer some kind of return-to-the-real world program, let's face it: It's easy to eat healthfully when someone is cooking for you, leading you on hikes, and removing temptation. The challenge comes when the fairy dust settles and the real world kicks in.

But some people prevail. Hohl lost nine pounds during her month at Movara, and her body fat percentage went from 43.7 to 39.6.

When she returned to Colorado she did the Movara Home program and lost another 11 pounds. (It also helped that the "baking elf" got a full-time job, which cut down on her kitchen time.)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — Devising a superyacht concept that stands out from the rest is no easy feat nowadays, as designers continue to push against the boundaries, with more and more innovative vessel designs.

However, Rome-based Lazzarini Design Studio has managed to do just that with their latest project Saturnia.

The 100-meter vessel is designed to be made entirely of dry carbon fiber, making it 50% lighter than other similar sized yachts made from aluminum, iron or steel, according to the design team.

It will also have its own private dockyard on board, allowing tenders measuring up to 1.5 meters to moor inside.

Related content The hidden costs of owning a superyacht

Geometric lines

A rendering of the Saturnia, the latest yacht concept from the Lazzarini Design Studio. Courtesy Lazzarini Design Studio

The designers envision the yacht being powered by a hybrid propulsion consisting of twin diesel engines and a central electronic water jet system, which will produce fewer emissions and result in an estimated top speed of 30 knots.

With room for up to 20 guests, along with 20 crew members, Saturnia, which is fitted with high ceilings and huge sliding windows, is to be split across five different floors and also features a rooftop antenna area.

However, the layout isn't set in stone and the interior can be customized based on the owner's requirements. There's just the small matter of finding a buyer willing to splash out the roughly $350 million required to bring it to life.

As is customary for a superyacht design of this stature, Saturnia is to be equipped with a number of top amenities, including a glass bottom lounge area that offers stunning views of the water below and it will have a top speed of up to 30 knots,

Related content Huge superyacht squeezes down narrow Dutch canals

Private harbor

The vessel is to have its very own dockyard on board, which will allow smaller yachts to moor inside. Courtesy Lazzarini Design Studio

But there's no doubt that its dockyard, which can be accessed via two separate openings on each side of the vessel, is its most eye-catching feature.

While the Saturnia concept is still in the early stages of the design process, the project is already generating a lot of interest and the team at Lazzarini are hopeful that a buyer will come on board.

If the concept was to be picked up, it would take around two and a half years to complete, which means we could see the Saturnia become a reality by 2024.

The unveiling of Lazzarini's new concept comes after the design studio revealed a series of nature-inspired designs including the Prodigium, which was notably shaped like a shark.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — Vacation homes are one of those things that many people aspire to.

And with house prices recently seeing double-digit percentage increases in 90% of US metro areas, along with other urban centers around the world , some of those fantasy properties in less expensive destinations are starting to look pretty appealing.

Though travel restrictions are still in place in many parts of the world, it's still fun to contemplate the places we could take off to if we decided to uproot and buy our overseas dream homes.

"With restrictions in most locales lessening, the process of purchasing is becoming less burdensome and interest in buying abroad continues to expand," Joyce Lee, associate vice president for Asia Pacific at Christie's International Real Estate, tells CNN.

"Resourceful Americans have continued to buy properties abroad."

So what will a million or so US dollars get you these days? Here are a few of the properties on the market in some of the world's most popular travel destinations right now.

Phuket, Thailand

When you tire of Phuket's many beaches, relax in your private pool instead. Courtesy Coldwell Banker Phuket

Thailand 's island of Phuket has long been one of the most desirable vacation spots in all of Asia, and the pandemic hasn't changed that.

Local real estate agent Norbert Withinrich of Coldwell Banker Phuket confirms that Covid-19 may have slightly cooled the market, but not dramatically.

"In the past 15 months, we saw some second homeowners drop their prices," he says, adding that some properties even sold over the Internet without a single in-person viewing. But that won't be necessary now -- Phuket reopened to vaccinated travelers on July 1.

Among Coldwell Banker Phuket's listings within the million-dollar range is a four-bedroom, four-bathroom villa set in a gated community in the island's hills, a short drive from Bang Tao Beach.

Sitting on a 995-square-meter plot (10,710 feet), the home is laid out in a u-shape around a 15-meter pool, which the bedrooms open up to.

Price: 33,980,000 baht ($1,037,000). Find out more about the property on the Coldwell Banker Phuket website

Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic

This three-bedroom pool villa is located in Dominican Republic's Sosua Ocean Village. Courtesy Ocean Side Realty by Remax

It's not hard to see why Puerto Plata was the first part of the Dominican Republic to open up to tourism -- between the lush green valleys and the long stretches of sandy beachfront, it's basically impossible to find an unattractive view in this province.

For those looking to enjoy it from the privacy of their own home, this three-bedroom, oceanfront villa is located inside the Sosua Ocean Village gated community, just a 15-minute drive from Puerto Plata International Airport.

The villa, built in 2018, is 220 square meters and sits on a 2,088-square-meter lot. Owners can walk straight out of the breakfast nook into the electric-blue swimming pool, or follow one of the shaded footpaths down to the Atlantic.

Price: $1,050,000. More info can be found on the Ocean Side Realty by Remax listing.

Barcelona, Spain

This four-bedroom apartment is located in Barcelona's Sant Gervasi - Galvany neighborhood. Courtesy Lucas Fox

Does your second-home dream look more like a trendy urban loft apartment than a beachside villa?

The price on this design-forward, 187-square-meter apartment in Barcelona's trendy Sant Gervasi - Galvany neighborhood has just been reduced.

Featuring four bedrooms and two bathrooms, it was recently renovated, with the original features carefully maintained. And did we mention the clawfoot bathtub?

Spain has recently reopened its borders to international visitors. Combine your real estate tour with stops in the neighborhood's cool cava bars.

Price: 825,000 euros (about $971,000). For more info visit Lucas Fox International Properties

The Bahamas

Golding Cay: For those who want to build their very own dream home. Courtesy 7th Heaven Properties

If you liked social distancing so much you're hoping to keep it up after the pandemic, consider investing in your very own island.

Golding Cay is a 3.4-acre beauty just off the coast of North Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas. It's totally empty and ready for you to build a mansion, villa, tree house or any other property of your choice.

Golding Cay offers privacy and breathing room while not being completely cut off from the rest of the world; it's just 10 minutes by boat from the fishing village of Spanish Wells.

It's close enough to North Eleuthera that you can have easy access to the island's airport and infrastructure, while if you have a boat you can be in Miami in a few hours' time.

Price $800,000. Check out 7th Heaven Real Estate for more details.

Hokkaido, Japan

A log cabin in one of Japan's most luxe ski areas. Courtesy Niseko Real Estate

If you're the kind of person who hoards your vacation days to chase powder in Vail, consider buying a home on Japan's northernmost island of Hokkaido, where you'll find some of the best skiing in Asia.

This quaint, 168-square-meter (1,808 square feet) log cabin in world-famous Niseko is unfurnished, so you can be 100% in charge of decorating decisions.

Located in North Hills, the two-bedroom home is just five minutes away from the slopes of Hanazono.

Price: $888,860. More info available at Niseko Real Estate

Los Cabos, Mexico

This ocean-front, 9,000-square-foot mansion has six bedrooms. Courtesy Baja123

With 1,933 miles of shared border, Mexico has always been a popular getaway for Americans.

This includes the beachside community of Los Cabos. Located on the very southernmost tip of the Baja peninsula, it offers gorgeous views in nearly every direction.

One option for sale there: This ocean-front, 836 sqm mansion in Rosarito Beach's gated Castillos Del Mar development, which sits on a stretch of sand that's popular with surfers.

If you prefer calmer waters, there's a dreamy infinity pool that overlooks the ocean.

It's got six bedrooms, six full bathrooms and offers private beach access. According to the agent, the title is held in a club membership, which has approximately 51 years remaining on it.

Price: $1,050,000. Contact Baja123 for more info.

Ocho Rios, Jamaica

Boasting 11 bedrooms, this Jamaica mansion is 15 minutes from James Bond Beach. Courtesy Coldwell Banker Jamaica

"Over the last two years, Jamaica's real estate market has literally been on fire!" laughs Matthew Stevenson, an agent at Coldwell Banker in Jamaica. The good news here is that you can buy houses that are absolutely not on fire, although Stevenson's joy is palpable.

While Caribbean islands are never a hard sell, Stevenson has noticed one major takeaway -- Jamaicans who moved elsewhere in the world found themselves pulled homeward once the pandemic started.

According to Stevenson, many Jamaicans who had settled in countries like the US decided that they'd rather wait out the Covid storm from a cozy beach, and property sales kicked up accordingly.

The agent recommends that Americans check out areas like Ocho Rios, near the famous "James Bond Beach" -- your money will go further, but you'll also be enjoying some of the prettiest landscapes on the island.

Among the properties now on sale for under a million there is an 11-bedroom mansion in the St. Mary Country Club, just 15 minutes away from James Bond Beach. It offers ocean views and over 800 square meters of living space, with each bedroom having its own private balcony.

Related content The Americans who bought a house in Italy over the internet

St. John, Barbados

A four-bedroom home with stunning hilltop views. Courtesy Seaside Realty Inc

Who needs neighbors? If you buy this home, perched on a hilltop overlooking Martin's Bay in St. John, eastern Barbados, you won't have to worry about anybody else blocking your view.

The open-plan property has a roomy walk-in shower, a balcony perfect for watching the sunrise, an elegant garden and four bedrooms, where you can listen to the waves crashing as you fall asleep.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Editor's Note —

(CNN) — As he slipped through the kelp forest to the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, Kamau Sadiki's eyes hooked onto something resembling the item he and fellow divers had been searching for.

However, the water temperature was low at the site just off the coast of Cape Town, and visibility was poor.

Veteran diver Sadiki recalls the surge pulling him back and forth as he attempted to get closer to his "first visual of some tangible artifact" of the ship he'd heard so much about.

"It was a piece of wood material that was lodged into the rocks," he tells CNN Travel. "I hesitated before approaching it, and then the surge just carried me straight into it."

Sadiki became overcome with emotion when he grabbed hold of part of the wreckage of the Sao Jose-Paquete de Africa wreck , which sank off Cape Town while transporting over 500 enslaved Africans from Mozambique to Brazil in 1794.

It's thought that 212 of the captives, along with the crew, drowned in the incident.

"It was like I could hear the voices," says Sadiki, who was part of the dive team who located the wreck in 2015. "The screaming, the suffering, the terror, the pain and agony of all those individuals being shackled arm and leg, and then perishing in a wrecking event.

"I knew then that I wanted to help tell their story and get those silent voices into the history books."

Buried history

Divers scatter sand from Mozambique near the site where the wreckage of the Sao Jose-Paquete de Africa was found. Rodger Bosch/AFP/Getty Images

According to the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database , around 35,000 ships were used to bring over 12 million enslaved Africans across the Atlantic between the 15th and 19th centuries.

Some wouldn't survive the journey, and an estimated 500 to 1,000 of the ships, including the Sao Jos-Paquete de Africa, wrecked before reaching their destination.

However, only five have been found in the many years since then, and just two have been adequately documented.

This ultimately means that the remains, along with the stories, of many of the captives who perished lie buried at the bottom of the sea.

Sadiki, lead diving instructor for Diving With a Purpose (DWP), a non-profit organization focused on the protection, documentation and interpretation of African slave trade shipwrecks, is among those attempting to bring this painful history to the surface.

DWP was founded in 2003 by Ken Stewart, a member of the National Association of Black Scuba Divers (NABS), and Brenda Lanzendorf, a maritime archeologist for Biscayne National Park, after both participated in the 2004 documentary, "The Guerrero Project."

The film told the story of the Spanish pirate ship believed to have crashed while carrying 561 kidnapped Africans in the Biscayne National Park off the coast of Florida.

After wrapping up the project, Stewart says he contacted all the divers who appeared on screen and said, "Tired of the same old dives, let's dive with a purpose."

He then teamed up with Lanzendorf, a park archaeologist at Biscayne, where a vast number of slave ships, along with the Guerrero, had wrecked.

Stewart pledged to help her locate some of the wrecks along the area and teach other Black divers maritime archaeology techniques, while Lanzendorf promised to provide him with a vital piece of information in return.

"She said if we learned properly she'd show us where the Guerrero was," explains Stewart.

Related content The man who found the Titanic is on a new quest

Forgotten voices

An artifact from the Sao Jose-Paquete de Africa on display at the Slave Lodge museum in Cape Town. Rodger Bosch/AFP/Getty Images

However, Lanzendorf died in 2008, five years after DWP was launched, and the team are still in the dark about the exact location of the wreck.

"If she knew where (the Guerrero) was, she took it to the grave with her," he adds. "So we're still looking. "We're doing a search this summer and hopefully we can finalize that (location)."

Over the years, DWP has taken part in around 18 missions to find submerged artifacts related to Africans in the Americas, partnering with the Slave Wrecks Project (SWP), a collaboration of organizations hosted by the Smithsonian's National Museum of African American History and Culture.

Underwater archaeologist and storyteller Tara Roberts has spent the past two years following DWP, taking on a storyteller role.

Like Stewart and Sadiki, she believes that bringing to the forefront the forgotten voices of the enslaved Africans who died en route is critically important.

"At least 1.8 million Africans died in the crossing. Who talks about that? Who's mourning the lives of those people?" says Roberts.

"We'll never know their names, we'll never know anything about them. They're lost people, and nobody is grieving them. Nobody is mourning them. They're just lost. I don't think that that's okay."

Roberts first learned of DWP when she saw a picture of a group of some of the organization's Black female divers on display in 2019 at the National Museum of African American History and Culture and says she was absolutely transfixed.

"These divers are turning stereotypes on their heads just in the very nature of being who they are and doing what they're doing," she explains.

"They are disrupting these ideas of who Black people are and what Black people do. I think it's so important for people to be able to see them, to see me, to know that this work is possible that we are in this space too."

Roberts is one of 300 or so divers who've taken part in the DWP's maritime archaeology program, which is open to anyone who's a certified diver with strong underwater abilities.

"It requires some diving skills," stresses Stewart. "You can't just come. You need some dives (at least 30) under your belt."

Those who sign up must undertake a week-long training session in which they spend at least three days in the water learning how to document shipwrecks and artifacts, as well as learn underwater investigative and research techniques.

"You have to have good what we call peak buoyancy, which means you can be very still in the water," explains Sadiki, who originally met Stewart through NABS.

"That's critically important, as we have to get very close to some of these artifacts to survey them and we don't want to disturb them."

However, Stewart admits that the process can be quite grueling and isn't suited to all divers.

"Some people do it and think 'I don't want to do this anymore, because it's quite intense," he says.

Related content All-Black flight crew commemorates Juneteenth

Success stories

A mural of the Clotilda slave ship, which was successfully located in 2019, on display in Africatown, Alabama. Carmen K. Sisson/Cloudybright/Alamy

One of DWP's most recent triumphs was helping to locate the Clotilda , the last known US slave ship to bring enslaved Africans to the United States, which was located near Mobile, Alabama, back in 2019.

The ship is believed to have arrived sometime between 1859 and 1860, years after the slave trade was abolished in 1808.

"The Clotilda went illegally over to West Africa, loaded up with around 110 Africans and brought them back to Alabama," explains Roberts.

While the ship landed safely, the Clotilda was torched after the slaves were unloaded to destroy all evidence of the illegal crossing.

Many of the slaves who were brought over on the ship returned to the area when they were emancipated with the hope of returning to West Africa.

In 1866, they founded their own town, Africatown, after saving enough money to buy land from their former owners.

Some of the graves of those who survived the Clotilda voyage can be found at the Old Plateau Cemetery in Africatown. Emily Kask/The New York Times/Redux

Unlike those on board some of the other slave wrecks, the stories of those on board the Clotilda have been well documented.

In fact, a large number of the descendants of those original residents still live in Africatown, one of the first US towns founded and controlled by African Americans, and tests are being conducted to see if any of those people match with the DNA found in the wreckage.

"What's so incredible about that story is that not only was it illegal and a gross miscarriage of any sense of justice, but there's still a very strong community associated with that vessel right now," says Sadiki, who was among the divers who helped to positively locate the ship in 2019.

"So we're working with the community to help tell the story of Clotilda. "

Africatown has been plagued by industrial pollution, a declining population and many years of poverty.

"Some horrendous things have happened to that community," adds Sadiki. "But hopefully, with the discovery of the Clotilda, we can begin to bring some prosperity, peace, calm, and most importantly, justice to Africatown."

Diving a little deeper

Diving With A Purpose lead instructor Kamau Sadiki creates an in-situ drawing of a shipwreck artifact. Matt Lawrence/NOAA

Although Sao Jose and the Clotilda are among a small number of success stories, the process of finding slave wrecks is far from simple. In fact, it's a long and arduous process that can take many, many years with little guarantee of a positive outcome.

"Most wrecks start in the archives," explains Roberts. "With researchers or historians going through the records and finding out where a wreck might have happened.

"Then archaeologists become involved, helping to pinpoint where that location could be based on the records."

Once the location has been identified, trained divers are brought in to search the area for artifacts, shackles, or anything that could link it to a particular ship.

"If we find some evidence, or artifacts that are of interest, we dive a little deeper," adds Sadiki. "We go to that particular site to collect more evidence and data and information, and if it looks like a powerful shipwreck site, we do a detailed documentation of that site.

"In essence, we're trying to tell the story of these vessels by literally lifting them from the sea floor."

Roberts is recording a podcast recounting her experiences with DWP, connecting the wrecks to her own identity as an African American.

"One of the amazing things I think about this body of water is that it is the thing that connects us," she says. "It connects the African diaspora, which has been spread all over the place.

"I think a lot of African Americans have a real connection to the continent that is beyond the way that the media portrays Africa.

"It feels like these ships provide a bridge for us to cross to really begin to learn about what came before."

Reclaiming the past

DWP founder Ken Stewart launched the Youth Diving With a Purpose program, pictured in 2013, in order to get young people involved in the project. DWP

Roberts believes that by digging into the pasts of those who perished on the boat and reclaiming those stories, healing can begin.

"I think that much of the way that we (African Americans) see ourselves is through a lens of trauma, pain and sadness," she says.

"Those kinds of ideas and feelings and experiences are often the way that black folks' stories are told.

"I don't think that that's the full of us. And I'm much more interested in the complexity of our story. Our story doesn't start in slavery."

This sentiment is shared by Stewart, also a co-founder of the Tennessee Aquatic Project and Development Group, who has focused a lot of time on getting young people involved in the organization, as well as diving in general, noting that it's simply unaffordable for some.

He began developing Youth Diving With a Purpose (YDWP,) aimed at those between 15 and 23, back in 2011.

For Stewart, having the younger generation on board is vitally important, as he feels that many simply aren't aware of the full extent of slavery.

"Here in the US, our (African American) history has been ignored," he adds. "They don't really teach anything about slavery in schools.

"And I think if you don't teach your history, you're bound to repeat it. That's been proven over and over again.

"It's important that we teach the next generation. Those are the ones that are going to turn this thing around."

Now age 76, Stewart remains heavily involved with DWP's missions, but is acutely aware that he'll need to start winding things down at some point.

However, there's one very important goal he hopes to achieve before stepping back from the organization.

"My tenure with DWP is coming to a close, and I'd sure like to end it by finding the Guerrero," he admits. "But what I'd really like to do is to educate and bring on some young people so we can keep DWP going.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — I've been a transatlantic avgeek for decades, regularly flying back and forth from the US to the UK. I always welcome a new entrant into the arena, but many of the newcomers don't really have a strong business plan and their efforts don't survive the harsh economics of the North Atlantic, particularly in the winter.

That's not going to be the case with JetBlue. The US airline's inaugural transatlantic flight landed at London Heathrow on August 12. I was on board, and I reckon this new offering is here to stay, despite the effects of the pandemic.

JetBlue has been working towards this transatlantic flight for the past two years. It's got a new Airbus A321 Long Range aircraft with an interior specifically imagined for this purpose.

On board, the airline has crafted an experience that is equal to the competition and in many cases beats it hands down -- what's more, it is comparably cheaper than other products on offer.

On board experience

The Airbus A321 is a small aircraft, but JetBlue has made sure it's a comfortable experience for transatlantic travelers. Chris J. Ratcliffe/Bloomberg/Getty Images

The Airbus A321 is a narrow bodied aircraft -- a replacement in many ways for the 757 which opened up lots of transatlantic routes between secondary cities, some say these single aisle planes can feel a bit claustrophobic on six hour flights -- but JetBlue has done a good job in making use of the space available.

While the cabin does feel a bit cramped, the airline's extraordinary attention to detail has delivered an inflight experience that makes it as comfortable as possible whether in Mint (business) or Core (economy).

Crucially, JetBlue hasn't just taken its existing domestic service and run it international. The team has redesigned the seats, and the result is one of the best business class seats I've ever flown on across the Atlantic. The mattress topper built into the Mint seat gives firm support when the seat reclines, without the joins of the seat digging in.

Also, Mint seats are in a reverse fishbone configuration, with plenty of storage -- although this configuration is not so good for people traveling together in Mint, as you can't properly sit next to each other.

On the plus side, here's also lots of room around your shoulders.

There's also free Wi-Fi for all passengers, which worked well throughout the flight.

The food is very good too -- think restaurant quality. I think they're going to have to work a bit on the service, it was a bit slow. But it was nice to see food served on plates again. Airlines are moving away from the pre-packaged model they switched to during the pandemic.

JetBlue has always striven to be different, to be cool, and I think they've achieved that here.

It's not your father's airline. It's not a Chevrolet. It's something sporty and cool.

Related content United Airlines to introduce more inclusive cabin crew hair and makeup rules

Cost efficient

The business class seat was very comfortable according to Richard Quest. Chris J. Ratcliffe/Bloomberg/Getty Images

One of the benefits of flying with a small aircraft -- there are just 114 regular seats on board alongside 24 business class suites -- is JetBlue isn't going to have the Norwegian problem. It'll be easy to fill every seat -- plus a small aircraft is highly fuel efficient.

Cost-wise, JetBlue's competitive ticket pricing has already brought down its competitors' rates for New York to London flights.

If you wanted to travel with JetBlue from New York to London in economy on Tuesday August 17, tickets start at $202, according to a search on JetBlue's website at time of writing.

British Airways economy tickets for the same route on the same day start at $502, while United's are from $1,085, according to their respective websites.

Generally speaking, the return ticket is still costly whatever the airline -- that's because westbound across the Atlantic doesn't have the same demand right now: if you're traveling from London to New York, it's because you've got to travel and you're part of a category of people who are allowed to travel to the US, which is still a pretty slim group.

While fully vaccinated Americans can currently enter the UK without the need for quarantine, the US travel ban on UK and European arrivals remains firmly in place.

Once that's lifted, prices should go down for westbound transatlantic flights too.

The message from Heathrow Airport and JetBlue, not to mention the other airlines operating the usually busy transatlantic travel corridor, is an emphatic plea to open up to fully vaccinated travelers.

"The US government should take a risk-based approach to travel," JetBlue CEO Robin Hayes told me before we boarded. "Covid infection rates in Europe are lower than many other countries in the world where you can fly from today."

The issue is with fears around the Delta variant, the US government remains very hesitant to open up borders and risk any ill effects.

Still, the US needs to find a way to do it, so it will happen -- it's just a question of when. I thought it was going to happen by the end of the summer, I think maybe early autumn now.

Related content Travel to the UK during Covid-19: What you need to know before you go

Time will tell

Whether JetBlue makes a lasting impact on the transatlantic corridor remains to be seen. Chris J. Ratcliffe/Bloomberg/Getty Images

Time will tell whether JetBlue can make a major, long-lasting impact on the North Atlantic. Of course the airline still has some refining to do, to iron out any clunkiness.

And right now, there's just one JetBlue return flight operating daily -- departing JFK in the evening on a red eye and then returning from Heathrow to New York the following afternoon.

This schedule is due to be ramped up, with flights between JFK and Gatwick set to commence in late September, and flights between Boston and the UK scheduled for Summer 2022.

But will JetBlue match the multiple flights a day offered by the likes of British Airways and United?

Travelers will happily pay less for a ticket if they can -- but they also want multiple options if possible.

Plus, travelers who are loyal to a particular airline and collect miles need more of an incentive to switch allegiances.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dyersville, Iowa (CNN) — Is this heaven? No, It's Iowa.

It's the place where dreams came true for baseball fans, as the Chicago White Sox and New York Yankees emerged from the cornfields to play the first official Major League Baseball game in the state on Thursday night on a specially built field next to the original "Field of Dreams" movie site in Dyersville.

Based on W. P. Kinsella's novel "Shoeless Joe," the 1989 film "Field of Dreams" starring Kevin Costner is considered by many to be one of the finest sports movies of all time for how it captures the timeless nature and universal appeal of baseball. Costner attended Thursday's game.

In the film, Ray Kinsella, an Iowa farmer, portrayed by Costner, hears a voice beckoning through the swaying cornfields: "If you build it, he will come." Convinced carving a baseball diamond into the crop will summon the spirit of legendary ballplayer Shoeless Joe Jackson, he sets out to do just that with the support of his wife, Annie (Amy Madigan) and daughter Karin (Gaby Hoffman), despite the financial hardship it incurs.

The site of the movie "Field of Dreams" has long drawn curious visitors and baseball fans. Joshua Mellin

The movie expertly strikes all the right emotional chords, and communicates what drives our dreams. Setting off and letting a voice guide the way. Opening up to the world, discovering what connects us and continuing the cycle. It's what's drawn generations to the Field of Dreams for over 30 years now.

Anticipation had only grown for the game after being delayed last year by the pandemic . The contest was originally slated between the White Sox and St. Louis Cardinals in 2020, after a scheduling issue precluded the Yankees as envisioned . The game was rescheduled so fans could be included, and it didn't disappoint -- the White Sox won a comeback thriller 9-8 with a Tim Anderson walk-off homer into the cornfields.

Since the movie premiered, the original baseball field and farmhouse film site has remained a significant touchstone for the entire state of Iowa, drawing curious visitors and baseball fans from all over.

Kevin Costner, who starred in the film, was at the new stadium on Wednesday before Iowa's first MLB game. Joshua Mellin

People will come, Ray. People will most definitely come

Yankees fans Mike Dempsey and his father Frank, a Vietnam veteran, drove out from New York for the game to celebrate Mike's 50th birthday, after he'd played in a tournament at the site a few years previously. To mark the occasion they decided to have a "last catch" together and vowed to retire from baseball together, as father and son.

Normally, the original field the movie was filmed on is open from dawn to dusk for shag batting practice, to have a catch or see "the greatest show on dirt," the Ghost Player games (a Harlem-Globetrotters-meets-baseball comedy routine hosted on scheduled Saturdays for free that's returning this month after a two-year pandemic hiatus.)

To access the new field, currently dubbed "MLB Stadium," attending fans entered at the original Field of Dreams from the film, where they could dip themselves in "magic waters," look around, even have a catch on the field, before being summoned by some familiar voices to pass through the centerfield cornfield on a path that leads to the MLB Stadium, complete with a corn maze in the shape of MLB's silhouette logo separating the two fields.

The new field was rebuilt this year for the special game. Locals hope it will become an annual event. Joshua Mellin

Constructed first in 2019, dismantled in 2020, and rebuilt this year for the game, MLB Stadium was built with seating for a potential capacity of up to 8,000 people, or nearly double the town of Dyersville's entire population. Tickets for the game were allotted via a lottery limited to fans who have Iowa zip codes. The lucky chosen few were able to purchase up to two tickets and one parking pass. The cheapest resell tickets were available on StubHub in the week before for around $1,000 each, and some prime seats still had asking prices up to $10,000.

Perched atop her car less than a mile from the farm site with binoculars in hand, Jes Henize hoped to catch a view of the house from the movie Wednesday after planning to visit on her first trip to Iowa on a cross country trip from Georgia to Oregon.

Unaware of the game, she "just got lucky and found out the White Sox and Yankees were playing, by pure coincidence." Even though access was limited to ticket holders, Henize happily proclaimed "I will remember this forever," gazing at the ballpark's flood lights illuminating the cornfields.

The new stadium illuminated on Wednesday night before the game. Joshua Mellin

A dream fulfilled

All the attention is a much needed boon for the rural ballpark recovering from diminished visitors during the Covid-19 pandemic. The city's three hotels were booked full for the game months in advance and stores stocked up with souvenirs, but the hope is the fanfare around the game will reignite passions around the movie and tourism to Dyersville for years to come.

Shelly Kalb, the general manager of the Comfort Inn Dyersville near Field Of Dreams, says despite the fact they've been booked up for over a year her phone still has not stopped ringing, and they're already booked for the same dates next year in anticipation the game will become an annual affair.

Local businesses are already seeing the benefit. Robyn Maiers, one of the owners of Just For You, a custom T-shirt and souvenir shop in Dyersville, has had her staff "busting butt printing shirts" with their popular "If You Build It" designs, saying they were "working day and night to fulfill all their orders."

Murray Cook, MLB Field & Stadium Consultant, who helped oversee construction of the new stadium, likened the process of bringing the new stadium to life as "just like Ray Kinsella and his daughter did on the tractor years ago."

A corn maze in the shape of the MLB logo is part of the new ball field. Joshua Mellin

Complete with bullpens designed to resemble Chicago's Old Comiskey Park and a unique manual scoreboard, the stadium also features a 16-foot removable panel in right field that allowed the players to enter the playing field through the corn as in the film.

The logistics of ferrying the players to a one-off game 200 miles from the nearest MLB city (Milwaukee) was no easy feat either, with the teams flying in from finishing their respective series to the airport in Dubuque, Iowa, on game-day, where buses whisked them through the cornfields to Dyersville.

A sight that likely rivaled the vision of the Lansing Family Farm peeked in the final shot of the film, as thousands of cars line the single-lane farmland road to visit the cornfield-framed ballpark. The Field of Dreams game joins other notable locales MLB has hosted unique events in recent years: The Fort Bragg Game in 2016, London in 2019, and the annual Little League Classic in Williamsport since 2017.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — If the "baking elf" hadn't spent the pandemic whipping up sweet confections, Frances Hohl might not have gained 25 pounds.

But the magical pastry chef -- aka Hohl's 19-year-old daughter, Casmere, who was doing college remotely -- calmed her Covid anxiety by baking fabulous creations almost every night: Strawberry shortcakes and chocolate chip cookies and French macarons and lemon meringue pies. She once even made a wedding cake. Never mind that no marriage was taking place.

Hohl couldn't ignore her daughter's efforts. Nor did she want to. "Wedding cake is my favorite," says Hohl, 56, a writer in Steamboat Springs, Colorado.

And that is how, 11 months into lockdown, Hohl found herself at Movara, a fitness resort in Ivins, Utah, trekking through rust-colored canyons with sand so thick she was practically wading in it. Her calves ached. Her shoulders throbbed. Blisters erupted between her toes. Still, in the afternoons she did strength or cardio classes, along with massages and other body treatments -- all in an effort to take off the pounds she had amassed.

"I just felt so uncomfortable in my body," says Hohl.

Many people felt similarly after a year spent ordering takeout, bingeing Netflix and working from home -- often facing enormous stress, anxiety and depression. According to a March research letter published in JAMA Network Open, Americans gained more than half a pound every ten days of lockdown.

Movara Fitness Resort in Ivins, Utah, was recently sold out 18 weeks in a row. Courtesy Movara Fitness Resort

And the urge to drop pandemic pounds extends beyond the United States.

Slimmeria , a weight loss, detox and fitness retreat operator in the United Kingdom, has been sold out since May. "I think due to the Covid situation people are taking their health very seriously and started practicing self help," says Slimmeria owner Galia Grainger.

, is seeing the same thing. Caroline Sylger Jones, the founder of retreat guide and review site Queen of Retreats , is seeing the same thing.

"Most of our UK and European retreats that have been able to run have sold out this summer, although everyone says bookings are last minute," she says. "Definitely people are looking to lose their lockdown weight and get fitter."

Now that the world is opening up, weight loss and fitness resorts are reaping the benefits of those goals.

Looking to lose the 'Covid 19'

Hilton Head Health , in South Carolina, has seen a 30% increase in new inquiries since mid-February, with a six- to eight-week waiting list. Due to customer demand, The Ranch in Malibu, California, recently launched The Ranch 9.0, a nine-day experience that adds two days to its signature week-long program. And We Care , in Desert Hot Springs, California, is so busy that they're considering opening a branch on the East Coast.

Movara in Utah was recently sold out 18 weeks in a row.

"And there's no sign of it slowing down," says Elaine Hartrick, Movara's general manager. "Guests arrive each week talking about how they've gained the 'Covid 19' or the 'Covid 25' or 'Covid 30'. People recognized obesity as a risk factor for complications from Covid, and they wanted to change their lifestyle so they wouldn't become another statistic. It was a wake-up call for so many people."

Related content Find out which countries are welcoming US tourists back

Caren Kabot, the founder of Solo Escapes , a travel company that focuses on spa and wellness, says people are also looking to rest and reset after a year of confinement.

"They're like, where do I start? What do I need to do? I say, plan at least one week where you can focus on creating balance in your life while shedding a few extra pounds."

Fit Farm offers fitness and weight loss programs in Tennessee. Courtesy Fit Farm

'It was so calming'

Tiffany Benjamin, 41, took that further and booked a month-long stay at Fit Farm , in Castalian Springs, Tennessee.

"We e-learned three kids and stayed inside for a year and several months, and I just ate and drank and gained about 60 pounds," says Benjamin, who runs a foundation for a company in Indianapolis. "I wasn't feeling great, my pants didn't fit. I hadn't lifted anything other than a donut box. I thought, just to go someplace to not have to pick up anybody's socks and to be given a schedule of what to do sounds great."

Each morning she woke up at 6 a.m. for a pre-breakfast workout, along with eight to 10 other guests. The remainder of the day consisted of five to six hours of workouts and workshops on everything from nutrition to the 5 Love Languages , along with three healthy meals and two snacks. Think adult summer camp, but with cooking classes, interval training and unsweetened bug juice.

The camaraderie was as important as the physical fitness. At all of these resorts guests eat meals together, and work out as a group.

"Everybody was sort of on the same mission, no matter where they were in terms of health and weight," says Benjamin. "We were there to be kind to ourselves and each other. I watched the sunrise over the horizon. I petted a horse. I went hiking. It was so calming and I didn't have to make a lot of decisions."

Fit Farm retreats take place at Rock Springs Retreat Center in Castalian Springs, Tennessee. Courtesy Fit Farm

Pandemic stress takes a toll

Stress and anxiety are two of the biggest reasons why many people gain weight in general, and specifically during lockdown, says Katie Rickel, a licensed clinical psychologist and the chief executive of Structure House , in Durham, North Carolina.

"Stress, habit and boredom, and that describes the pandemic," says Rickel, adding that Structure House is booked solid three months out. "All the reasons people went to food was accentuated. Covid also sensitized people to just how delicate our health is and helped people reprioritize just how controllable health behaviors are."

Jacob Norry, 25, went to Structure House for five weeks in November. A graduate student in marine biology in Fort Lauderdale, Norry has struggled with binge eating for years. Last August he broke his ankle and his weight shot up to 280 pounds. He fell into a deep depression.

Related content Travel to the Caribbean during Covid-19: What you need to know before you go

"Covid didn't help," he says. "I live alone and not having people come over was hell."

A family friend suggested Structure House, which offers treatment for compulsive overeating, and Norry decided to go. He lost 20 pounds, most of which he has kept off.

"They really help rebuild your relationship with food," he says. "When I went into Structure House my goal was, 'I want to get back to 175.' Now my goal is, 'I want to be healthy.'"

Participants exercise during a Fit Farm retreat. Courtesy Fit Farm at Rock Springs Retreat Center

'We needed something different'

Getting healthy is what brought Laura and Danielle Prioleau to Movara. The mother-daughter duo from Twentynine Palms, California, spent nine weeks there.

"Before the pandemic I had lost nearly 60 pounds and was doing really well," says the twenty-something Danielle, who is completing her graduate studies in marriage and family therapy.

"But during the pandemic I gained weight and wasn't really getting out. I wanted to support my mom and make this a joint effort. We both wanted a lifestyle change and were tired of the dieting rigamarole. Nothing was sticking. We needed something different."

She was able to work remotely; her mother, a comptroller for a non-profit organization, took time off from work to go to Movara. "Being at home, with three kids who came home from college -- I was just cooking and playing board games," says Laura Prioleau.

Laura has lost almost 35 pounds and Danielle has dropped about 30 pounds.

These vacations don't come cheap. Rates for a new participant at Structure House start at $3,050 for a one-week visit, and about $2,500 a week in a shared one-bedroom apartment if you stay four weeks. The Ranch runs $8,600 for seven days and $10,800 for nine. At Fit Farm, a double starts at $2,399 for one week. Movara begins at $1,995 per person in a shared room ($2,569 in a single) for a week.

But many people who can afford this kind of retreat feel they're worth the investment -- though there are no guarantees they'll keep the weight off.

Because though most resorts offer some kind of return-to-the-real world program, let's face it: It's easy to eat healthfully when someone is cooking for you, leading you on hikes, and removing temptation. The challenge comes when the fairy dust settles and the real world kicks in.

But some people prevail. Hohl lost nine pounds during her month at Movara, and her body fat percentage went from 43.7 to 39.6.

When she returned to Colorado she did the Movara Home program and lost another 11 pounds. (It also helped that the "baking elf" got a full-time job, which cut down on her kitchen time.)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — Every Friday, Ross Harrington, a car dealership service manager in Melbourne, heads to a local lunch shop to pick up a couple of deep-fried dim sims, kicking off his weekend dim sim routine.

Harrington is the founder of Dim Sims 4 Lyfe , a Facebook community made up of about 5,000 dim sim enthusiasts who share their experiences and innovative recipes -- dim sims on pizza, for example.

They aren't alone in their obsession.

Dim sims, or "dimmies," are a variant of the traditional Chinese dumpling. Served in a variety of ways, including steamed and fried, they first gained popularity in the 1940s and have since become an iconic dish in Melbourne and beyond.

So who invented them? Turns out it's complicated.

Chinese Australian businessman William Chen Wing Young is often credited as being the father of dim sim.

Elizabeth Chong, Chen's daughter and a well-known Chinese Australian cooking show presenter, tells CNN Travel otherwise.

"It's often been erroneously recorded that he invented the dim sim and had a restaurant called Wing Lee. He did not invent the dim sim," says the 90-year-old celebrity chef.

"But yes, if it weren't for my father dim sim wouldn't be what it is. It wouldn't be an Australian fast-food icon."

The origins of dim sim

Australia's dim sim story began in 1942, when Chen realized that a number of elderly Chinese men who had come to Australia to work during the gold rush of the 1800s were left jobless.

"They were like the leftovers from the goldfields days. They didn't make it back home to China and were too old for heavy works," says Chong.

At the same time, Chen noticed how popular Cantonese dim sum had become in Australia. ("Dim sum" refers to the whole collection of dumplings and delicacies served with tea. Among the many dim sum dishes, siu mai -- a flowerpot-shaped pork and prawn dumpling -- was especially popular.)

Dim sims, which come in many shapes and sizes, are usually fried or steamed. iStockphoto/Getty Images

Chen came up with an idea: If he could mass produce siu mai, these men could sell them on food trucks and earn a living.

But siu mai was too much of a mouthful for Australians to pronounce back in the 1940s. Chen called it "dim sim" instead -- which has the same meaning as dim sum, but in a different Canton dialect.

"So he kind of combined philanthropy with the business," adds Chong. "They started with four women making them by hand -- my mother was one of them. Then the popularity grew and we started to employ more and more ladies."

Chen called the business Wing Lee -- Wing was his middle name and Lee was his wife's maiden name.

But the hearty dumplings weren't propelled into stardom until his son stepped in, albeit accidentally.

A day of slacking launches dim sim to the masses

"At that time, my eldest brother Tom checked into the business. My father asked Tom to deliver a box of dim sims to an elderly Chinese gentleman who lived in Cheltenham (a Melbourne suburb)," says Chong.

"While my brother was on his way to deliver them, he decided it was such a fine day, he'd stop and say hello to his good friend Joe, a Greek guy who owned a fish and chip shop near the Mordialloc area."

The two friends ended up going fishing. Chong says when they got back, Tom told Joe, "I've got a box of these dim sims. If you like, I'll cook them in your shop and you can have them for lunch."

Ross Harrington, founder of a Facebook community dedicated to dim sims, says he eats them every weekend. Courtesy Ross Harrington

Joe decided to deep fry them, as "that's the only way you could (cook them) in a fish and chip shop," says Chong.

Joe said they were wonderful so Tom, instead of continuing with the delivery, left the box of dim sims there.

"Before the next day was over, Joe rung Tom at Wing Lee and said every one of his mates were asking where he got these dim sims," says Chong.

As their popularity increased, the factory couldn't keep up with demand.

So Chen engaged a German engineer to design the first ever dim sim machine to churn out these delights by the thousands.

"I was a little girl then," recalls Chong. "I remember my father talking into late nights with the engineer about how he wanted the pastry done and how the machine should churn all the ingredients."

The results were an immediate hit, she says, making Wing Lee Dim Sim the first Chinese factory to commercialize a fast food for the masses.

"Every fish and chip shop was clamoring for them. Supermarkets were now asking for them. So it wasn't long before dim sims become an institution at every fish and chip shop in Victoria," says Chong.

Dim sim vs. siu mai

Chef Mak Kwai Pui, owner of Hong Kong's most famous dim sum restaurant, shares a few essential dining tips.

Though similar, dim sim isn't the same as the siu mai you would normally find in a Chinese restaurant.

Dim sims are bigger. They have thicker skin to withstand freezing and delivery. The ingredients also differ.

"It was during World War II when meat was scarce. As my father was supplying the munition factory with dim sims for lunch, he was granted a few more food coupons. But it was only a limited amount so he had to change the recipe," says Chong.

"I think the meats he used were pork and veal. He had to fill up with more vegetables, like celery and English cabbages. We didn't have Chinese cabbages. And a bit of onion for flavors. It's still delicious."

Chong remembers fondly how Australians embraced her father's dim sims.

"At one time, a lot of young Australians traveled to London. We used to get letters back at Wing Lee that said, 'Please can you send us some dim sims?' So I think the dim sims -- which means 'to touch the heart' in Chinese, really did touch the hearts of the Australians.

"It's an Aussie thing now. People would buy fish and chips and have a dozen fried dim sims, too," says Chong.

'It's a part of Australian history'

Harrington, 52, says he had his first taste of dim sim when he was 10 years old. For him, it was an acquired taste.

"I wanted to see what all the fuss was about. It was steamed and loaded with soy sauce; I didn't like it. I persevered and eventually grew to love them," Harrington tells CNN Travel.

"As you get older, things that you grew up with either disappear or become unattainable. Dim sims haven't changed and eating them as an adult brings back fond childhood memories. Everyone has a story of where they get their favorite dim sim from."

With that in mind, he started the Dim Sims 4 Lyfe Facebook group.

Dim sims on the barbie? Why not. Courtesy Ross Harrington

"Through Dim Sims 4 Lyfe, I have experienced a lot of good dim sims through recommendations from other group members. More importantly, I have brought a lot of people together from all walks of life, to celebrate something so simple yet something that means a lot to so many.

"I feel that if I can maintain the popularity of the dim sim, then I can help to ensure that some of these original Chinese restaurants can remain in business and as new generations take over it will give them a reason to keep them going. They need to be preserved as part of our Australian history," says Harrington.

Harrington's favorite dim sim memory took place about 30 years ago, when his wife took him to the South Melbourne Market to try their famous dim sims.

"They were big and peppery. I stood in line behind about 30 people to get my order and it was worth the wait," he recalls.

These days, after a dim sim lunch on Friday, or "Fryday" as Harrington calls it, he will also have dim sims at the football matches during the weekends. He says he sometimes makes his own dim sims with "premium ingredients to perfect the ultimate taste."

"The dim sim is definitely an iconic Australian dish," he says. "The dim sim reminds Australia that we have always been a country that welcomes others and isn't afraid to adopt new cultures and cuisines."

What happened to the original dim sim company?

Elizabeth Chong was awarded the Queen's Birthday Honour medal in 2019 for her services to Australia's hospitality sector. Asanka Ratnayake/Getty Images

Chen's company, Wing Lee, failed to achieve the longevity of the Australian dumpling he created. After he retired in the late 1950s, the company was put on the stock market and taken over by two other brands, Marathon and Chien Wah.

Shops and factories -- big and small -- have since created their own versions of dim sims.

But over the years Chong and her family have continued to impact the Australian food scene in other ways.

She started a Chinese cooking school in the 1950s, first as a small class for neighbors. She has since taught more than 35,000 students.

Then she was a popular Chinese food show presenter in the 1990s and 2000s, one of the very first Asian faces to promote Chinese cuisines on television. in 2019, she received the Queen's Birthday Order of Australia award for her services to the hospitality sector and promotion of Chinese cuisine.

"There is a Chinese restaurant in almost every corner of Australia. Although Chinese food is always loved, it is not always understood. I put a different face on it and showed people that Chinese food was much more than just something to fill the stomach," says Chong.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — The United States' railroad system is getting a boost from its northern neighbor.

One of Western Canada's most-decorated luxury scenic train lines, the Rocky Mountaineer , launched its first US route on August 15 through its namesake mountain range, running two-day, one-night trips back and forth between Denver, Colorado, and Moab, Utah.

The new route, known as Rockies to the Red Rocks , joins the line's three rail offerings in Western Canada (Vancouver to Banff, Lake Louise and Jasper) and takes passengers through several distinct regions of Colorado before cruising into the heart of canyon country in Southern Utah.

Rocky Moutaineer's Rockies to the Red Rocks route stretches between Denver, Colorado, and Moab, Utah. Salvador Lopez/Emotion Cinema

The US, while not known for its train travel, does already have a handful of dedicated scenic trains in the West. The Durango & Silverton Narrow Gauge Rail, for example, or Amtrak's Coast Starlight between Washington and California.

None, however, quite fit the same bill as the Rocky Mountaineer, whose unique operations, food and beverage program and luxury-focused service have made it a model for the industry.

Since its inception in 1990, it has been honored by the World Travel Awards as the "World's Leading Travel Experience by Train" eight times, and in 2020, it won a Globe Travel Award for "Best Rail Company."

US President Joe Biden's new infrastructure bill calls for an investment of $66 billion into Amtrak and America's railways. But before any of that can come to fruition, Rocky Mountaineer is off and running. So what can we expect from its debut in America? Come along as we explore the new route.

An overnight train without sleeper cars

Depending on your perspective, the most differentiating thing about the Rocky Mountaineer's operations is either its best competitive advantage or its worst Achilles' heel: Although it's a multi-day trip, you don't actually sleep on the train.

In fact, there are no sleeper cars at all on any of the Rocky Mountaineer's routes. Instead, guests disembark the train each evening and spend the night in a local hotel.

The train featues expansive windows and only travels during the day to maximize the scenery. Rocky Mountaineer

The purpose of this setup is two-fold: To allow guests to get a better night's sleep (no rocking and rolling), and to ensure darkness does not cloak the scenery.

"Our routes showcase some of the most spectacular scenery North America has to offer," said Nicole Ford, communications director at Rocky Mountaineer. "Our trains only travel during the day and feature oversized windows so guests do not miss a moment of the ever-changing landscapes."

Another differentiating factor for this Rocky Mountaineer route is its food and beverage program, which forgoes a classic dining car for an eat-at-your-seat approach with individual tray tables. Each row is treated as a table at a restaurant, with personalized service, scheduled meals and drinks on demand.

Passengers on the two-day, one-night journey stay overnight in a choice of hotels. The overnight stay is included in the fare. Salvador Lopez/Emotion Cinema

The menu features local ingredients, many from areas the train passes through, such as short ribs braised with beer from Epic Brewing, charcuterie boards made with Colorado bison, elk and venison, seasonal vegetables from Colorado growers and desserts from Aspen Baking Company.

The drink menu for the launch doesn't showcase any regional wine (it's from California and Oregon instead), but it does offer Colorado beers (Denver Beer Company). Rocky Mountaineer said the beverage selection could continue to change throughout the inaugural season as it looks to establish more local partnerships.

There are two classes of service on the Rockies to the Red Rocks itinerary: SilverLeaf ($1,250 per person) and SilverLeaf Plus ($1,645). Both include all meals and drinks -- both alcoholic and non-alcoholic -- seats adjacent to oversized glass-dome windows and an overnight hotel stay in Glenwood Springs at either the Glenwood Hotel Colorado, the Hotel Denver or the Glenwood Hot Springs Resort.

The SilverLeaf Plus adds an additional course during meals and exclusive access to a separate lounge that features a mixologist who makes craft cocktails with premium spirits.

Though meals are enjoyed at your seat, there is reason to get up and walk around -- each car, regardless of class, has a small outdoor viewing platform where you can get a blast of fresh mountain air.

The train passes through Eagle County, Colorado. Salvador Lopez/Emotion Cinema

The journey -- mountains, hot springs and canyons

The Rocky Mountaineer can be ridden in either direction, but here, we focus on the east-to-west route.

The journey begins in Denver, where passengers board the Rocky Mountaineer at the Union Pacific Railyard at 9 a.m. From there, the train sets off for an eight-hour, 175-mile ride to Glenwood Springs.

As you slowly roll out of downtown Denver (5,280 feet above sea level), wave goodbye to the skyscrapers and bustling city life. You won't encounter either of them again.

The train breaks free of the metropolitan area and begins climbing into the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains via the "Big 10 Curve." It was built in the early 1900s as a switchback to help trains climb the steep terrain. At about the middle of the curve, two dozen rail cars filled with cement are permanently parked alongside the track as a wind block. If you visit one of the outdoor viewing platforms at this time, you may experience for yourself the region's notorious winds.

Related content Remote Big Bend sheds a different light on the US frontier

After the climb into the Rockies, you'll come to the Moffatt Tunnel. It's been open for nearly a hundred years (since 1928), and it cuts through the Continental Divide at 9,239 feet above sea level to the base of Winter Park Ski Area.

Just down the tracks from there, in Granby, you'll pick up the mighty Colorado River and follow it, more or less, for the remainder of your journey to Moab. Watch as the green and yellow ranch lands and expansive valleys give way to a series of canyons, the first day culminating with a ride through Glenwood Canyon.

Sixteen miles in length, it is one of the most scenic stretches of road and track in the entire state of Colorado, with jagged walls that rise to more than 1,300 feet tall. It serves as the gateway to Glenwood Springs , where you'll disembark for the night with a chance to explore its downtown area and soak in a hot spring

Passengers spend the night in their choice of three hotels in Glenwood Springs, Colorado. Courtesy Emotion Cinema

The next day's route between Glenwood Springs and Moab is 194 miles, longer than the previous day. But, because this ride follows a decline in elevation, the trip takes only five hours.

Yesterday, you got to see the how the city of Denver and the Front Range transition into the high elevation of the Rocky Mountains. Now, you'll discover how Colorado's Western Slope transitions from high alpine forests to red rock cliffs and canyons.

The convergence takes place west of Glenwood in the Grand Valley, where the 11,000-foot Grand Mesa and its thick, green forests are juxtaposed with the beige, sandstone cliffs of the Book Cliffs Mountain Range.

As you enter the Grand Valley, you'll pass through the small town of Palisade , home to the Palisade Fruit & Wine Byway , with more than 30 wineries and about two dozen peach orchards butted up against the Book Cliffs.

From there, it's 25 miles through Ruby Canyon and its red sandstone cliffs, an area only accessible by train, foot or raft. The train then crosses into Utah, and the Rocky Mountains give way to the expansive desert that leads into Moab.

Related content Visitors turned away as national park fills up in Utah

Using the train as a launching point

Traditional train travel wisdom says it's the journey and not the destination that matters. Luckily, Rocky Mountaineer's approach is a little more modern and a little more inclusive.

Obviously, the two-day experience on the train is the main dish, but Rocky Mountaineer encourages its guests to spend more time in its destinations with pre- and post-trip planning services.

When booking, it will help guests make a bigger trip of it by arranging extended stays at the origin and destination. It also partners with tour companies to facilitate adventures in the surrounding areas.

The train passes close to attractions such as Arches National Park in Utah. The rail line offers add-on tours to the park and other spots on either end of the journey. Courtesy Rocky Mountaineer

There are package options for add-on tours, activities and hotel stays in Denver and Moab, including Arches and Canyonlands National Parks, as well as within-reach destinations such as Bryce Canyon, Lake Powell, Salt Lake City and Las Vegas.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@(CNN) — It may not be as long or as well-known as Russia's iconic Trans-Siberian Railway . But international recognition is long overdue for the 1,394-kilometer (865-mile) Trans-Iranian Railway.

On July 25, the railway was one of 33 new sites awarded World Heritage status by the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), joining world famous locations such as Venice, Machu Picchu in Peru, Yellowstone National Park in the US and Ecuador's Galapagos Islands.

Linking the Persian Gulf with the Caspian Sea, the strategically important project was a relative latecomer in railway terms. It opened in 1938 after 11 years of hugely challenging construction.

Although not widely known outside Iran today, it can legitimately claim to be one of the greatest engineering feats of the 20th century.

The railway -- which carries both freight and passenger trains -- runs roughly north-east from Bandar-e Eman Khomeyni (formerly Bandar Shahpur) via Ahvaz, Qom and Tehran to Bandar Torkaman (previously Bandar Shah).

No fewer than 224 tunnels total more than 76 kilometers in length, while 174 viaducts and 186 smaller bridges carry the railway across deep ravines and river valleys as it climbs to two 2,134-meter (7,000-foot) summits.

One of 33 sites added to the UNESCO World Heritage list this year, the 1,394-kilometer Trans-Iranian Railway is an engineering marvel. From Hossein Javadi/UNESCO

Negotiating two formidable mountain ranges required not just steep gradients, but ingenious civil engineering to gain height via spiral tunnels and giant leaps over isolated valleys in fiercely hot, rugged terrain unsuited to railway building.

Countless geological and engineering challenges had to be overcome to complete the line. Some tunnels had to be abandoned during construction after salt and gypsum deposits were found, forcing new routes to be located, while another tunnel through volcanic pumice could be neither blasted nor dug out with picks and shovels.

Related content These are the new UNESCO World Heritage Sites

Another tunnel encountered a cavernous void under the mountains, a problem solved by building a bridge inside the tunnel.

Day-to-day problems included a lack of fresh water for mixing good quality mortar and concrete and keeping workers and train crews hydrated.

Lengthy gradients take the single-track railway high into the mountains on either side of Tehran, which itself sits on a high plateau.

Highlights for those able to experience it include the Se Khat Tala (Three Golden Lines) spiral, where the line can be seen at three different heights thanks to loops and tunnels that help it to gain height, and the spectacular Veresk Bridge in the Alborz mountains.

Built in 1934/35 by an Italian contractor, the latter soars 110 meters above the valley floor on a 66-meter masonry arch.

Local folklore claims that to assuage fears that the slender structure would not be able to handle the weight of the trains, its Italian chief engineer and his family were instructed to stand underneath for the passage of the first train.

Spectacular scenery, ancient sites

Tim Littler is the founder of UK-based Golden Eagle Luxury Trains, which ran 19 tours to Iran between 2014 and 2019. The company included a journey on the Trans-Iranian line on its 'Heart of Persia' trip from Tehran.

"Immediately after leaving Pol-e-Safid (at the northern end of the route) the line starts climbing on a ruling gradient of 1-in-35 for around 65 miles, limiting speeds to just 20 mph (32 kph)," says Littler.

"During this section the train passes over the famous Veresk Bridge and several loops and horseshoe curves where the line doubles back on itself inside a tunnel, emerging higher up the mountain."

A freight train passes through Lorestan on the Trans-Iranian Railways' Bisheh-Dorud route. From Hossein Javadi/UNESCO

There are more attractions on the line south-west of Tehran, as it continues through Qom and climbs through the nuclear center of Arak to the summit at Noor Abad, he adds.

"From this spectacular 220-mile section through Doround and Andimeshk it's possible to visit the ancient city of Susa, dating back to 4,200BC, and two other World Heritage sites -- the ancient hydraulic water system of Shustar and the Elamite complex at Chogha Zanbil, abandoned as long ago as 640BC," he says.

Related content Iran's most beautiful hotels

A symbol of modernization

The Trans-Iranian line was the first part of an ambitious network planned by the-then leader of the country, Reza Shah-Pahlevi, as he strove to modernize Iran's communications and economy in the 1930s.

Other lines were planned or built to link Tehran to the Soviet Union, Turkey and Pakistan (which was then British India).

However, construction of the costly north-south railway, estimated at around $39 million at the time of completion (more than $2.7 billion in today's figures), weighed heavily on the developing nation, making it widely unpopular and eventually contributing to the Shah's downfall.

Early proposals for a railway across Iran linking the Russian Empire and British India were mooted in the late-19th and early 20th centuries, but diplomatic concerns about the balance of power in the region, Britain's indifference and Russia's war with Japan in 1905 focused attention and finite funds elsewhere.

Construction of the Trans-Iranian Railway was a collaborative effort involving contractors from many countries. Three Lions/Hulton Archive/Getty Images

Eventually, the German-backed Baghdad Railway, linking Europe with the Middle East via the Ottoman Empire, threatened to increase Berlin's influence in the region by building an extension to Tehran.

Russia and Britain were forced into action, but in 1914, with surveying and preparation work underway, World War I intervened.

Five years later, the world had changed. Germany had been subdued, Russia was under new management and Iran was technically independent, albeit weak and virtually bankrupt.

Despite this, the Trans-Iranian Railway was seen as a vital tool for modernizing the country and overcoming poor communications across a sparsely settled region.

When it finally got underway, construction of the railway was a remarkable collaborative effort by 43 contractors from many countries, including the US, UK, Germany and Denmark.

Unusually for a major Asian railway of the time, it was funded entirely by Iran itself. It was heralded as a symbol of the independent country's modernization and growing national confidence but financing the project from taxes on commodities such as sugar and tea was also a buttress against foreign exploitation, especially by the British Empire and Soviet Union.

An international syndicate, the Syndicat du Chemin du Fer en Perse, undertook the construction of the initial test lines with an American team starting from the south and a German consortium working from the Caspian Sea coast to the foothills of the Alborz mountains at Shahi.

Delays to payments led to the Americans pulling out in 1930 and it took three years to find a replacement in the form of Danish construction company Kampsax. The Danes sub-contracted the project in 43 lots to companies from Europe, the US and Iran. Overseeing this diverse workforce, Kampsax managed to complete the line by August 1938 -- under-budget and almost a year ahead of schedule.

Related content The ultimate trip: Around the world in style

To power trains over the demanding route, Beyer, Peacock & Co. of Manchester in England supplied four huge, articulated Garratt steam locomotives. These 14-axle behemoths were similar to machines built for British colonial lines in Africa and Australia, combining enormous power with the flexibility to negotiate tightly curved tracks with severe weight limits.

German railway engineering giants Krupp and Henschel also supplied conventional heavy steam locomotives, although by 1941 many of these were already out of action, requiring repairs or modification to withstand the rigors of desert operation.

In August 1941, just three years after the completion of the showcase project, Britain and Russia invaded Iran on the pretext of foiling a German-backed coup. In reality Britain had moved to secure one of the Empire's primary sources of oil -- and establish a wartime supply route to the Soviet Union via the Caspian Sea.

The following month, the southern section between Bandar Shahpur and Tehran was taken over by the British Army's Royal Engineers regiment while the line north of the capital was under Soviet control. New railway yards, extra locomotives and rolling stock and experienced railwaymen from Britain and the US drove a massive increase in capacity during the war.

The Trans-Iranian Railway includes 224 tunnels, 174 viaducts and 186 smaller bridges. From Hossein Javadi/UNESCO

In 1941, just one freight train a day could use the line, moving less than 1,000 tons of freight. Two years later, with the US Army Corps of Transportation (USATC) now in charge, this had increased to 5,400 tons a day.

Heat, dust, altitude and a shortage of water for steam locomotive boilers -- and for their crews -- made the railway a very harsh environment. But by 1944 capacity was up to 6,489 tons per day, thanks to the introduction of US-built diesel locomotives and thousands of extra freight cars.

When the European conflict of World War II ended in May 1945, aid convoys to Russia ceased and USATC handed control of the Trans-Iranian Railway back to Britain, which quickly passed it on to Iranian State Railways, predecessor of the current Islamic Republic of Iran Railways.

The future of Iranian rail

Today, despite decades of economic sanctions, Iran is investing heavily in expanding and upgrading its rail network. Almost 1,100 km of new railway has been completed over the last seven years, linking provincial capitals to Tehran.

Construction began on the country's first high-speed railway in 2015, linking Tehran to Isfahan via Qom at speeds of up to 300km/h. A second high-speed line between Arak and Qom is also under construction. Both projects are backed by Chinese credit and engineering expertise.

In April 2020, a $3.56 billion deal was signed to build a 510 km electrified line branching away from the Trans-Iranian Railway at Ahvaz and crossing the Zagros mountains to Isfahan.

China has become increasingly involved in Iranian infrastructure as part of its 'Belt and Road Initiative' aimed at expanding its influence across the region.

Related content Tibet's first bullet train line enters service

In 2015, China unveiled plans for an ambitious 2,000-mile high-speed railway from Urumqi in Xinjiang province to Tehran via the capital cities of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.

As well as a new Iran-Turkmenistan link and a standard gauge railway into Afghanistan completed in December 2020, there is a proposal to reopen a line to Azerbaijan, creating a new corridor between Iran, Russia and Georgia.

Work also continues on the Astara-Rasht line along the western side of the Caspian Sea. This will complete a north-south corridor linking Russia with the Persian Gulf. A rail bridge across the River Astaraçay border in Astara is complete, but the line currently terminates just inside Iran.

The Trans-Iranian Railway connects the Persian Gulf with the Caspian Sea. From Hossein Javadi/UNESCO

UNESCO World Heritage status is a highly coveted title that puts a site firmly on the global tourism map. It can help to deliver additional funding for maintenance and restoration work, opens doors for expert advice and studies and potentially deliver a huge uplift in visitor numbers.

For some places, the latter can become a double-edged sword, with over-tourism threatening the very environment that brought them to UNESCO's attention in the first place.

That fate is unlikely to befall the Trans-Iranian Railway just yet. Visiting Iran remains a tricky proposition for many foreigners and relationships with Western nations continue to be strained. However, Littler hopes to return when conditions allow, taking his more adventurous customers back to enjoy the country's cultural and engineering highlights.

"If and when the situation improves we would certainly look at returning to this wonderful destination," he concludes.

"During talks with Iranian Railway management a few years ago they voiced interest in running a tourist train between Garmsar and Pol-e-Safid, using a restored German steam locomotive. I'm sure that project has been put on ice but who knows what might happen if and when things improve?"
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@