ABOVE: © BONNIE HOFKIN

Like the hands that pull the strings at a marionette puppet show, our resident microbes influence the day-to-day running of virtually all of our biological systems. For instance, host-microbe interactions during the first three years of life are particularly important for the development of the immune system, and perturbances to the gut microbiota, or dysbiosis, during this critical time in early life can have long-lasting detrimental effects on health. Until very recently, this microbe-mediated immune education was thought to be initiated when a newborn baby leaves the relatively sterile environment of the uterus and is seeded with its mother’s microbes, but work from our group and others in the last few years has shown that the maternal microbiome can exert its influence even earlier—on the gestating fetus.

© BONNIE HOFKIN

In the mid-2010s, when we started our work on the role of the maternal microbiome during pregnancy, there was no direct evidence that mom’s resident bacteria affected the developing baby. However, it seemed naive to think that the influence of the maternal microbiota would start only at birth. We knew that maternal antibodies crossed the placenta to protect the fetus from infection, and we suspected these antibodies could also direct the maturation of the immune system. We also knew that commensal bacteria, in addition to pathogenic microbes, trigger the development of antibodies. Moreover, we thought that perhaps microbial products or metabolites could also be transferred to initiate exposure to a microbial world even before the baby is colonized with his or her own microbiome at birth. Now, just five years later, we know this to be the case: both bacteria-produced molecules and maternally derived antibodies appear to drive immune development in utero.

Many unanswered questions remain, and we are far from understanding the long-term significance of this phenomenon. However, it seems increasingly possible that our mothers’ microbiomes may, to some extent, shape our health and well-being before we are born.

Developmental origins of health and disease

During delivery, babies are exposed to the maternal microbiota. Children born by the vaginal route are colonized by vaginal and fecal microbes, while those born by Caesarean section are instead predominantly seeded by the maternal skin microbiota and sometimes hospital-acquired microbes. The importance of this vertical microbial transfer is apparent in the higher rates of immune, metabolic, and neurodevelopmental disorders among babies born by C-section.

See “The Maternal Microbiome”

Manipulating the microbiota of pregnant mice can modify the function of the offspring’s immune systems and alter their disease outcomes.

After birth, it takes several years for a child’s microbiota to fully develop and diversify. This is a dynamic process, heavily influenced by external factors including hygiene, antibiotic usage, and diet, including human oligosaccharides from the mother’s milk. In the same time frame, the offspring’s immune system is undergoing intense development and maturation and is highly susceptible to microbial imprinting. Exposing young children to antibiotics during this critical window has been associated with an increased susceptibility to several diseases, likely due to the indirect effects that these drugs have on immune development.

In 2013 and 2014, as researchers began to question the role of the maternal microbiota during pregnancy, several groups launched epidemiological and animal studies to examine whether in utero antibiotic exposure poses a similar risk to a child’s health. Fetuses don’t have their own microbiota, so any microbe-mediated immune education that may happen in the womb falls to the resident microbes of the gestating parent, and antibiotic exposure during pregnancy would disrupt this.

Sure enough, exposing pregnant mice to antibiotics can modify the function of the offspring’s immune systems and alter their disease outcomes. This was first demonstrated in 2015, when Youjia Hu and colleagues from Yale University showed that prenatal antibiotic exposure influenced the development of type 1 diabetes in the offspring. Since then, a number of other studies have similarly demonstrated effects on offspring of manipulating the microbiota of pregnant mice, either with antibiotics or dietary intervention. Researchers have observed such results in a variety of models, with implications not only for diabetes, but for susceptibility to asthma, obesity, and colitis, as well as the progression of autism-like behaviors.

In most circumstances, manipulating the maternal microbiota changes which microbial communities are passed from mother to offspring at birth, and subsequently alters immune development in the neonatal host. It has therefore proven challenging to attribute the immune phenotypes described in most of these studies to the maternal microbiota directly, as opposed to those mediated by the newly seeded microbiota of the neonate. Fortunately, we are beginning to tease these differences apart, and tantalizing hints are emerging that the maternal microbiota educates the immune and nervous systems of gestating offspring remotely.

See “The Infant Gut Microbiome and Probiotics that Work”

© BONNIE HOFKIN

Maternal microbiota shapes infant antibody repertoire

For decades, we have known that antibodies are passed from parent to fetus during pregnancy. They play a huge role in protecting babies from infection both before and after birth. Antibodies continue to be passed postnatally through breast milk, which is one of the many reasons breastfeeding is more beneficial to a baby’s immune system than formula is, and why immunizing a person against pathogens during pregnancy or lactation can protect her baby from infections. However, we are only now beginning to appreciate the role the maternal microbiota plays in shaping the antibody repertoire. We are also gaining new insights into other roles for antibodies beyond binding to pathogens and protecting from infections.

By adulthood, the intestine is home to the body’s largest collection of immune cells. As it is continuously exposed to enormous amounts of foreign antigens, derived from both the microbiota and our diet, the intestinal immune system must learn to tolerate innocuous food components and symbiotic microbes while retaining the ability to mount a successful defense against harmful pathogens. Moreover, all microbes can quickly become harmful if they enter the bloodstream, even those that are considered symbiotic when living in the gut. Antibodies such as immunoglobulin A (IgA), secreted by B cells at the mucosal surface lining the intestines, are transported across the gut epithelium into the lumen, where they bind to microbes and prevent them from passing through the intestinal epithelial barrier.

The immune system of a newborn infant is inexperienced. The fetus is not thought to be colonized with its own bona fide microbial communities. Traditionally, researchers thought that maternal antibodies transferred across the placenta were specific to infectious microbes that might infect the baby while its own immune system was still developing. We now know that maternally derived antibodies can also bind commensal bacteria—and that this helps to keep these nonpathogenic bacteria from crossing the epithelial barrier as a newborn’s gut is rapidly colonized by a vast array of unfamiliar microbes.

© BONNIE HOFKIN

Antibodies transferred in breast milk can interact directly with the microbial inhabitants of the infant gastrointestinal (GI) tract, where they keep populations of commensal species in check and ensure that the microbes stay in the gut lumen where they belong, thereby preventing the inappropriate activation of the local adaptive immune response. This transfer of antibodies might partly explain why newborn babies fed breast milk are less susceptible to developing necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), a severe and often fatal inflammation of the colon that can occur when babies are born prematurely.

The reason that preterm babies are highly susceptible to NEC is unclear, but it is widely postulated to be a consequence of their immature immune systems overreacting to the abrupt colonization of their GI tracts—something that full-term babies typically handle without issue. In 2019, Kathyayini Gopalakrishna and colleagues at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Children’s Hospital demonstrated the importance of bacteria-specific IgA antibodies in preventing an overexpansion of Enterobacteriaceae—a classic hallmark of NEC—in the guts of preterm babies. These and other results imply that immune education in the final weeks before birth is important for babies’ immune systems to tolerate friendly bacteria. Maternally derived antibodies appear to put the brakes on inflammatory pathways to protect the gut from unnecessary damage when first exposed to the microbial world.

As well as functioning in the GI tract, commensal-targeting antibodies from breast milk can be actively transported across the epithelial barrier of a baby’s intestine and into its circulation, ultimately disseminating throughout the body. At least a portion of these anticommensal antibodies can cross-react with pathogens. Wen Zheng and colleagues at Harvard Medical School hypothesize that this transepithelial transfer of cross-reacting anticommensal antibodies, from breast milk to the infant bloodstream, could explain the observed protection of neonatal mice from systemic pathogen infection. While it is unclear whether the transfer of antibodies across the placenta in utero contributed to protection in this model, it seems likely that they acted in concert with antibodies transported via breast milk to protect the neonate.

The Many Effects of Microbes on Offspring During pregnancy, the body is subject to numerous changes. The composition of the gut microbiome shifts, metabolism changes, and the gut epithelium becomes more permeable. These alterations facilitate interactions between the immune system and gut microbiota, leading to the production of microbe-specific antibodies that are transferred across the placenta to the developing fetus, and later via the milk to the nursing offspring. The maternal microbiota, and the external factors that shape it, influence which immunomodulatory metabolites are produced and transferred to offspring, where they support immune education and otherwise influence development, helping to protect offspring from allergic asthma, metabolic syndrome, and likely other inflammatory diseases later in life. After birth, maternally derived antibodies help newborns tolerate the bacterial colonization of their own GI tracts, while simultaneously protecting them from enteric and systemic infections. @Studio Lindalu, Linda Lubbersen PREGNANT MOUSE FETUS External factors affect the composition of the maternal microbiota (for example, diet, antibiotics, and other drugs). The antibody-mediated transfer of metabolites increases antimicrobial peptide production, which strengthens the epithelial barrier to prepare the gut for microbial colonization. The permeability of intestinal epithelium increases during pregnancy, facilitating interactions between the microbiota and a mother’s immune system. SCFAs transferred from mom travel to the fetal thymus, where they trigger epigenetic changes that nudge T cells toward becoming regulatory as opposed to inflammatory later in life. The maternal microbiota shapes the repertoire of commensal-targeting antibodies, which cross the placenta and are transferred in breast milk to her offspring. SCFAs also have various effects on the heart, pancreas, thymus, and other organs. Gut microbes produce various metabolites, including short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and immunomodulatory compounds, some of which are bound by antibodies and transferred to the fetus.



@Studio Lindalu, Linda Lubbersen NEONATES Commensal-targeting antibodies promote tolerance during bacterial colonization, largely by keeping gut bacteria inside the intestinal lumen or ushering them back in when they do escape. If microbes that escape the intestinal lumen are not immediately ushered back in, antibodies from mom tag them for efficient elimination to limit inflammation. @Studio Lindalu, Linda Lubbersen OLDER PUPS As the pups age, the immune education that they received in utero and shortly after birth protects the animals from inappropriate inflammatory reactions that can lead to allergy, metabolic syndrome, or other health consequences. PDF See full infographic: WEB

Microbial metabolites also influence infant immunity

The maternal microbiota is not a one-trick pony; it does more to shape the offspring’s immune system than induce the production of antibodies that are shared with the newborn. By breaking down the food we eat, and molecules secreted by other resident microbes, intestinal microbes produce a wealth of metabolites with wide-ranging immune-modulatory functions. At least some of these are passed from parent to child during gestation and breastfeeding.

Best characterized are the short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), derived from the fermentation of dietary fiber by intestinal microbes. The amounts and types of SCFAs that are produced in the parent’s gut and transferred to her baby depend on the maternal microbiome, which is in turn shaped by her diet. When pregnant people eat a diet rich in fiber, SCFA-producing microbes thrive, and increased amounts of SCFAs are transferred to the developing fetus. These compounds may influence the maturation of the fetal immune system—specifically, the development of regulatory T cells (Tregs), which help quiet runaway inflammation.

Tregs are crucial for protecting our bodies from autoimmune diseases, as well as from allergies and asthma. They also teach our immune systems to tolerate food and friendly bacteria. Although they self-renew with time, Tregs are long-lived and their progeny will likely be present throughout the life of the host. So, if the maternal microbiota influences the development or maturation of these cells, this could have far-reaching implications for the health of the offspring.

In 2017, Akihito Nakajima and colleagues at Juntendo University in Tokyo reported that three-day-old mouse pups had more Tregs in their thymuses and spleens if their mothers had been fed a high-fiber diet, compared with pups of mothers on a low-fiber diet. The pregnant dams that ate more fiber had increased amounts of the SCFAs acetate, propionate, and butyrate in their feces, as well as increased butyrate in their blood, and their pups had increased SCFAs, especially acetate, in their blood at day 11 of life. The authors suggest that SCFAs produced by the maternal microbiota may act remotely to influence T cell education in the developing thymus, accounting for this increase in Tregs. However, mothers fed a high-fiber diet had differences in their own microbiota, meaning that their babies would likely be seeded with different microbes that might also contribute to circulating SCFAs. More work is needed to establish if it was really the maternal SCFAs transferred during gestation, as opposed to the altered composition of the offspring’s microbiomes, that caused the varying numbers of Tregs in the mouse pups.

In addition to those that are produced in the thymus around the time of birth, another group of Tregs can develop from naive T cells in the periphery, and these are equally important for preventing autoimmunity. Alison Thorburn and colleagues at Monash University have shown that the process happens more efficiently when the SCFA acetate is transferred from mother to fetus across the placenta. By increasing transcriptional accessibility of the gene encoding FoxP3, the master regulator of Tregs, maternally derived acetate permanently altered naive T cells in the fetal thymus. This process skewed T cell differentiation toward a regulatory phenotype, as opposed to an inflammatory one, following antigen exposure later in life, thereby protecting mice from developing asthma. Importantly, the authors performed a variety of cohousing and cross-fostering experiments to rule out contributions from milk metabolites and the offspring’s own microbiota in driving this protective phenotype. That is not to say that the transfer of SCFAs in milk doesn’t contribute to protection. But in this study, maternal acetate in the mice’s milk was not sufficient to confer asthma protection, whereas transfer of maternal acetate across the placenta was.

Until very recently, this microbe-mediated immune education was thought to be initiated at birth when a newborn baby leaves the relatively sterile environment of the uterus.

The study by Thorburn and colleagues, published in 2015, was arguably the first to concretely and convincingly demonstrate the long-term effects of the maternal microbiota on disease susceptibility in the offspring. A recent study by Ikuo Kimura of the Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology and colleagues showed that the placental transfer of propionate, another SCFA that is regulated by the microbiota, could reduce susceptibility of the offspring to obesity and metabolic syndrome in response to a high-fat diet later in life. These phenotypes, which were driven by interactions between maternal SCFAs and their receptors in the developing fetus, could implicate the maternal microbiota in the risk of type 2 diabetes in the offspring.

We predict these two pioneering articles will be the first of many, particularly when one considers the extent of inflammatory diseases that can be controlled and suppressed by Tregs and the wide range of immunomodulatory effects mediated by SCFAs. Moreover, SCFAs are not the only group of microbial metabolites that offspring receive in utero. When working at the University of Bern, our research group demonstrated that a broad range of metabolites are transferred during pregnancy and lactation. We colonized germ-free mice with a friendly species of E. coli that was genetically engineered to be unable to replicate without supplementation with essential amino acids. This enabled us to restrict colonization to a precise period during pregnancy, allowing time for the mothers to return to germ-free status before giving birth to germ-free pups. The metabolites passed from mom to pup changed the immune cell profile in the neonatal intestine and increased the transcription of genes involved in antimicrobial defense. These processes reinforced the integrity of the epithelial barrier, so that when the germ-free offspring were colonized later in life, friendly gut bacteria were prevented from escaping the confines of the intestine to invade the host.

Surprisingly, we found that antibodies were necessary for optimal metabolite transfer, both across the placenta and via breast milk. Specifically, antibodies apparently bound to metabolites in the circulation after pregnant mice were fed E. coli. This sheds new light on more than 100 years of antibody research—in addition to protecting against infection, these molecules appear to serve as chaperones of immune-modulating metabolites. If the mothers lacked antibodies, the effect of the maternal microbiota was largely absent; metabolites required maternal antibodies for their transfer.

We are far from fully understanding the extent to which microbial molecules are passed from mother to child, or to what degree they imprint upon the developing immune system. Our group found hundreds of metabolites in the organs of fetal mice and the milk of their mothers, and our model only involved a single species of microbe. In a natural microbiome with diverse assemblages of microbes, the range of metabolites transferred would likely be even more extensive.

© BONNIE HOFKIN

A new view of the maternal microbiome

Most of the research into the effects of the maternal microbiota on offspring has focused on immune education. However, there are some studies emerging that imply that these microbes may have further-reaching consequences. Epidemiological studies have tentatively linked maternal diet and antibiotic exposure to the development of neurodevelopmental disorders in children.

Researchers have recently begun to investigate these observations using animal models. Two separate studies, one published in 2018 by Morgane Thion and colleagues from the Université PSL in Paris and the other in 2020 by Helen Vuong and colleagues from the University of California, Los Angeles, showed that the colonization status of a pregnant mouse can influence gene expression in the brain of her prenatal offspring. The study from Thion’s group linked these changes to differences in microglial phenotype and abundance during critical developmental stages, while Vuong’s team documented the stunted development of the nerves connecting the thalamus to the cerebral cortex in the offspring of germ-free or antibiotic-treated mice. Collectively, these studies provide preliminary evidence that a mother’s microbiota may modulate neurodevelopment in her offspring, possibly even protecting them from neurological disorders later in life.

In the last century, the incidence of neurological, inflammatory, and metabolic disorders has risen dramatically. What healthier way to flatten these curves than to nip them in the bud—or, more accurately, in the womb? The research to date adds weight to the developmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD) hypothesis, which suggests that prenatal and perinatal exposure to environmental factors can influence disease susceptibility later in life, and puts the maternal microbiome on the map as one important environmental factor to consider.

The implications of these studies are extensive. For one, they could provide evidence for guidance about maintaining a healthy microbiota throughout gestation—for example, by eating a fiber-rich diet or avoiding unnecessary antibiotic use. Moreover, they could inspire microbial manipulation strategies tailored to prospective parents with genetic susceptibilities to certain diseases. Such prophylactic therapies could be designed to curtail the establishment of such diseases before they begin by ensuring the healthiest possible immune development during gestation. The more information we glean on how the maternal microbiota shapes neonatal development and future disease susceptibility, the more likely we are to be able to prevent certain disorders altogether.

Kathy D. McCoy is a professor in the Snyder Institute of Chronic Diseases and the Cumming School of Medicine at the University of Calgary. Carolyn A. Thomson is a postdoctoral fellow in McCoy’s lab, which studies microbiome-immune interactions in health and disease.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, VISUAL GENERATION

As a reproductive medicine specialist in the US, I often find talking with patients about the cost and coverage of fertility care a discouraging discussion. Despite infertility being an incredibly common and devastating disease, the extremely effective treatments that have been developed to enable infertile individuals and couples to have children are often not affordable and are therefore out of reach. This made me wonder: Why is the cost of care for some diseases covered by insurance while others are not? Instead of criticizing payers for consigning infertility to the “not covered” bin, I choose to be curious. Why this disconnect?

Infertility is clearly a disruption to the normal functioning of the body that results in harm or morbidity. But despite this clear fact, it took the American Medical Association more than eight years to join the World Health Organization in defining infertility as a disease. This may seem an obvious or inconsequential point, but this declaration has an enormous bearing on how society views infertility and sends a clear message that infertility is not a mere inconvenience; it is a medical condition. Officially designating infertility a disease was a necessary but unfortunately not a sufficient step to securing public and private payer coverage of fertility care. Even the medical community often views infertility differently from other diseases. Why?

Infertility may be treated differently because it is perceived as rare; however, data strongly contradict this. One in eight couples in the US has trouble getting pregnant, and estimates suggest that more than 100 million individuals suffer from infertility worldwide. These figures are hard to conceptualize, and perhaps understanding the prevalence of infertility relative to other conditions would have more impact: more women of reproductive age are affected by infertility than by high blood pressure, by diabetes, or by cancer. Although infertility is common, its associated stigma and an absence of physical manifestations can leave sufferers feeling alone and hide them from the unaffected, who therefore remain unaware of the sheer volume of people affected.

In addition to misconceptions of infertility’s prevalence, could the condition be viewed differently because it is seen as preventable? Some assume most tubal factor infertility is caused by sexually transmitted infections, and individuals older than 35 years of age are often left wondering if they brought their difficulty conceiving on themselves by “waiting too long.” In truth, behavioral or social factors contribute to a minority of infertility cases, so it is false to state that modifying these factors alone could eradicate the disease. But even if lifestyle issues did cause the bulk of infertility cases, why should that matter? The cost of treatment for many diseases with behavioral components, such as heart disease, lung cancer, and diabetes, are covered by public and private insurance.

Is infertility distinct because it is not life-threatening? Broken bones, blindness, and arthritis are typically not life-threatening, but treating these conditions improves quality of life and is covered by most insurance policies.

Would these attitudes persist if the trauma associated with infertility and the reduction in quality of life suffered by those who cannot build a family had a physical manifestation? For those who have not experienced infertility, the pain is difficult to imagine. Unlike other diseases, infertility scars its victims invisibly, making it easy for society to ignore. In contrast, failure to provide treatment for diabetes can result in amputation—an outcome that would be unimaginable in this day and age. Everyone can see the loss of a limb and the disability it would entail. If insulin can prevent amputation, then it is clearly in the patient’s and society’s best interests to ensure that the medication is made affordable and accessible to diabetics. Because many people cannot see the havoc the disease wreaks, infertile couples often hear trite sentiments from friends and family such as: “Kids are a lot of work—you can have one of mine.” Or, “You should buy a puppy or travel the world!” No one would ever tell a diabetic, “Losing a foot isn’t that bad. You have two, after all!”

Finally, the late ethicist Amnon Goldworth described a very common argument against expanding coverage for fertility care: “Such efforts are extremely expensive and, in terms of number of individuals affected, could be used more effectively in other medical arenas.” But surely the more than 8 million babies born worldwide by IVF are enough to prove that fertility care affects a large number of individuals and is effective. Why should other medical arenas be prioritized? If so, which ones? Who is assessing what people value and ensuring that the care provided aligns with their priorities? In the US, well-intentioned organizations such as the Association of American Medical Colleges and the American Medical Association that avowedly work with policymakers to improve the nation’s well-being and public health are focused on myriad other issues, and ultimately, their review and approval of healthcare policy is not binding on insurance companies’ coverage decisions.

This is a mind-boggling disconnect. Family is highly valued by both individuals and society in the US, yet the care that is required for a significant proportion of the population to build a family is not accessible. Black and Hispanic individuals have less access to assisted reproductive technology, as well as to other gold-standard disease treatments, than their white counterparts are, exacerbating longstanding inequities in healthcare.

Despite all of this, I am choosing to see fertility care in America through a lens of radical optimism. I believe the stigma surrounding infertility is lessening, and individuals are increasingly willing to talk about their experiences of suffering from this devastating, all-consuming, life-altering disease. I have faith that we are becoming smarter healthcare consumers, and we will demand that the services covered by public and private insurance plans align with our healthcare priorities. I am confident that we recognize the inequality that has plagued healthcare delivery in the US and that there is a genuine desire to reform the system to provide nondiscriminatory care. I am convinced that surviving this pandemic has inspired decisionmakers to rebuild this fragmented and inefficient framework from the ground up. Until then, I will continue to be one of the loudest voices in the room fighting for support for infertility care, and I hope that everyone will join me.

Kate O’Neill is an attending surgeon specializing in reproductive endocrinology and infertility at the University of Pennsylvania. She also serves as an assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology and is the co–principal investigator of the Uterus Transplant for Uterine Factor Infertility (UNTIL) Trial. Reach out to her on Twitter @KateONeill_MD.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Researchers are investigating the effects of pollution in cities such as Barcelona (pictured) on the health of pregnant people and their children.

© ISTOCK.COM, IMV

For two days in June 2020 and another two days that October, environmental epidemiologist Ioar Rivas wore a special backpack whenever she left her home. As she rode her motorbike to the lab, or picked out fruits and vegetables at the grocery store, an air pump on one shoulder strap hummed quietly, while a tube on the other passively sampled the environment. “People look at you like you are carrying something weird [that is] making some noises,” she recalls of the experience. “They don’t understand what is going on.”

Rivas was (and still is) taking part in a research study aiming to measure how much air pollution pregnant people are exposed to, and to identify associations between those pollutant levels and the neurodevelopmental outcomes of their children. She recalls having her baby’s brain examined during an ultrasound in her third trimester, and later nursing her one-month-old son to sleep before placing him in an MRI machine for further scanning. Rivas is not just a study participant; she also happens to be a scientist involved in the project, working as a postdoc in the lab of the study’s director, Jordi Sunyer, a developmental epidemiologist at the Barcelona Institute for Global Health (ISGlobal).

Inside a backpack, an air pump with filter (Ieft) measures personal exposure to fine particulate matter that is 2.5 micrometers or smaller, while a second device (right) monitors personal exposure to black carbon. PAU RUBIO / ISGLOBAL

“We are . . . looking into the brain development of the fetus,” says Rivas. “We would like to study how the exposure during the pregnancy is really affecting the brain.”

The project, called the Barcelona Life Study Cohort (BiSC), is a follow-up to a study of school-age children that identified correlations between kids’ neural activity and the levels of air pollution they were exposed to in classrooms and on the playground—children with higher exposure showed brain activity patterns typical of younger kids, Sunyer explains. But the researchers didn’t find any structural differences in the children’s brains. The kids in that study were age seven to nine years, so their brains were more than 90 percent developed, notes Sunyer. “Our question is: What would happen . . . if air pollution exposure occurs early in life, during the prenatal life, when the [development] of the brain is much faster?”

For more than a decade, research has been uncovering potential negative effects of exposure to air pollution on neurodevelopment. In 2009, for example, a group of researchers at Columbia University linked higher in utero exposure to one type of air pollution, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), with reduced IQ at age 5. Since then, Sunyer notes, longitudinal studies from numerous countries have similarly found an association between exposure levels and reduced intelligence or mental functions. Preliminary data from various research groups have also revealed an association between prenatal air pollution exposure levels and risk of behavioral syndromes such as autism spectrum disorder, although there the results are less consistent, Sunyer says.

To better assess the potential influence of prenatal exposure on neurodevelopment, Sunyer’s team launched BiSC in mid-2018. Although COVID-19 has complicated some of the project’s data collection, the team has nearly completed its planned enrollment of 1,200 pregnant people, who for two days during their first or third trimester (or two days during each, as Rivas did), will wear the air pollution–detecting backpacks whenever they leave their homes. Around 500 early participants in the study carried backpacks fitted with a tube for sampling NO 2 , a monitor for black carbon, and an air pump attached to a filter that captured particulate matter 2.5 micrometers in diameter or smaller (PM 2.5 ). They also wore smartwatches to monitor their activity and vitals. The backpack required some setup, though, so once pandemic-related lockdowns prevented researchers from entering participants’ homes, participants simply wore the NO 2 tube and the smartwatch.

Outside the homes of study participants, researchers placed a sonometer to capture ambient noise and a tube to measure NO 2 . PAU RUBIO / ISGLOBAL

“It’s these kinds of studies that help you tease apart what’s contributing to the exposure,” says Rima Habre, an environmental health scientist at the Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California. Habre is the director of exposure assessment and a project lead at the MADRES Center for Environmental Health Disparities, where she and her colleagues have similarly been collecting personal exposure data of pregnant people—using a purse-like design, rather than a backpack—and tracking health outcomes of both mothers and children. With regard to the BiSC program, she adds: “It’s really nice that they’re starting early and that they’re doing this very personal exposure assessment and . . . this very cutting-edge neurocognitive assessment. . . . That’s very innovative and probably unique as far as I know.”

Emory University environmental and reproductive epidemiologist Audrey Gaskins agrees that the BiSC cohort study will generate valuable data for understanding the link between prenatal air pollution exposure and neurodevelopmental outcomes in babies and kids, but notes that assessments also need to be made at an even earlier stage: pre-conception. Her research has shown that higher levels of air pollution are associated with lower fertility among people undergoing assisted reproductive technologies, suggesting potential toxic effects on the ovaries, and it remains an open question whether there could be any effects of pre-conception exposure on the offspring themselves.

“We think a lot of these air pollutants have a specific negative effect on the ovary, and particularly we think it might be affecting the epigenetic signature of the egg,” she says. “So that again might have downstream consequences for neurodevelopment. . . . Does air pollution have an impact on the epigenetic profile of the egg, and can that translate to outcomes even in childhood?”

BiSC participant Yasmina Díaz wears the air pollution–measuring backpack on the streets of Barcelona. PAU RUBIO / ISGLOBAL

The answers to this and many other questions about the influence of air pollution of brain development are outstanding. Rivas, Sunyer, and their colleagues have yet to publish results from BiSC, and specifically from the AirNB part of the project focused on fetal and early-life neurodevelopment. So far, Sunyer says, the team can see that personal levels of exposure are highly variable, and that “a high proportion of pregnant women in Barcelona have high levels of exposure to air pollutants,” but he doesn’t anticipate that the group will finish collecting and analyzing the neural data until later this year.

Going forward, it will be important to examine when during pregnancy the fetus is most vulnerable, as well as to identify possible mechanisms by which air pollution might influence fetal health, says Ferran Ballester, a public health researcher at the University of Valencia who is not involved in BiSC. “It is also very important to look at the nature of the exposure—which . . . pollutants or characteristics are playing a role in the potential detrimental health effects,” he adds. “All of the above will help not only to increase knowledge on the relationship, but more importantly, to develop actions and measures to prevent potential harm.”

In the meantime, evidence is building that air pollution exposure may have adverse effects for birth outcomes generally—so much so that it’s time to act to monitor and limit those exposures, argues Bruce Bekkar, a retired clinician who is now a full-time climate change activist. Last year, Bekkar coauthored a systematic review on the link between air pollution exposure and birth outcomes; although the studies varied widely in their methodology and outcome measures, the research strongly pointed to increased rates of preterm birth, lower birth weight, and stillbirth among people with high exposures, he says. “We felt that [there was] strong evidence of association, and also ample reason to think that this was cause-and-effect and not just a statistical association. . . . We have enough data to start taking action.”

With respect to her own pregnancy, Rivas says that she didn’t worry too much about her exposure to pollution because Barcelona was in lockdown as a result of COVID-19, and the levels of air pollution in the area were very low as a result. She now lives in an area with very little road traffic, she adds, which also eases her mind regarding any exposures her infant son may have. Still, she notes, “I try to avoid streets with high levels of road traffic.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: La Paz, Bolivia, is the highest capital city in the world, providing researchers with a living laboratory to study human pregnancy at elevation.

COLLEEN GYDE JULIAN

To navigate the political, cultural, and language barriers that come with researching pregnancy in another country, Colleen Glyde Julian says she channels the properties of chewing gum. Julian, an integrative physiologist at the University of Colorado’s Anschutz Medical Campus, says that remaining flexible under grinding pressure is “the defining characteristic that somebody must have to do this kind of work”—wisdom she cultivated as a PhD student working under another Anschutz researcher, biomedical anthropologist Lorna Grindlay Moore. “You just have to take it all in stride.”

Working in Bolivia has meant, for example, balancing coolers of blood during hair-raising taxi rides through congested streets en route to the local hospital, crammed shoulder to shoulder with colleagues. And because luggage is often delayed in transit, the researchers sometimes have to get creative with equipment. One time while carrying out similar work in Tibet, Moore connected a boombox to her ultrasound machine to hear the blood passing through a pregnant woman’s uterine artery.

Julian and Moore study pregnancies at altitude, where lower air pressure means that each breath draws in less oxygen than at sea level. Because the success of a pregnancy is predicated in part on how much oxygen gets to the fetus, disruption of oxygen flow is associated with various pregnancy complications—including fetal growth restriction, preeclampsia, and gestational hypertension. Even though such conditions kill thousands of people and their fetuses each year, much about their underlying physiology remains unknown.

The best model for human pregnancy is humans. —Lorna Grindlay Moore, University of Colorado

Anschutz Medical Campus

Despite the inherent practical difficulties, the two women agree that studying pregnancy at elevation, where all fetuses develop under chronic hypoxia, can inform what goes wrong in pregnancies worldwide, while also revealing how local Indigenous populations have adapted to low oxygen over millennia. “The only way to ethically manipulate maternal oxygenation is really altitude,” Moore tells The Scientist. “A lot of studies use experimental animal models . . . but the best model for human pregnancy is humans.” The pair’s findings, based primarily on studies of Andean women in Bolivia, have uncovered potential treatments for conditions linked to hypoxia.

ANDRZEJ KRAUZE

The thread of that work began in the late 2000s, when Moore and Julian traveled to South America, working alongside colleagues at the Bolivian Institute of High Altitude Biology to compare pregnancies between Andean women and those of European descent living in the region. At low elevations, the two populations were similar, but above 12,000 feet, Andean infants were born larger and heavier than European babies. Uterine artery blood flow, and therefore oxygen delivery, was also twofold higher in Andean women.

Comparing gene expression patterns between the two populations revealed a clue about why: two genes in Andeans contained mutations that were positively associated with birth weight at high altitude, and one of the mutations—in a gene called PRKAA1—was also linked to increased uterine artery blood flow. “The interesting thing is that it’s associated . . . only at high altitude, not at low,” Julian tells The Scientist. “That suggests a gene-by-environment interaction that provides some specific benefit at high altitude.”

PRKAA1, the researchers learned, is part of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signaling pathway, a regulator of metabolism, cell growth, and vascular function that switches on under hypoxic stress. AMPK activation also regulates vasodilation, and variations in PRKAA1 may bolster uterine artery blood flow at altitude, thereby reducing the effects of hypoxia. Back in aptly named Summit County, Colorado, where the average elevation is above 10,000 feet, the team is now probing the pathway using animal models and pieces of human myometrial arteries collected during C-sections at local hospitals. Julian sometimes sleeps in her car as people undergo their surgeries so that she can drive a cooler of samples—belted into the passenger seat—back to the lab.

Julian and Moore’s colleagues have designed special chambers, essentially barrels fitted with vacuum pumps, that can simulate altitudes of up to 20,000 feet, or two-thirds the height of Everest. When pregnant mice were exposed to hypoxia inside, the animals gave birth to smaller young than control mice, but pups born to mothers treated with an AMPK-activating drug during pregnancy were closer in size to the controls, if not entirely protected from hypoxia’s shrinking effects. Exposing isolated arteries taken from the pregnant mice to an AMPK-activating drug in vitro showed that the drug keeps vessels more dilated, evidence that the pathway does help preserve oxygen flow to a fetus at elevation. The team found similar effects in arteries taken from pregnant women at altitude. Notably, the vessels from women who gave birth to growth-restricted babies dilated less than those taken from women with normal pregnancies, a finding the team is still investigating.

SOUND INTERRUPTED: A Tibetan physician named Droma—most Tibetans do not use family names—used a boombox to listen to an ultrasound after the machine’s recorder broke. LORNA MOORE

The goal of all this work is to identify therapies for complications such as preeclampsia. Several AMPK-activating drugs exist, and some, such as the diabetes medication metformin, are approved for human use. Researchers in South Africa recently completed a Phase 1/2 trial testing whether metformin could help extend the pregnancies of people with preeclampsia. Currently, delivering the baby is the only treatment. While the results aren’t yet published, Catherine Cluver, a maternal-fetal medicine specialist at Stellenbosch University who led the research, says in an email that the trial “went very well,” and Julian is now planning a similar trial in Bolivia.

Julian, Moore, and their colleagues are also investigating links between hypoxia in utero and disease in adults. Under hypoxic conditions, oxygen gets diverted away from a fetus’s peripheral circulation to protect the brain. As a consequence, scientists have found, those babies sometimes develop cardiovascular diseases in adulthood. “Virtually every adult-onset disease has a relationship to development in utero,” notes Moore.

Dino Giussani, a developmental cardiovascular physiologist at the University of Cambridge who was born in Bolivia, studies this phenomenon, called fetal reprogramming, using large altitude chambers. Giussani found that in sheep, which have similar gestational milestones to humans, exposing pregnant ewes to hypoxia resulted in growth-restricted lambs that developed high blood pressure more frequently in adulthood.

Rather than targeting AMPK, Giussani treated ewes with an antioxidant called MitoQ that reduces oxidative stress by scavenging free radicals. “We’re finding that you can rescue some of the fetal growth restriction and some of the later cardiovascular disease by giving antioxidants following the start of hypoxia,” he tells The Scientist, adding that he is now delaying the therapy until a time equivalent to when clinicians might detect a hypoxic pregnancy in humans. “The next step would be to apply this to obstetric practice.”

The promise of real-world solutions for the millions of mothers living at altitude, who are still most at risk of developing hypoxia-related complications whatever their ancestry, has been central to the relationships between the researchers in Bolivia and Colorado.

“Our collaborative research projects have already yielded important scientific findings related to improving the identification of at-risk pregnancies,” Lilian Toledo-Jaldin, an obstetrician at the Hospital Materno-Infantil in Bolivia, tells The Scientist in an email (translated from Spanish with Google Translate). Moore and Julian recently trained Bolivian physicians on how to standardize their metrics for diagnosing preeclampsia, and Toledo-Jaldin is helping to analyze medical records to see whether diagnoses have changed since. “It’s really important for the work that people are doing internationally to benefit the community that they are working with,” Julian says. “I’m really proud of our Bolivian team, and it’s nice to see the long-lasting effects of what we’re all doing.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, BENJAMIN TOTH

EDITOR’S CHOICE IN PHYSIOLOGY

The paper

R. Rojas-Rodriguez et al., “PAPPA-mediated adipose tissue remodeling mitigates insulin resistance and protects against gestational diabetes in mice and humans,” Sci Transl Med, 12:eaay4145, 2020.

A fetus needs fuel, and a mother’s body undergoes big physiological changes during pregnancy to make sure it gets it. One change is a reduction in insulin sensitivity, meaning that cells become less responsive to insulin signals telling them to take up glucose from the blood. In 5 percent to 9 percent of US pregnancies, cells become so resistant to insulin that they become significantly less effective at keeping blood glucose levels down. Mothers who have this temporary condition, known as gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), may have an elevated risk of type 2 diabetes and other diseases later in life—as may her children.

Several years ago, Raziel Rojas-Rodriguez, then a PhD student in Silvia Corvera’s lab at the University of Massachusetts, discovered differences in the fat, or adipose tissue, of pregnant people with and without GDM. Although increases in fat mass are normal during pregnancy, people with GDM had larger fat cells surrounding their organs, and, according to genetic assays, lower expression of certain genes involved in insulin signaling in their fat tissue than did pregnant people without GDM. The researchers wondered if there might be a link between fat remodeling during pregnancy and the development of insulin resistance.



WEB | PDF SIGNAL BOOST: Pregnancy triggers a remodeling of fat tissue, according to findings from researchers at the University of Massachusetts. In the team’s proposed mechanism, pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPPA), which is produced in the placenta and elsewhere in a pregnant person’s body, acts on insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5 (IGFBP-5), freeing up the insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) that typically binds to it. IGF-1 signaling subsequently triggers fat remodeling, including the expansion of blood vessels (angiogenesis) into the tissue (vascularization). These changes are likely to be important for maintaining insulin-driven regulation of glucose levels in the blood, the researchers conclude, although the mechanism for this is not clear. © KELLY FINAN

To investigate, they focused on pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPPA), which is produced mainly by the placenta and helps regulate insulin signaling and increases in the blood throughout pregnancy. In vitro assays revealed that PAPPA plays a role in remodeling human fat tissue and promotes vascularization. Compared with pregnant wildtype mice, pregnant mice lacking PAPPA had more fat around their livers and reduced insulin sensitivity, Rojas-Rodriguez says.

The researchers also examined hospital data from 6,361 pregnant people who took PAPPA tests (the protein is also used to diagnose fetal aneuploidy) in the first trimester and glucose tests in the third. The team found that, even when controlling for BMI and age, low PAPPA was associated with elevated GDM risk, suggesting the protein may protect against the condition.

The University of Southern California’s Thomas Buchanan, who was not involved in the study, says the findings offer new insight into adipose tissue remodeling during pregnancy and into the role of PAPPA. He says the relationship between PAPPA levels and GDM is unclear because there may be confounding factors influencing a person’s GDM risk that aren’t captured in this study, and because the PAPPA-knockout mice don’t recapitulate all the characteristics of human pregnancy. For example, although the knockouts showed reduced insulin sensitivity compared with wildtypes, they paradoxically had enhanced glucose tolerance.

Corvera says that this seems to be because muscle tissue in these mice consumed unusually large volumes of glucose. “We don’t know why,” she says. “It may be that the mice are moving more.” Tissue-specific knockouts could help narrow in on what’s happening where, she adds. Rojas-Rodriguez, now a postdoc at Tufts University, says the team would like to measure PAPPA longitudinally during pregnancy and notes that the protein may have use as a biomarker. “Obviously this will need more studies,” she says, “but there is a potential of this protease to be used in the diagnosis of gestational diabetes.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: When obese female mice exercised during pregnancy, their young grew up to be healthier than pups born to sedentary obese moms.

© ISTOCK.COM, DRA_SCHWARTZ

EDITOR’S CHOICE IN PHYSIOLOGY

The paper

R.C. Laker et al., “Exercise during pregnancy mitigates negative effects of parental obesity on metabolic function in adult mouse offspring,” J Appl Physiol, 130:605–16, 2021.

Obesity is a risk factor for numerous diseases, including cancer and type 2 diabetes. This risk extends to future generations, as parental obesity can leave epigenetic marks in egg and sperm cells that affect the metabolic health of offspring formed from those germ cells. “The health status of the parents matters,” says Zhen Yan, a physician scientist at the University of Virginia who studies exercise physiology.

Yan’s group had previously studied how exercise before and during pregnancy affected the adult offspring of female mice with diet-induced obesity. Maternal exercise improved glucose tolerance in their offspring, and also curbed DNA hypermethylation—an epigenetic change that can reduce expression of particular genes—of the promoter of PGC-1α, a gene expressed in the adult progeny’s skeletal muscle that encodes a key metabolic regulator.

In a new study, Yan and his colleagues investigated whether exercise started during pregnancy is enough to improve offspring health in mice. The adult male progeny of obese mothers that never exercised had higher insulin and glucose levels in adulthood compared with the male offspring of sedentary non-obese mothers. But when obese mothers exercised, their offspring did not show hypermethylation of PGC-1α and had normal metabolic health. The researchers also found that maternal exercise compensated for the negative effects of obese fathers on offspring health, preventing a pattern of glucose intolerance in their adult pups, though paternal obesity didn’t affect PGC-1α methylation levels, suggesting a different mechanism is involved.

“I think this work is really interesting. . . . Looking at maternal and paternal influence, in general, is important,” says Kristin Stanford, a physiologist at the Ohio State University who wasn’t involved in the work. How maternal exercise during pregnancy counters the effects of parental obesity remains an open question, as well as how the findings might apply to humans.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Endometrial stromal fibroblasts, one of the endometrial cell types which expresses HAND2

MICHAEL SULAK

EDITOR’S CHOICE IN GENETICS

The paper

M. Marinić et al., “Evolutionary transcriptomics implicates HAND2 in the origins of implantation and regulation of gestation length,” eLife, doi:10:e61257, 2021.

Scientists don’t fully understand the molecular mechanisms that conclude human pregnancies. Simply put: “We don’t know how women go [into] labor,” says Mirna Marinić, a developmental biologist at the University of Chicago, adding that pregnancy in animal models is often too different from that of humans to be very informative.

Still, understanding how differences between animal and human pregnancies arise could provide novel insights into how labor is triggered. Marinić and her team compared gene expression profiles in the endometrial tissue that forms the maternal-fetal barrier across 27 species—including 18 live-birthing mammals, the egg-laying platypus, and eight other egg-laying animals—to look for shifts in gene expression associated with the evolution of different reproductive strategies.

The analyses revealed 149 genes that had evolved to be expressed in the endometrial tissue of placental mammals, and of those, a transcription factor called heart- and neural crest derivatives-expressed protein 2 (HAND2) stood out. The gene is known to play a role in prepping the uterine lining for implantation and suppressing estrogen signaling; reexamining published data, the team found that HAND2 expression decreases throughout human gestation. The researchers then knocked out HAND2 in human endometrial cells and identified changes in the expression patterns of genes associated with premature birth and protecting the fetus from the mother’s immune system, strongly pointing to a role for HAND2 in initiating labor.

“This is really exciting, because it’s leading us to genes that might be important,” says Rachel Freathy, a genetic epidemiologist at the University of Exeter who was not involved in the study. Freathy identifies genomic regions involved in preterm birth, and says she was excited by the researchers’ experimental approach. “It was a great bridge from the kind of work that we do that brings up associations to actually getting to the mechanisms in the right tissues.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA

Darby Saxbe got her start in psychology research early. A self-described “nerdy kid,” she did a science fair study in seventh grade in which she gave left-handed people who wrote with a “hooked” posture and right-handed people a visual test to compare their perception in their left and right visual fields. “I’ve always been sort of curious [about] what makes people different from each other,” she explains.

Growing up in the college town of Oberlin, Ohio, it was easy to envision a career in academia, but Saxbe wasn’t completely sold. When she enrolled at Yale University in 1995, she originally majored in English. After realizing that career prospects for would-be English professors weren’t promising, she gravitated back toward psychology, and graduated with a double major. She moved to New York, working for tech startups and as a freelance writer, but the crash of the dot-com economy in the early 2000s led her to press the restart button on her career by going to graduate school.

She applied to a lab at the University of California, Los Angeles, that was launching an intensive study of the everyday lives of dual income heterosexual couples. Rena Repetti, who heads the lab, recalls that in her admission interview, Saxbe “came across as not only very intelligent, clearly, and very accomplished, but full of energy, full of ideas.”

In the lab, Saxbe proved “an absolute joy to work with,” Repetti says, displaying an impressive ability to “put different strands of research and different research literatures together in novel ways.” Saxbe excels, Repetti adds, at combining biological, psychological, and social research. “I don’t know of anyone, literally, who combines those three strands together as well as she does.”

Darby Saxbe began her psychology research early, participating in science fairs as a young girl. Courtesy of darby saxbe

As part of Repetti’s study, Saxbe monitored cortisol levels in the saliva of participants and compared it to people’s self-reported marriage quality. Levels of cortisol, a stress hormone, normally peak in the morning and then decline. If an individual’s levels instead remain high, it can indicate burnout or chronic stress. Saxbe found that women in lower-quality marriages tended to have less decline in cortisol levels throughout the day compared with their counterparts in happy marriages, while no such relationship existed for men.

Saxbe earned her PhD in clinical psychology in 2009 and went on to a year-long internship at a veteran’s hospital before beginning a postdoc at the University of Southern California (USC) with psychology researcher Gayla Margolin. There, Saxbe continued to pursue her interest in family relationships and cortisol levels, while adding neuroimaging to her toolkit. Using MRI, she scanned the brains of adolescents between 15 and 18 years old as the teenagers viewed videos of either themselves, their parents, or unfamiliar peers displaying positive and negative emotions. Their patterns of brain activation were different depending on whether they were viewing unfamiliar people or viewing themselves or their parents, she found, and the particulars of those differences correlated with whether adolescents engaged in risk-taking behaviors such as shoplifting or drug use.

Saxbe had her two children just before and during her postdoc, and that experience aroused an interest in the changes wrought by the transition to parenthood, she says. After starting her own lab at USC in 2013, Saxbe began a study on expecting couples, focusing particularly on fathers. Men in couples expecting a child completed questionnaires and had their hormone levels measured and their brains scanned before and after the birth of their child, and underwent observation with their babies. Saxbe says that she’s interested in the wide variability—among both individuals and cultures—in fathers’ level of involvement in parenting. In addition, Saxbe notes, “if they are showing changes to their biology or to their brain, it suggests that you don’t need to be pregnant to undergo some of those changes to your physiology.” That study recently wrapped up data collection.

“What’s very unique about what she’s done is . . . making a very compelling case that childbirth is a life event with implications for the health of all family members involved,” says Margolin, who echoes Repetti’s praise of Saxbe’s facility for interdisciplinary work. An example, she says, is Saxbe’s 2020 launch of the USC Center for the Changing Family, which pulls together faculty and trainees from different schools at the university with the idea of “getting people to talk to each other across different fields and make connections.”

Clarification (August 2): The first paragraph of this story has been edited to clarify that Saxbe carried out her study in seventh grade for a science fair.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: MODIFIED FROM

© ISTOCK.COM, ALEKSEI NAUMOV

At first glance, this year’s inaugural Mothers in Science conference would have looked familiar to anyone who has attended a professional event in the last year: it was remote due to the pandemic, speakers fidgeted with their mute buttons, and more than one person revealed themselves to be wearing sweatpants.

But throughout the daylong event, held on May 8, it would quickly have become clear that this event was something unique. Ryan Watkins, a planetary scientist and program manager at NASA, spoke from her home in St. Louis, framed by a virtual background of a human landing capsule. Towards the end of her presentation, a disembodied hand pierced the capsule’s window; in reality, the arm belonged to her youngest daughter, who was home sick. Watkins finished her presentation on the barriers faced by mothers in science, technology, engineering, math, and medicine (STEMM) while doling out snacks to the toddler on her lap.

On Twitter, parents shared photos of their children attending the conference alongside them, and presenters opened talks by commiserating about the challenges of balancing work and family. Aaron Clauset, a computer scientist at the University of Colorado Boulder, had his three daughters with him and needed his speaking time changed to accommodate their schedules.

This honest discourse, and the empathy extended to struggling parents, is just the behavior the team behind the event, the nonprofit Mothers in Science (MIS), is working to normalize. For too long, say the organization’s founders, academia has sidelined the contributions of parents, prompting many to abandon their careers. Studies report that women worldwide shoulder a disproportionate burden of household labor, and mothers specifically earn less money, are less likely to be hired or promoted, and are more likely to drop out after starting their families than fathers or childless peers are. (Little research focuses specifically on trans or nonbinary parents.) Pregnant people also face prejudice, so much so that the US Department of Education included pregnancy discrimination under its 1972 Title IX civil rights law. With a pandemic straining many working parents, the motivation is there to advocate for change—before the world returns to a normal that suits only some.

Since launching MIS in 2019, Isabel Torres—the organization’s cofounder, a PhD in genetics, and a mother of four children—has seen the group swell and its influence grow, in part because women are speaking out about the challenges they face. “There’s a lot of silence and stigma around motherhood, and women know . . . that it is used against us in the professional setting,” she says. Despite a subtle closing of the gender gap in recent years, Torres continues, change has been slow, and motherhood is still seen by many employers as a liability.

The conference brought together researchers studying gender disparities in academia, drawing almost 200 participants from 46 countries. During presentations and panels, scientists detailed how the system fails working mothers and pregnant people; highlighted existing solutions; and brainstormed new strategies for research and policy. “Mums are scared that everything will go back to the way it was, so our organization is really pushing for change now,” Torres says of her team’s decision to host the conference during the pandemic. “We hope to bring a deep change to the system, because it’s so overdue.”

Attendees of the Mothers In Science virtual conference in May Isabel Torres

Raising awareness of the barriers for working parents

Torres’s ardor stems from her own experiences as a new mother during her PhD studies at the University of Cambridge. “You go back to the lab, and you don’t feel different, but you feel that people see you differently,” she says. Torres was no longer as involved in research planning, and colleagues stopped inviting her out to network because they expected she was overwhelmed, she recalls. While her career goals remained unchanged, “they just assume you’re no longer ambitious, that you just want an easier, more flexible job,” she tells The Scientist. She left academia after completing a postdoc at the UK's Medical Research Council, and now works as a science writer and editor.

For researchers who spend long stretches in the field, however, parenthood can in fact be difficult to reconcile with career aspirations. Gemma Collins, a molecular ecologist at the Senckenberg Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre in Germany who was not at the MIS conference but has shared her parenting challenges with MIS through social media, scheduled her first pregnancy around Antarctic field seasons during her PhD work. After waiting one year, Collins decided not to postpone again. But when she contacted her funders about rescheduling her second expedition, they declined. “The fieldwork that I’d managed to get funding for, they just gave the slot to someone else,” she tells The Scientist in a video recording. “I was gutted, and a bit bitter about it.”

Mums are scared that every­thing will go back to the way it was, so our organization is really pushing for change now. —Isabel Torres, Mothers in Science

The decision to delay parenthood also affected Monica Malta, an epidemiologist at the University of Toronto. Initially, she wanted to start a family once she was more secure in her career. But as a postdoc approaching 40, she forwent applying for a tenure-track job and took a leave of absence to have the first of her three children via in vitro fertilization. “I think it’s very common for most women in STEMM to wait . . . because our training takes a lot of time,” she says, adding that many of her friends who wanted children ultimately chose work instead.

Stories such as these have played out in countless iterations, with mothers facing a number of barriers collectively called the maternal wall. Several women from STEMM backgrounds tell The Scientist that in addition to having colleagues assume their priorities, as happened to Torres, others had their competency questioned when, for example, they needed time to get themselves back up to speed. Still others say they have been asked, illegally, about their family planning during interviews and felt that the job depended on their answers.

This kind of anecdotal evidence is common, says Torres, with women communicating through whisper networks. But research presented at the conference is providing hard data to support the experiences of exasperated mothers. In one 2019 study highlighted at the event, sociologists Erin Cech and Mary Blair-Loy investigated how people’s careers changed after having children. Using data from the National Science Foundation (NSF), they found that nearly half of all new mothers leave full-time STEMM employment following the birth or adoption of their first child, while roughly one-third leave the field entirely. “The sheer size of the attrition was really striking to us,” Cech tells The Scientist, adding that mothers rarely return even once their children enter school. “Once you’re out of full-time STEMM employment, it’s really unlikely that you will jump back in.” The effects weren’t limited to mothers: nearly one-quarter of new fathers surveyed also left full-time employment in STEMM after becoming parents.

More recently, a study by Clauset and others, published in Science Advances and shared at the MIS conference, found that researchers in computer science, history, and business delay having kids by several years compared to the national average, and that respondents who self-identified as women tended to have fewer children than the average US parent. Parenthood was also linked to a sustained decline in publications for mothers—between 17 percent and 48 percent, depending on the field—compared to women who did not have children, while fathers’ output changed very little, on average, compared to men who did not have children. Within computer science, mothers wrote roughly 18 fewer papers in the decade following their child’s birth, a gap that would take five years to close. “I didn’t really expect it to be so much,” says study coauthor Allison Morgan, a computer scientist at the University of Colorado Boulder who analyzed the data for her dissertation. “It’s meaningful because so many academics become parents,” she adds, noting that nearly 80 percent of respondents over 40 had children.

PARENTS SPEAKING OUT: As one of their first actions after launching in 2019, Mothers in Science designed and distributed a survey about parenting in STEMM that received almost 9,000 responses from academics living in 128 countries. Participants included self-identified men, women, and nonbinary individuals living with and without children. Results from two of the questions are presented below for women and men, who accounted for around 97 percent of the respondents. THE SCIENTIST STAFF; DATA FROM MOTHERS IN SCIENCE SURVEY

Designing and implementing practical solutions

Shortly after launching MIS, Torres and her team developed their own survey to capture evidence of what they believe is a global phenomenon. The survey, which was sent to universities worldwide and publicized on social media, garnered nearly 9,000 responses from more than 120 countries. Watkins, who is also the research manager at MIS, presented preliminary results at the conference about the challenges parents face, reaffirming what has been shown on a smaller scale in other studies, either in particular countries or within specific disciplines. This replication of existing findings on a larger scale will be important, she says, when MIS delivers its final report to various groups that help shape academic policies. The group’s advocacy work “might start small, at the institution level . . . [but] ultimately we’d like to get up to government levels, finding out what representatives we can take this kind of information to,” Watkins tells The Scientist.

In addition to generating data that could help shape policy, the survey provided a space for parents to express their opinions about what needs fixing and share their ideas for long-term solutions. Mothers and fathers have long been frustrated by insufficient parental leave, for example, suggesting that policies addressing this issue could be powerful recruitment and retention tools. In Morgan’s survey, half of the women respondents said leave policies were somewhat or very important in choosing their current job, but only 60 percent of the surveyed institutions offered paid leave.

Some funders are already playing a part in bringing about that change by offering flexible deadlines, grant extensions for parental leave, and subsidies for childcare. Deadline extensions during COVID-19 garnered more applicants who self-identified as female, and both the NSF and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) have initiatives geared towards parents, including paid leave for doctoral and postdoctoral fellows, funding for faculty to hire technicians to assist with research while academics are on leave, and annual subsidies for childcare. The NIH’s Office of Extramural Research tells The Scientist in an email that such policies have benefited thousands of scientists, and in response to their popularity, the agency plans to expand its childcare subsidies over the next fiscal year.

For parents wanting to reclaim their careers, nonprofits are offering programs to help academics re-enter STEMM following extended absences. In the US and Canada, the American Physical Society’s M. Hildred Blewett Fellowship provides funding to women for one year to cover childcare, salary, equipment, and tuition, while in the UK and Ireland, a fellowship from the Daphne Jackson Trust provides money and training to scientists of any gender resuming research after a break of two or more years.

One Trust awardee is Aisha Baba-Dikwa, now a microbiologist at the University of Manchester. She had been teaching for five years while she started her family, but missed the intellectual curiosity of conducting research. “It took a wake-up call—starting a family—to make me realize I had to go back into research, because that was my passion,” she tells The Scientist from her car, speaking between errands with her son, now eight years old.

For parents wanting to reclaim their careers, nonprofits are offering programs to help academics re-enter STEMM fol­lowing extended absences.

Applying for the Daphne Jackson Fellowship required Baba-Dikwa to submit a research proposal to potential host institutions, which provided additional funding in addition to lab space and an advisor. The money allowed her to ease back in by working in the lab part time, and her adviser trained her on new molecular tools. “It was really a drop in the deep end, as a new mother,” Baba-Dikwa says. Her son was then only two years old, and her pregnancy had been difficult and draining. The fellowship gave her confidence and the experience to land the first job she interviewed for afterwards, she says. “They really give you all the tools you need as a person returning to science.”

Making the most of the moment

The proliferation of groups such as MIS signals that greater awareness, and real change, may finally be on the way. Still, breaking through cultural and structural barriers to equality and equity within STEMM will require moving “beyond the sense of this being an individual problem, where mothers must be . . . educated about how they might best game the institution,” to a broader understanding of academia’s failings, Cech says.

All scientists should reject unfair policies, initiate conversations about what parents need, and extend empathy to their colleagues with children, say Torres and Watkins. As a new mother, Watkins asked her postdoctoral advisor for space to pump breast milk, which he had simply never recognized as a need but happily granted. Collins similarly approached her male supervisors as a PhD student about setting aside an empty room for her to use. Her outdated building didn’t even have a women’s restroom or diaper-changing facilities at the time, and the room gave her privacy to pump in a clean and quiet space.

With conversations on these issues coming to the fore amid a broader discussion about what work will look like after the pandemic, Torres feels confident that change is coming, the success of the conference being just the latest example of a groundswell of support. “It might be slow, it might go step by step, but I think this is definitely the moment,” she says. “Mothers are at the breaking point; the system is at the breaking point. I just hope we’ll be able to push enough to really change the system irreversibly.”

Correction (July 23): The seventh paragraph of this article has been amended to note that Torres left academia after completing a postdoc at the UK's Medical Research Council, not after completing her PhD. The Scientist regrets the error.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, VCHAL

Genetic knowledge has played a direct role in pregnancy for more than 50 years, since the first use of amniocentesis to extract amniotic fluid containing fetal cells and DNA for analysis. Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT)—which is significantly cheaper than amniocentesis and, requiring only a blood draw, can be done earlier in pregnancy—started a decade ago and is now common. NIPT will only become better, providing more-accurate information on risk for thousands of rare genetic conditions and dozens of more-common diseases. It’s just one of the technologies poised to transform pregnancy over the coming decades.

Today, bad news from prenatal testing leaves would-be parents with two options: terminate the pregnancy or prepare for the birth of an ill or at-risk child. For over 30 years, parents have been able to avoid this dilemma by turning to pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). This procedure starts with in vitro fertilization (IVF), but then tests embryos before they are transferred into the uterus. For many people, choosing not to transfer an embryo destined to have a genetic disease raises less concern than aborting an already implanted embryo or growing fetus.

PGD opens yet another door. One might edit the genes of those at-risk embryos, using CRISPR or other methods, before using them to try to start a pregnancy. Infamously, Chinese scientist He Jiankui used embryo editing to make babies three years ago. In this case, rather than trying to head off genetic disease, He was attempting to confer HIV resistance by introducing mutations in CCR5, a gene that encodes a cell-surface receptor that the virus latches onto to infect T cells. He expected acclaim, but instead was condemned around the world and ultimately sentenced to prison. For many people, He’s sin was changing the babies’ DNA in ways they could pass on to their children, because changed cells in the embryo would eventually become eggs or sperm. This argument against heritable changes would also apply when the change is made to correct disease-causing mutations—or when it is used to try to “enhance” the resulting babies. Whether such germline editing should be a “line in the sand,” not to be crossed, is hotly disputed.

MIT Press, February 2021

My new book, CRISPR People: The Science and Ethics of Editing Humans, tells this story of human germline genome editing in depth, including He’s experiment and the many problems with it. But if the process of editing the DNA of embryos is eventually shown to be safe and effective, it might end up being adopted, especially as we continue to improve our understanding of genetics. As we learn more about the effects of genetic variations, gene editing technologies will have more to offer. Most of us look forward to this when it involves disease, while the (distant) prospect of “enhancement” of traits such as height or intelligence causes very mixed feelings.

Now, consider that we may soon be able to make eggs and sperm from stem cells derived from a person’s skin. This technique, which has already worked in mice and is being researched with human cells, offers hope to people who cannot have their own genetic children because they lack functional sperm or eggs, as well as a potential pathway for LGBTQ couples who want to have children who are biologically their own. If the technique becomes an easy source of human eggs, it may also allow people to bypass the uncomfortable, risky, and expensive process of harvesting eggs for IVF, which could lead to a vast expansion of the use of PGD.

Finally, in several decades, one might be able to make a living uterus outside the body using stem cells and, by mechanically giving it blood with oxygen, nutrients, and the right hormones, use it to gestate a baby. This not-exactly-artificial womb could transform pregnancy entirely, and with it, the lives of billions of people.

Some of these developments will come to pass, some will not, and some things that I have neither discussed nor dreamt of will happen. While these advances could bring great benefit, they could also be abused, creating in real life the familiar dystopias of the breakdown of family structures, state control over parental decisions, or genetically stratified societies. We need to watch these biomedical possibilities to make sure they deliver a better tomorrow.

Henry T. Greely is Professor of Law, Professor by Courtesy of Genetics, and Director of the Center for Law and the Biosciences at Stanford University. Read an excerpt from CRISPR People here.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pregnancy triggers a remodeling of fat tissue, according to findings from researchers at the University of Massachusetts. In the team’s proposed mechanism, pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPPA), which is produced in the placenta and elsewhere in a pregnant person’s body, acts on insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5 (IGFBP-5), freeing up the insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) that typically binds to it. IGF-1 signaling subsequently triggers fat remodeling, including the expansion of blood vessels (angiogenesis) into the tissue (vascularization). These changes are likely to be important for maintaining insulin-driven regulation of glucose levels in the blood, the researchers conclude, although the mechanism for this is not clear.

© KELLY FINAN

Read the full story.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Thanks to more than two decades of animal and clinical research, dozens of women who lacked a uterus have received the organ via donation and transplant surgery, and many of these patients have had successful pregnancies. While the procedure was developed explicitly for the purpose of rescuing a woman’s reproductive capacity, scientists are taking advantage of the unique model to ask some basic research questions about endometrial turnover and other aspects of uterine biology, as well as questions about transplantation, and specifically, immune rejection of an organ. After every uterus transplant, recipients undergo regular blood draws and cervical biopsies—samples that clinical trial researchers are actively interrogating and banking for future studies. A few of those research directions are illustrated below.

Immune rejection of organ

Immunosuppressant drugs designed to help recipients accept the transplanted uterus can be discontinued prior to having the organ removed. From cervical biopsies and other samples, researchers can watch for signs of rejection and look for biomarkers that could provide a less invasive way to test for rejection following transplant surgeries involving uteruses or other organs.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: @STUDIO LINDALU, LINDA LUBBERSEN

During pregnancy, the body is subject to numerous changes. The composition of the gut microbiome shifts, metabolism changes, and the gut epithelium becomes more permeable. These alterations facilitate interactions between the immune system and gut microbiota, leading to the production of microbe-specific antibodies that are transferred across the placenta to the developing fetus, and later via the milk to the nursing offspring.

The maternal microbiota, and the external factors that shape it, influence which immunomodulatory metabolites are produced and transferred to offspring, where they support immune education and otherwise influence development, helping to protect offspring from allergic asthma, metabolic syndrome, and likely other inflammatory diseases later in life. After birth, maternally derived antibodies help newborns tolerate the bacterial colonization of their own GI tracts, while simultaneously protecting them from enteric and systemic infections.

@Studio Lindalu, Linda Lubbersen PREGNANT MOUSE FETUS External factors affect the composition of the maternal microbiota (for example, diet, antibiotics, and other drugs). The antibody-mediated transfer of metabolites increases antimicrobial peptide production, which strengthens the epithelial barrier to prepare the gut for microbial colonization. The permeability of intestinal epithelium increases during pregnancy, facilitating interactions between the microbiota and a mother’s immune system. SCFAs transferred from mom travel to the fetal thymus, where they trigger epigenetic changes that nudge T cells toward becoming regulatory as opposed to inflammatory later in life. The maternal microbiota shapes the repertoire of commensal-targeting antibodies, which cross the placenta and are transferred in breast milk to her offspring. SCFAs also have various effects on the heart, pancreas, thymus, and other organs. Gut microbes produce various metabolites, including short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and immunomodulatory compounds, some of which are bound by antibodies and transferred to the fetus.





@Studio Lindalu, Linda Lubbersen

NEONATES

Commensal-targeting antibodies promote tolerance during bacterial colonization, largely by keeping gut bacteria inside the intestinal lumen or ushering them back in when they do escape. If microbes that escape the intestinal lumen are not immediately ushered back in, antibodies from mom tag them for efficient elimination to limit inflammation.

@Studio Lindalu, Linda Lubbersen

OLDER PUPS

As the pups age, the immune education that they received in utero and shortly after birth protects the animals from inappropriate inflammatory reactions that can lead to allergy, metabolic syndrome, or other health consequences.

Read the full story.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@