ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, KEITHBINNS

A man who died August 2 in Guéckédou Prefecture, Guinea, has been confirmed to have had Marburg virus disease, the World Health Organization announced yesterday. The case marks the first time the highly virulent, Ebola-like virus has been found infecting a person in West Africa. Previous outbreaks of Marburg virus disease, which is spread through contact with the body fluids of infected people or animals, have occurred mainly in eastern and southern Africa, according to The Guardian.

See “Bats in Sierra Leone Carry Marburg Virus”

Guéckédou Prefecture has been the origin of some previous Ebola outbreaks, The Guardian reports. The region borders Liberia and Sierra Leone. According to The Washington Post, Guinea has ordered 155 people into quarantine in response to the case, although only three are considered at a high risk of having contracted the virus based on their contact with the man.

“We applaud the alertness and the quick investigative action by Guinea’s health workers. The potential for the Marburg virus to spread far and wide means we need to stop it in its tracks,” says Matshidiso Moeti, WHO’s Regional Director for Africa, in the WHO statement. “We are working with the health authorities to implement a swift response that builds on Guinea’s past experience and expertise in managing Ebola, which is transmitted in a similar way.”

According to the WHO, symptoms of Marburg include fever and severe headache. In previous outbreaks, fatality rates for infected people have ranged from 24 percent to 88 percent.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Forest fire in Chiang Mai, Thailand

© ISTOCK.COM, MACK2HAPPY

Today (August 9), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released a report compiling the planet’s most up-to-date information about climate change. The report, which was written by 234 authors from around the world and cites data from over 14,000 studies, warns policymakers and the public that climate change is unequivocally caused by human action—and that we’re running out of time to reverse it.

According to the report, global temperatures have warmed by about 1.1 degrees Celsius since pre-industrial times, and without any reduction in emissions, within the next 40 years those temperatures will meet or exceed 2.0 degrees Celsius—the cap set by the Paris Accords in 2015.

According to The Washington Post, warming of over 2 degrees Celsius could be enough for Greenland’s ice sheet to melt, which would cause sea levels to rise globally by more than 6 feet. Effects aren’t limited to ice caps and coastal areas, either—“Climate change is already affecting every inhabited region across the globe with human influence contributing to many observed changes in weather and climate extremes,” the report states. These changes include droughts, wildfire-stoking heat waves, and flooding—disasters that have befallen communities across the globe in the last year alone. The report also projects that some damage from carbon emissions, such as acidifying oceans and rising sea levels, could take centuries to millennia to reverse.

United Nations Secretary General António Guterres says in a statement that the findings are “a code red for humanity,” and that leaders from government, business, and civil society must unite behind policies and investments to keep rising temperatures under control. “We owe this to the entire human family,” he says. “There is no time for delay and no room for excuses.”

This report is the sixth of its kind since 1990—and the most recent since 2013—according to Nature, but is distinct from previous reports in a few ways. First, it leaves no room for doubt as to whether or not humans are responsible for the rapidly warming temperatures of the last century. Additionally, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology climate scientist Sonia Seneviratne tells Nature that within the last decade, scientists have developed better statistical models to predict the effects of climate change. She also says that increasing numbers of extreme weather events are evidence of the changing climate.

“It’s now become actually quite obvious to people what is happening, because we see it with our own eyes,” University of East Anglia climate scientist and report contributor Corinne Le Quéré tells the Post. “You don’t have to have a PhD. You don’t need to be a climate scientist. You just need to be a person who looks out the window.”

This report does not offer any policy recommendations or mitigation strategies, but will be followed by two additional reports in the coming months that will offer concrete recommendations to limit carbon emissions. However, Monday’s report does include five projected scenarios, ranging from “business as usual” (the planet continuing its current reliance on fossil fuels) to making dramatic cuts to carbon emissions. At this point, even the most dramatic interventions wouldn't be able to stop the climate from exceeding the 1.5 degrees C threshold before temperatures stabilize and begin cooling—and in the “business as usual” scenario, scientists project the climate would hit 4.4 to 5.7 degrees C higher than preindustrial levels by the end of the century, according to Science.

Despite the sobering projections, officials and activists say that it’s not too late to act.

“From a scientific perspective, every degree, every part of a degree, every half of a degree matters in terms of limiting the impacts that we will see from climate change,” Ko Barrett, former vice chair of the IPCC, tells CNN, and climate scientist and report coauthor Kim Cobb tells Buzzfeed that acting now can help ensure “these next two decades of warming may be some of our last.”

“The new IPCC report contains no real surprises. It confirms what we already know from thousands previous studies and reports—that we are in an emergency,” writes teenage environmental activist Greta Thunberg on Twitter. “It is up to us to be brave and take decisions based on the scientific evidence provided in these reports. We can still avoid the worst consequences, but not if we continue like today, and not without treating the crisis like a crisis.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, EONEREN

SARS-CoV-2 is fitter than ever. Its latest incarnation, the Delta (or B.1.617.2) variant, is the fastest-spreading form of the virus yet. First identified in India, which it swept through killing hundreds of thousands this spring, Delta has swiftly become the most dominant coronavirus variant worldwide. While it’s already driving rapid increases in hospitalizations and deaths—overwhelmingly in unvaccinated populations—simply by virtue of being more transmissible, it may also cause more severe disease than some previously dominating SARS-CoV-2 variants.

Meanwhile, emerging data suggest that when vaccinated people become infected with the Delta variant and develop symptoms—which, although increasing in frequency, remains exceedingly rare, officials report—they might be as contagious as unvaccinated infected people. Those findings motivated the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to recommend in late July that in places with high transmission of the virus, even fully vaccinated people should wear masks indoors.

The Delta variant’s emergence isn’t a shock to many researchers; spreading throughout the globe for a year and a half, SARS-CoV-2 was destined to adapt to humans and become better at infecting them. The mystery remains, however, exactly how Delta affects the human body differently than other variants. A flurry of recent research, little of which has undergone peer review, is yielding some clues—on how the Delta variant might produce greater amounts of virus in people’s airways, for instance, which could make it more transmissible, and how it could cause more severe disease.

Scientists are also uncovering cause for hope. Although the antibodies induced by vaccines available in the US are slightly less effective against the Delta variant, the shots are largely still powerful protectors against severe cases of COVID-19. And according to preliminary data, “breakthrough” infections in vaccinated people resolve faster than in unvaccinated people.

“We’ve already seen a variety of other variants that have some—but maybe not all—of the same characteristics that Delta has,” such as increased transmission and a slight reduction in the effectiveness of vaccine-induced antibodies, says Richard Kennedy, an immunologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. “None of those are really a surprise. This [variant] just seems to have more of all of those.”

What makes Delta more transmissible

Measuring SARS-CoV-2’s transmissibility in the real world is notoriously difficult as human behavior is continuously changing, notes virologist Paul Bieniasz of Rockefeller University, but the fact that the Delta variant has so quickly displaced its dominating predecessor Alpha (B.1.1.7) is convincing evidence that it’s able to spread more rapidly in incompletely vaccinated populations. The UK government’s Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, Operational sub-group (SPI-M-O) estimates that Delta is between 40 and 60 percent more transmissible than the Alpha variant and nearly twice as transmissible as the original virus first identified in China.

In explaining this heightened transmissibility, scientists point to not-yet-peer-reviewed data suggesting that infection with the Delta variant results in greater levels of virus accumulating more rapidly in human airways. In China, researchers tracked 62 people exposed to the virus who developed infections with the variant. They took daily measurements of the concentrations of viral RNA in swabs from the backs of the participants’ throats. Compared to 63 people infected with other variants, people with Delta infections tested positive sooner: four days after viral exposure compared to six. And when patients infected with Delta first tested positive, they carried around 1000 times more viral RNA. Although virologist Angela Rasmussen of the University of Saskatchewan’s Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization cautions that viral RNA isn’t necessarily a proxy for the amount of virus that is actually infectious, “it’s probably a safe assumption that people are making more virus and shedding more virus” when infected with the Delta variant, she says.

Perhaps the variant replicates faster inside cells or binds more tightly to human cells’ ACE2 receptor, which the virus’s spike protein uses to enter cells, Kennedy speculates. But much attention has surrounded a particular mutation on the Delta variant called P681R, which suggests another potential mechanism. The mutation lies at the junction between two subunits of SARS-CoV-2’s spike protein, at a site that allows the human cellular enzyme furin to cleave the spike into two parts. This cleavage, some experiments suggest, primes spike proteins in a way that allows them to fuse more readily with a host cell’s membrane, according to a detailed description in Nature.

The Delta variant’s P681R mutation seems to allow that cleavage to occur more efficiently than in the original SARS-CoV-2 strain. This could help the variant infect more cells in a given amount of time, and therefore, make more copies of itself overall. “Having a more efficient furin cleavage site could lead to increased amounts of virus in the respiratory tract,” Bieniasz says. The Alpha variant—also more transmissible than other versions of SARS-CoV-2 when it first emerged—has a similar mutation.

Some scientists are skeptical that the P681R mutation is to blame for the heightened viral load in people infected with Delta. Kei Sato, a virologist at the University of Tokyo, says that in his own experiments, he and his colleagues generally didn’t observe much difference in replication or the ability to infect cells when comparing the Delta variant to a previously described form of the virus that lacks the P681R mutation. In any case, Bieniasz says he’d be surprised if the Delta variant’s heightened transmissibility were caused by P681R alone. The variant carries a handful of other mutations on the spike protein, and more scattered around the genome. But “there isn’t really any information at this point that would tell you mechanistically what their contribution is to the increased fitness of Delta,” he says.

The biology behind “breakthrough” infections

The fact that the Delta variant has also triggered increasing numbers of infections in vaccinated people has generated a bevy of headlines, some of which have been criticized for their alarmist nature. The CDC’s revised guidelines on mask-wearing were based in part on data from an outbreak in Massachusetts in the wake of large public gatherings. In July, officials identified 469 people in Barnstable County who tested positive, mostly for the Delta variant (participants had likely asked to be tested, and the majority had developed COVID-19 symptoms). Three-quarters were fully vaccinated, in part reflecting a relatively high vaccination rate in the area. Scientists stress that the vaccines still work as intended; they were designed to prevent severe disease, not infections. The Massachusetts study, for instance, reported only five hospitalizations—four in fully vaccinated people—and no deaths.

Nationwide, robust figures on the frequency of breakthrough cases are elusive—particularly of asymptomatic or mild cases; the CDC only monitors instances that have progressed to hospitalization or death. According to an unpublished internal CDC document obtained by ABC News, breakthrough cases are reported for 0.096 percent—or 153,000—of the 156 million Americans who are fully vaccinated. A recent review of data from 25 states also estimated the rate of breakthrough cases to be “well below 1 percent.” According to that same review, the rates of hospitalizations and deaths with COVID-19 among the fully vaccinated range from “effectively zero” to 0.06 percent and 0.01, respectively.

Surprisingly, the Barnstable County study detected similar amounts of viral RNA in the specimens of vaccinated and unvaccinated participants. While that’s not necessarily reflective of the people’s capacity to infect others, “it is indisputable that in this outbreak, there seems to be transmission between previously vaccinated people,” says Hana Akselrod, an infectious disease physician at George Washington University. The fact that participants had been gathering in bars and other crowed spaces probably created a high-risk setting for viral transmission, she adds.

Kennedy cautions that it’s hard to say how much of the increase in breakthrough infections is because of the Delta variant’s specific biology, rather than simply because it’s dominating a general surge in cases. But recent CDC data from Colorado does suggest vaccines are less effective against the variant; when it sped through Mesa County, the overall effectiveness of the available vaccines against symptomatic infection dropped to 78 percent, while in counties with lower Delta levels, it was 89 percent.

The variant’s fitness advantage could feasibly allow it to build up a high viral load before vaccinated immune systems crank out enough antibodies to quash it, Akselrod says. Anatomically speaking, it’s possible that while antibodies induced by current vaccines form high, protective levels in the lungs—where infection is associated with severe COVID-19 symptoms—they might be less able to access mucosal tissues in the nose and upper respiratory tract, allowing viral replication to occur there, Bieniasz speculates.

Another possible factor in establishing infections in vaccinated people is the Delta variant’s modest ability to evade vaccine-induced antibodies, Akselrod suggests. One yet-to-be-peer-reviewed paper posted to medRxiv in mid-July pitted antibodies isolated from 40 healthcare workers who had received either the Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna mRNA vaccines against different variants. They found the Delta variant reduces the ability of antibodies to neutralize the virus by around 2.5-fold compared to a previously described isolate—slightly more so than the Alpha variant but not as much as the Beta variant (B.1.351) first discovered in South Africa or the Gamma variant (P.1) first spotted in Brazil.

This is likely due to mutations to the Delta variant’s receptor binding domain—the patch on the spike protein that latches onto host cells’ ACE2 receptors and is targeted by vaccines, Kennedy says. “What happens is the antibody either doesn’t bind or doesn’t bind as well,” he explains. But the human immune system typically produces many different antibodies against individual viral proteins—not to mention other kinds of immune machinery—preventing a complete reduction in vaccine effectiveness.

To wit: data from the Sisonke clinical trial in South Africa, reported in a news conference on Friday, suggest that even when it comes to Delta, the Johnson & Johnson vaccine is 71 percent effective against hospitalization and 95 percent effective against death. Rasmussen says she expects future variants to arise for which current vaccines are less protective, but for now, “the vaccines are actually holding up very, very well against Delta.”

In line with that idea is unpublished data from Singapore posted to medRxiv on July 31 that tracked Delta infections in 88 vaccinated—and mostly symptomatic—people. Although their viral RNA loads for the first week of illness were similar to those recorded in a group of 130 infected unvaccinated people, they decreased much more quickly in the vaccinated group. “And it showed that they had a huge spike in neutralizing antibodies immediately on testing positive,” adds Rasmussen, who wasn’t involved in the research.

Even so, several experts, including Rasmussen, Sato, and Bieniasz, agree with the CDC’s recommendation that vaccinated people should wear masks in high-risk settings. “No one wanted to be spending the summer sweating under masks, but this is the situation we have now, and we have to protect each other,” Akselrod says. “The primary use of masks is to prevent infections among unvaccinated people” who are more contagious for longer and are most at risk for developing severe COVID-19 with Delta.

More severe COVID-19 symptoms and long COVID?

It’s not clear if the elevated risk of hospitalization and death that some epidemiological studies have linked to Delta has more to do with characteristics of the populations in which Delta is circulating, or with the biology of the variant, Akselrod says. But some researchers have explored possible biological explanations. In a recent preprint, the University of Tokyo’s Sato and his colleagues report that when they allowed a SARS-CoV-2 isolate to infect modified monkey cells in vitro, the cells would stick together, forming connected structures known as syncytia, which have been spotted in the lungs of people with COVID-19. The team suspected that SARS-CoV-2’s furin cleavage site might be facilitating the observed clumping.

In addition to helping the viruses fuse with cells, it’s plausible that cleavage of the spike protein could also somehow cause infected cells to fuse with other cells close by. Notably, the team saw that syncytia induced by the Delta variant—whose P681R mutation may allow for more efficient cleavage—were much larger than those induced by a different form of SARS-CoV-2 that lacks the mutation. Interestingly, hamsters infected with SARS-CoV-2 viruses engineered to express the P681R mutation showed more signs of obstructed airways, and lost weight more quickly, than those infected with the other version of SARS-CoV-2—suggesting the variant caused more severe disease. Sato hypothesizes that by causing larger syncytia to form, the Delta variant could be causing more severe tissue damage in the lung. “I think that is the reason why the P681R-bearing virus is more pathogenic,” he says.

Rasmussen isn’t fully persuaded that the Delta variant is inherently more pathogenic. After all, hamsters are imperfect models of human COVID-19. But the P681R-driven syncytia formation might somehow explain why the virus is more transmissible, she says. Some other viruses are known to use such fused structures to spread from cell to cell, sometimes allowing more rapid spread across tissues.

Meanwhile, Akselrod says she’s worried about a Delta-driven surge of mostly young, unvaccinated people who’ll develop long-term symptoms known as “long COVID.” Amid a depleted healthcare workforce, the COVID-19 recovery clinic she directs is still struggling to care for long COVID patients who were infected with the Alpha variant in late 2020 or early 2021. “To think of getting another giant wave of Delta on top of that is just very, very sad,” she says. It’s still unclear, though, whether long COVID may be proportionally more frequent with Delta, and whether even vaccinated people could develop long COVID. “That’s a big scientific unknown right now,” she says.

As researchers continue to chip away at questions about Delta, they’re also keeping in mind the new variants that are likely on the horizon. “I think we’ll see more variants that have increased transmissibility. We may or may not see variants that cause more severe disease. . . . We’ll undoubtedly see variants that have an increased ability to evade immune responses,” Kennedy says. “We’ll run out of letters in the Greek alphabet before we run out of variants.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Ribbon and surface representation models of the phenylalanine hydroxylase enzyme

© ISTOCK.COM, VDVORNYK

In a study published yesterday (August 5) in Science, researchers identify human and mouse long noncoding RNAs, whose loss mimics the metabolic disorder phenylketonuria (PKU) in human cells and mice. Injecting the human long noncoding RNA into a mouse model of the disease improved the animals’ symptoms, potentially pointing to new opportunities to develop treatments for human patients.

Scientists and clinicians have historically categorized PKU as a problem with the gene that encodes the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), which converts the amino acid phenylalanine into tyrosine. Without this enzyme, phenylalanine consumed as part of a normal diet in foods such as milk, eggs, cheese, eggs, and meat builds up, causing seizures, intellectual disabilities, and psychiatric disorders. But DNA sequencing has demonstrated that sometimes people with PKU don’t have a mutation in the gene for PAH, calling into question PKU’s status as a single-gene disorder. The new study suggests the depletion of certain noncoding RNAs could also cause the condition, and that boosting the levels of those RNAs could relieve symptoms.

“This just shows that even after such a long time of studying what we thought was simple disease, we’re still learning more and more about other factors than just the mutations in this specific gene,” says John Mitchell, a pediatric endocrinologist at McGill University Health Center in Canada who was not involved in the study. “We haven’t been able to really describe the genotype-phenotype relationship for this particular disease,” he adds. “Having new areas to pursue for treatment is going to be important.”

In the new paper, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center’s Liuqing Yang and colleagues write that nearly all mutations in the human genome happen in noncoding DNA. Based on this idea and on work showing that PKU sometimes occurs in the absence of mutations to the gene for PAH, they sought to identify potentially relevant long noncoding RNAs by searching for ones with differing expression levels in mouse livers—the main site of phenylalanine metabolism—at two points in time: on embryonic day 18.5, when PAH activity has not yet reached its peak, and in adult mice.

Yang and his collaborators identified two versions of a noncoding RNA that were upregulated in adult mouse livers, suggesting they may play a role in phenylalanine metabolism. The researchers then introduced a mutation to disrupt the first splice site in the noncoding RNA, which depleted both forms. The mice with reduced noncoding RNA were slow growing, had higher levels of phenylalanine in their serum, and displayed diminished PAH activity, similar to people with PKU. Furthermore, as these mice aged, they experienced seizures and early death. The team used an antibody to isolate PAH and determined that the noncoding RNA they found is associated with the enzyme, so they named it Pair (PAH-activating long noncoding RNA).

Next, they looked in donated human liver tissue and found that human PAH also has a long noncoding RNA—called HULC (hepatocellular carcinoma upregulated long noncoding RNA)—associated with it. In a cell-free system, the authors showed that both Pair and HULC interact with PAH and likely tweak its shape to enable the enzyme to better bind to phenylalanine. In human hepatocytes missing HULC, adding the long noncoding RNA back improved the ability of PAH to convert phenylalanine to tyrosine, suggesting insufficient levels of the RNA may play a role in the pathogenesis of PKU.

In an email to The Scientist, Nenad Blau, a consultant in biochemical genetics at University Children’s Hospital Zurich in Switzerland and coauthor on the paper, notes that HULC deficiencies have yet to be detected in patients with abnormally high phenylalanine levels. Still, he says the work highlights that “PAH genotyping is essential for the diagnosis and management” of such disorders.

David Dimmock, senior medical director of Rady Children’s Institute for Genomic Medicine in California who did not participate in the work, says the RNA results are “not something that I intuitively would have expected,” but that more research is needed. “It will be fascinating to see whether or not we can find changes in this long noncoding RNA or others that actually do explain some of the phenotypic variability” seen in PKU in people, he says. “The next logical question is, if there is variability in the long noncoding RNAs, is there therapeutic potential?”

See “New Treatments for Phenylketonuria Aim to Loosen Reins on Strict Diet”

In an effort to address that sort of question, Yang, Blau and their colleagues delivered a liver-targeted HULC mimic to mice with the PAH mutation seen in the majority of PKU patients in the US. Control mice that received an injection of a scrambled RNA had high serum levels of phenylalanine, but treated mice had comparatively low levels of phenylalanine and high levels of tyrosine. Then the researchers gave HULC mimic alongside an established drug—a synthetic version of a protein known to support PAH function—that works in some patients with mild cases of PAH deficiency, but has been shown before to be ineffective in this mouse model and in patients with full blown PKU. The combined treatment had an additive effect in the mice, lowering serum phenylalanine levels even more than HULC mimic alone. According to Blau, the results indicate that HULC mimics may be a viable treatment option for some patients with PKU.

“It’s certainly a tantalizing thought that maybe this would be a way of ramping up endogenous activity in individuals with certain genetic changes,” Dimmock says of the experiments. However, before applying a related strategy therapeutically in people, he notes that research would need to address whether it’s possible to manipulate one enzyme without having negative effects that would harm the patient. And while Yang, Blau, and their colleagues have identified these RNA candidates that appear to function in similar ways, he adds that another challenge with long noncoding RNAs “seems to be how do you jump the species gap, because your model systems may or may not actually be accurate mimics of what’s going to happen in a human.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, FRANKYDEMEYER

Update (August 17, 2021): The US Food and Drug Administration will recommend that mRNA COVID-19 vaccine recipients get booster shots eight months after their second dose of the vaccine, multiple outlets report. According the Associated Press, the announcement is expected as soon as this week. This means those who received their vaccinations in December 2020 and January 2021 could receive boosters as soon as mid-September, The New York Times reports; boosters will be with the same brands as the primary vaccinations.

Update (August 13, 2021): In the United States, people recovering from solid organ transplants and others with compromised immune systems are now eligible for a third shot of either currently authorized mRNA vaccine, the Food and Drug Administration announced yesterday. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s independent advisory committee is expected to separately recommend the move in today’s meeting, reports The New York Times.

Whether boosters will become more widely available this fall remains an open question, Acting FDA Commissioner Janet Woodcock notes in the agency’s statement. “The FDA is actively engaged in a science-based, rigorous process with our federal partners to consider whether an additional dose may be needed in the future,” she says.

“Inevitably, there will be a time when we’ll have to give boosts,” National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Anthony Fauci tells NBC’s Today Show.

In a press briefing Wednesday (August 4), Director General of the World Health Organization Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus implored countries to consider a temporary moratorium on COVID-19 booster shots—until at least the end of September—to allow countries with lower vaccination rates to catch up.

More than 80 percent of the vaccines distributed to date have gone to high and upper middle–income countries, Tedros notes, “even though they account for less than half of the world’s population.”

“I understand the concern of all governments to protect their people from the Delta variant, but we cannot and we should not accept countries that have already used most of the global supply of vaccines using even more of it while the world’s most vulnerable people remain unprotected,” he adds.

See “How the Second mRNA Vaccine Bolsters Immunity”

Several nations, including Germany and Israel, have already rejected the idea of waiting, Reuters reports. “We want to provide the vulnerable groups in Germany with a precautionary third vaccination and at the same time support the vaccination of as many people in the world as possible,” the country’s health ministry tells the outlet. Israel began urging its older citizens to get booster shots at the end of July.

Other nations have similarly indicated plans to provide booster shots in the fall. French President Emmanuel Macron says the country is working on a roll-out plan for boosters in September, according to Reuters; the UK is also preparing to offer additional shots in September, The Washington Post reports.

While the United States has not yet decided whether boosters will be offered, White House press secretary Jen Psaki tells The New York Times that the Biden administration considers the juxtaposition of boosters with primary vaccinations to be “a false choice.”

“We can do both,” she adds, noting the administration’s efforts to distribute vaccines globally.

According to their developers, both the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines will likely need boosters to maintain protection, especially against the Delta variant. According to The Wall Street Journal, Moderna President Stephen Hoge says “a dose three of a booster will likely be necessary to keep us as safe as possible” in a business call Wednesday. “What we see is the potential for waning immunity.”

Public health experts continue to note that the likelihood of a vaccine-resistant variant emerging is higher in areas with low vaccination rates. “New variants are most likely to arise in unvaccinated populations," Ruth Karron, a medical doctor and epidemiologist with Johns Hopkins University, tells NPR. "So the more of the world that’s unvaccinated, the more we are all at risk."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: By freeze-drying mouse sperm on weighing paper and sandwiching the paper between protective plastic sheets, researchers were able to successfully mail the samples between labs in Japan.

DAIYU ITO, UNIVERSITY OF YAMANASHI



With mouse models undergirding so much scientific research, scientists have a vested interest in developing techniques to safely store and transport sperm samples between labs. Currently, most methods rely on shipping sperm in glass vials packed on dry ice, but glass is both heavy—raising the cost of shipping—and prone to breakage. In addition, any delays in shipping can result in thawed and unusable samples. In search of a better option, a team of scientists in Japan recently sent mouse sperm that was freeze-dried onto simple weighing paper and stored between two plastic sheets by postcard roughly 200 kilometers, from Kyoto to Yamanashi, where the rehydrated sperm fertilized eggs and produced healthy baby mice.

Daiyu Ito

Their new method, detailed in a study published today (August 5) in iScience, builds on the team’s previous work, which involved sending dehydrated mouse sperm stored in glass ampoules to the International Space Station to study how radiation affects mammalian cells. Drying the samples, the authors say, does away with the need for cold storage, and they’ve since refined the method further so that they can store sperm from thousands of different mouse strains in a single three-ring binder.

The Scientist spoke to Daiyu Ito, a reproductive biologist at the University of Yamanashi in Japan and the lead author on the study, via email about the challenges the team faced in developing the technique, and about what it will take to further refine the method for international shipping.

The Scientist: How has sperm traditionally been sent between labs, and what made you want to try something different?

Daiyu Ito: Until now, sending mouse sperm to other researchers has required a freezing environment such as liquid nitrogen or dry ice. . . . Not only is the constant supply of liquid nitrogen expensive, but if there is a road disruption or power outage due to an earthquake, all the sperm will melt and become unavailable.

The freeze-drying technique of mouse sperm that we first reported is the only method that can be preserved at room temperature for one year using glass ampoules. However, although they were small, they were bulky and often broke and [were] invalid to make offspring, thus that was not ideal for longer storage. Therefore, we wanted to develop a new preservation method.

TS: What were the challenges with drying sperm that you had to overcome?

DI: We went through various trials and errors and finally succeeded. We did not write much [about this] in the paper, but all the methods that we thought would be the best . . . failed. Unexpectedly, the best results were obtained when the weighing paper was used accidentally. Plastic sheets had other problems, such as toxicity when sealing, and we had a hard time finding the right material.

TS: What differences did you notice between the freeze-dried sperm [stored on the weighing paper] and control sperm, [which was freeze-dried but stored in glass]?

DI: The sperm morphology, DNA integrity, and developmental potential after sheet preservation are comparable to those of conventional glass ampoules. Unfortunately, with current technology, the sperm becomes immobile after freeze-drying treatment, and micromanipulation is required to obtain the embryos, which is common to both conventional and new methods. The pups derived from sheet preserved sperm are healthy and reproductive.

TS: You were able to generate viable offspring after keeping the sperm at room temperature for three days, but not five. Do you see this as an obstacle to international use, and do you think you will be able to overcome it?

DI: Yes, that’s right. The current success rate is not enough to [send samples internationally]. We have to improve this method, e.g. preservation temperature, period, and birth rate. Then, we believe that our method will spread worldwide.

Previously, . . . our team successfully produced a healthy offspring from sperm that had been left in a desk drawer (at room temperature) for over a year. From that study, we learned many things; for example, vacuum conditions are very important. We believe that our new sheet storage method can be improved and will be possible to preserve [samples] longer at room temperature.

The freeze-dried mouse sperm, when rehydrated, successfully fertilized eggs that resulted in healthy pups. DAIYU ITO, UNIVERSITY OF YAMANASHI

TS: You mailed the sperm on postcards without any protection. Are there hygiene concerns for mail workers or sample contamination concerns?

DI: There is no need to worry, because sperm was placed between [plastic] sheets. The sheets protect [against] any contamination, even if mail workers touched them with [un]clean hands.

TS: Are there any other important takeaways from this study?

DI: It is now recognized that genetic resources are an asset to humanity’s future. Even though many genetic traits are not needed for survival, depending on the environmental context, it is necessary to preserve them as much as possible so that species can survive if unknown diseases are spread or environmental changes . . . occur. The plastic sheet preservation method in this study will be the most suitable method for the safe preservation of a large amount of valuable genetic resources because of the resistance to breakage and less space required for storage.

However, this simplicity may increase the illegal transportation of genetic resources. Thus, it is essential to not only improve the success rate of offspring and extend the preservation period at [room temperature], but also to prepare international laws to prevent their use for purposes other than legitimate purposes, even if this technology was misused.

TS: What regulations or practices can be developed to minimize that risk?

DI: Unfortunately, it may be impossible to protect [against] illegal transportation of livestock sperm. However, we can protect intellectual property, therefore, it will be necessary to register all strains before spreading our method.

Editor's note: This interview was edited for clarity and brevity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, FATCAMERA

Pets get ill. Sometimes, outbreaks of pet illnesses occur—but there is no Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for pet diseases. Owners decide whether to get their pets tested, and in most countries, there is no mechanism for veterinarians to formally notify one another nor a state body that tracks disease trends.

Moreover, surveillance of pets for new viruses or new variants is not routine. Veterinary scientists in the UK and the US are trying to change that with twin initiatives aimed at monitoring pet populations for outbreaks. Their aim is to alert vets about new microbial threats to animals, but some infectious disease researchers say such monitoring might one day also serve as early warning systems, detecting pathogens that threaten to spill over into people.

For many virologists, this fills a clear gap. “There is not a country on the planet that I’m aware of that has a national surveillance system for [general] cat and dog diseases. I think that’s a blind spot,” says Alan Radford, a veterinary virologist at the University of Liverpool. In the UK, unlike with human patients, there’s no public funding for diagnostic tests of pets, and little money or incentive to collect data that would provide a nationwide picture of pet diseases or health status. “There is no Public Health England for dogs,” quips Radford. “So that generally for companion animals, that ability to have a national view of disease is not present.”

Currently, says virologist Gerald Barry at University College Dublin, Ireland, vets often swap information informally, such as by contacting colleagues or posting on social media if they see something unusual. This can alert vets to, for example, test for a specific microbe or fine-tune their prescribing practices.

But it is difficult to separate the coincidental from a trend without proper monitoring records. Radford with colleagues addressed that need in 2008 by setting up arguably the first surveillance network for small animals: the Small Animal Veterinary Surveillance Network (SAVSNET). This collects data from vets and from commercial diagnostic labs from across the UK for the purposes of research and surveillance. It has been a slow process to set up the network, with no obvious funding bodies to turn to. “It has taken us a lot of hard work to get us to where we are today,” says Radford.

The dream: real-time forecasting of outbreaks

The network proved its worth following a phone call Radford received from vet Danielle Greenberg, who thought she was seeing more cases than usual of severe vomiting in dogs in the Liverpool area in January 2020. She wanted to know if this was a true outbreak and if other people were seeing it.

SAVSNET analyzed data it had collected from across the UK and found an uptick in gastroenteric disease among dogs—not just in the northwest, but across most of the country. “It was essentially twice the normal level,” says Radford, adding that they also saw a substantial increase in prescribing of drugs used to treat vomiting.

Further statistical analysis confirmed that this was unusual, matching the definition of an outbreak. The SAVSNET team made its findings public in a report in the CDC’s Emerging Infectious Diseases in February 2021. This revealed that the vomiting outbreak was significantly associated with a canine enteric coronavirus and seemed especially severe around the cities of Edinburgh, Guilford, Swansea, Bristol, and Manchester. Radford and his colleagues set up a website to post live information and advice to vets, to help them manage and isolate cases and to communicate such issues to owners.

Jennifer Granick (right) with a veterinary student and a patient STEVE WOIT

Nearly all the dogs that tested positive for canine enteric coronavirus had a single variant, Radford explains, so the suspicion is that a new variant arose or arrived in the UK and rapidly spread through the dog population. Whether the same virus rippled through other countries is unknown. However, in February of this year, newspapers reported a vomiting outbreak among dogs in Ireland, possibly related to the same enteric canine coronavirus.

Radford says he hopes the network in Liverpool will inspire similar enterprises elsewhere. Already, it spurred US vets at the University of Minnesota to set up the Companion Animal Veterinary Surveillance Network, CAVSNET in 2019. CAVSNET seeks to record outbreaks and disease and treatment trends in small animals and horses in a statistically rigorous way. The network collects data from approximately 115 vet clinics across the US so far. It will track disease trends over time, identify animal populations at risk, describe treatment practices and outcomes, and provide data for veterinary research, its organizers say. “This is essentially a sister network to SAVSNET,” explains Jennifer Granick, a veterinary clinician at the University of Minnesota’s Veterinary Medical Center and a senior investigator and cofounder of the network.

Its first project, partly funded by the US Food and Drug Administration, will evaluate antibiotic use for common diseases in cats and dogs. Presently, there are no good estimates of antibiotic use, overuse, and resistance in small animal care. “We can’t make meaningful changes in terms of antibiotic use if we don’t know what our prescribing practices are to start with,” explains Granick. “Tools for measuring antibiotic use in veterinary medicine are rare.” CAVSNET tracks prescriptions by species, clinical syndrome, and drug type.

Granick notes that animals are intimately associated with their owners, often sitting on beds or couches. “There’s a lot of sharing, and that is particularly relevant when we’re talking about resistance to antimicrobials, because we share our microbial communities,” she says. “We also know that multidrug resistant infections can be transmitted from people to pets and vice versa.”

From pets to people

“Animals may also serve as sentinels for disease that can occur in people,” such as Lyme disease or fungal infections, Granick notes. So in the future, she says CAVSNET could track diseases that can pass from animals to humans, and potentially act as an early warning system, as regional upticks in animal cases could signal to public health officials the potential for illness in humans. This fits also into the principle of One Health, an approach that recognizes the importance of the intersections between environment and microbes in people and animals.

Pets could also be sources of novel human pathogens. For instance, while there are no indications that the UK canine coronavirus jumped into people, reports elsewhere suggest that coronaviruses from pets sometimes infect people. A study in Arkansas in 2014 found cat-like coronaviruses in some people with flu-like illnesses. Then, in May of this year, a team of US virologists and Malaysian medics reported in Clinical Infectious Diseases that out of 301 hospitalized pneumonia patients in the Sarawak region of Malaysian Borneo in 2017 and 2018, eight were infected with a canine coronavirus (part of the virus’s spike protein was almost wholly derived from a cat coronavirus, and another part of the spike appeared to come from a pig coronavirus).

“As we’ve seen with coronaviruses now, there’s always the possibility of zoonotic infections jumping from animals to humans,” says Barry. And coronaviruses are not alone. The last flu pandemic in 2009, for example, likely came from the mixing of strains of bird, pig, and human virus in a pig. The Nipah virus in bats sometimes causes deadly infections in people—and can infect pigs—and is still viewed as one of a number of pandemic risks.

While it’s not a bad idea to screen pets, Marco Salemi, a microbiologist at the University of Florida, says “the next potential coronavirus epidemic is more likely to come from wildlife reservoirs.” Surveillance there will be more important to public health, he adds, but surveillance of wildlife, farm animals, and pets should all paint a fuller picture of what pathogens could potentially cause future outbreaks in people.

“There is a lot of talk about One Health,” says Radford. “But the funding doesn’t tend to reach the animal side. Even the surveillance side didn’t get a huge amount of funding before this, but that might change now [due to the pandemic].” The UK network continues to pursue government and philanthropic funding, and is supported by modest income from veterinary pharmaceutical companies.

Barry notes that, “from a One Health point of view, we want make sure that our domestic animals are healthy.” And when it comes to human health, he says, “what the pandemic has told us is that surveillance and identification of potential [zoonotic] risks is the way forward, because we want to be able to identify these things before the problem emerges.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, XPOINT

In the three years since its announcement, Plan S, an initiative dedicated to making scientific research publicly available, has attracted new members, including international organizations and government funding agencies from around the world. A number of researchers question the global impact of Plan S’s implementation, however, raising concerns that its stringent open-access mandates have contributed to an increase in associated publishing costs that could potentially cut into research budgets and exacerbate inequalities that already exist in science publishing.

Plan S is a set of requirements drafted in September 2018 by a newly formed group of 11 national funding agencies across Europe collectively dubbed cOAlition S and supported by the European Commission and, initially, the European Research Council. The group aims to end the reign of paywalls and promote a transition to a fully open-access publishing model in science.

Traditionally, scientific journals have been sustained by subscriptions paid by libraries, institutions, and individual readers, while authors have published mostly for free. The number of journals and their subscription fees have grown in recent decades. For instance, one analysis reported 515- and 479-percent increases in the average price of library subscriptions to physical science and medical journals, respectively, between 1984 and 2001. The fast rise in subscription prices has been one of the motivations behind the push for open-access publishing, in which authors pay a fee known as an article processing charge (APC) to publish, but content is freely available.

Plan S mandates that newly published studies are made open access without a waiting period and that funders must cover grantees’ APCs. However, some scientists are concerned about the consequences of this rigorous mandate. The absence of a waiting period during which only subscribers can read papers, some argue, is a policy that may cause publishers to charge APCs in order to make up for an anticipated decline in subscription sales. In the past decade, APCs among journals with higher impact factors have skyrocketed: at journals in the upper half of Scopus classification, APCs increased 86 percent, while those in the upper half of the Journal Citation Reports (JCR) ranking increased 135 percent, according to a recent preprint.

“Essentially what Plan S is doing is it’s moving from a reader-pays to a [author]-pays system,” says Robin Crewe, a retired entomologist at the University of Pretoria in South Africa and former president of the Academy of Science of South Africa. “That’s fine in systems in which the research activities are well funded,” he says, but “when you come to developing countries like South Africa, the grants are not nearly as generous.”

Indeed, South Africa is set to serve as an early test case in how Plan S’s mandates will play out outside Europe. The South African Medical Research Council (SAMRC) is one of the few non-European national agencies that has joined Plan S. “SAMRC conducts research to improve the health of the country. This cannot be achieved if research results are behind paywalls and not accessible to all,” Nikiwe Momoti, who is leading SAMRC’s Plan S transition, writes in email to The Scientist.

However, it is not clear whether the high cost of APCs will cut into resources available for other aspects of SAMRC-funded research. “With the kind of financial constraints that we’re under now, it seems to me very unlikely that additional funding is going to be made available to support research,” says Crewe. “If additional funding is not made available . . . the funding for the APCs is going to come at the expense of the actual grants themselves.”

Alicia Kowaltowski, a biochemist at the University of Sao Paulo in Brazil, also expresses concern about the implementation of Plan S. “It’s very clear for everybody that science should be openly readable,” she says. “The problems I see with Plan S is that it’s pushing for open access . . . very quickly before [thinking] of other problems in the publishing industry.”

She adds that the push toward a pay-to-publish system will affect researchers worldwide, regardless of whether their national research agencies sign onto Plan S. “The fact that [Brazil’s government funding agencies] didn’t sign [Plan S] doesn’t mean we are not affected by this, cause the prices are going up.”

A global impact on publishing

A knock-on concern of steeply rising APCs is that inequities in science will be exacerbated. Last year, Springer Nature announced it would charge €9,500 (approximately $11,200 US) for publishing an open-access paper in the Nature family of journals. That’s more than twice the cost of one year of a PhD fellowship in Argentina, notes Humberto Debat, a virologist at the country’s National Agricultural Technology Institute. “[The] shift into APCs could be widespread and leave us extremely behind because of the asymmetries in [economies].”

Robert Kiley, the head of strategy of cOAlition S and the head of open research at the Wellcome Trust, says that the coalition “is trying to get publishers to think more about how they can develop more equitable models.” He points to an initiative at PLOS, a pioneer open-access publisher, called a Global Equity Model, which the publisher recently implemented for three of its journals. In this model, an institution pays an annual fixed fee based on its historical publishing activity in the field covered by the journal and the classification by income of the country where it is located. Researchers at member institutions can then publish an unlimited number of articles in the selected journal.

“It’s those sort of models which we are seeking to encourage,” says Kiley.

In addition, Plan S already has some requirements that encourage more-equitable publishing practices. To be eligible to publish results generated using funds from Plan S signatories, open-access journals or platforms must provide APC waivers for researchers from low-income economies and discounts for those in lower-middle-income countries. They must also provide waivers or discounts for scientists elsewhere with “demonstrable needs.” Therefore, at journals following the requirements, authors from upper-middle-income economies such as Argentina, Brazil, and South Africa have to individually ask for waivers or discounts if they need them.

But Kowaltoski says she’s heard from other researchers in Brazil that this process can be arduous—for instance, some have been asked to show their personal bank statements. It’s not defined what demonstrable need means, she says. Furthermore, in her experience, when asking for a discount, she has obtained at most 20 percent, which did not make much difference to the APCs’ affordability. “Upper-middle-income countries should be in the discount bracket,” she says, instead of having to apply on a case-by-case basis. On the other hand, Debat argues that “the entire concept of waiver is damaging to publishing” because “it puts underprivileged researchers in a position where they have to beg to somebody in a large editorial industry.”

Transformative agreements are one of the strategies cOAlition S suggests journals use in their transition to open access.

Kowaltoski further argues that funding agencies should set standards for APC pricing, first analyzing the real costs of publication and then deciding on fair pricing, and, for example, capping APCs. In the near future, cOAlition S will begin requiring publishers to be transparent about their costs (see “Breaking Down the Costs” below). However, Kiley says that he personally does not see caps on APCs as a solution. In his view, he explains, brands like Nature are expensive due to their high rejection rates—that is, their APCs support the salaries of people in high-income countries who are paid for rejecting manuscripts. “The problem is not the price; the problem is the model,” he says, and he encourages scientists to submit their work in alternative platforms if they find branded journals overpriced.

Kiley adds APCs aren’t the only publication cost that researchers or their institutions bear: “we shouldn’t forget that even in [low- and middle-income] settings, quite a lot of money is spent on subscriptions. . . . That money now needs to be transitioned to support the publication of research,” he says. Kiley refers specifically to so-called transformative agreements between institutions and publishers, where the money currently spent on subscriptions is repurposed to support open-access platforms.

Transformative agreements are one of the strategies cOAlition S suggests journals use in their transition to open access. The coalition is currently not funding publication in hybrid journals—those publishing both open-access and paywalled articles—unless they adopt any of such strategies in order to convert to full open access by the end of 2024. Several journals have committed to this transition, including those from major publishers such as Elsevier and Springer Nature.

Diamonds and other alternatives

Despite its ambitions for transforming scientific publishing, some researchers in developing countries argue that Plan S doesn’t go far enough. Ahmed Ogunlaja, a medical doctor in Nigeria, health policy scholar at Washington University in St. Louis, and Plan S ambassador, writes in an email to The Scientist that early on, he heard from some researchers “that Plan S was not sufficiently radical, that it focused too much on sustaining the status quo in terms of the power relations in research publishing.” They suggested Plan S should be supporting a shift to models such as diamond open access, a free-to-read and free-to-publish model with a strong tradition in Latin America. Diamond open access journals are usually backed by scholarly societies, funded by higher-education institutions, or staffed by volunteer editors.

In response to this feedback, the coalition reached out to stakeholders in Latin America, and commissioned a study to look at the viability of diamond open-access models, Ogunlaja explains. Even though the report concluded that less than 5 percent of diamond journals currently comply with Plan S criteria, its results have attracted attention. France recently announced that it intends to support and enact the resulting recommendations to strengthen diamond journals. Ogunlaja says that the most obvious way to confront climbing APCs is “to further develop and support other publishing models, especially the diamond open access model.”

Kowaltowski is also a diamond open access advocate, and says that scientists should try “to support journals that are backed by scientists more than journals that are backed by brand names.”

Debat and Kowaltowski argue that it’s not that simple. While each say that they wouldn’t be harmed if they stopped publishing in big-name journals due to unaffordable APCs, they say that students and younger researchers starting a career would. “Their careers depend on the science they produce, and unfortunately today they are still judged by where they are published,” says Kowaltowski. Crewe agrees that this is a problem younger generations of researchers will face.

There are a lot of incentives to keep on publishing in commercial journals, such as career advancement and prestige, says Debat. “It’s not that you can leave behind all [those metrics], because then you get isolated,” he says, but in Argentina, a government advisory committee in open science, which he belongs to, is currently discussing how to face those challenges at least at a regional level—for instance, “how to make incentives to publish more in community-led [and] scholarly-led journals” instead of in for-profit titles.

“Although [open access] is desirable,” concludes Kowaltowski in an email to The Scientist, “I don’t think we need to transition fast to [it] before talking and solving other problems regarding scientific publications.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Mineral deposits featuring red markings made by Neanderthals in Cueva de Ardales

JOÃO ZILHÃO

Neanderthals were making their mark on caves long before modern humans came to Europe. A paper published Monday (August 2) in PNAS confirms that red ochre markings on structures inside the famed Cueva de Ardales in Málaga, Spain were created intentionally and were not naturally occurring as some thought.

In the caves, stalagmites—formations that are made from the buildup of minerals as water drips in caves—were found to be streaked with red. When the caves were discovered, there was some debate over whether the discoloration came from a natural source, such as oxidized iron, or if the Neanderthals that lived in them were more intelligent than they had been given credit for and made the marks deliberately.

Mineral deposits featuring red markings made by Neanderthals in Cueva de Ardales PEDRO CANTALEJO-DUARTE

According to the study, the color couldn’t have appeared on the rocks through any natural process. Microscopic analyses found no evidence for a microbial origin. Furthermore, when the researchers compared samples from the stains to iron-rich materials elsewhere in the cave using scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction, they didn’t find a match. They concluded that the pigment had to have been brought in from elsewhere. That means the colorful substance must have been “collected, transported and prepared in advance of entering the cave, implying deliberation and planning,” study co-author João Zilhão of the University of Barcelona and the University of Lisbon tells CNN.

Moreover, the researchers noted that based on the shape and location of the marks, they couldn’t have been made accidentally. Instead, the color must have been applied by splattering or blowing pigment onto the surface.

It’s not clear what the markings meant, if anything, but the age of the marks raises questions about their makers’ intentions. While some of the oldest markings were dated to 65,000 years ago, others were as recent as 45,000 years old. The great span of time between markings “supports the hypothesis that the Neanderthals came on several occasions, over several thousand years, to mark the cave with pigments,” coauthor Francesco d’Errico of the University of Bordeaux tells Agence France-Presse—which suggests the markings or the structures they’re on had symbolic meaning to them.

While the marks aren’t necessarily considered “art,” the fact that Neanderthals were engaging in symbolic behavior gives researchers new insights into how our late cousins lived their lives, and challenges long-held assumptions about the nature of their cognitive abilities.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Purple microbial mats in the Middle Island sinkhole in Lake Huron. Small hills and “fingers” like this one in the mats are caused by gases like methane and hydrogen sulfide bubbling up beneath them.

PHIL HARTMEYER, NOAA THUNDER BAY, NATIONAL MARINE SANCTUARY

Billions of years ago, Earth lacked the oxygen-rich atmosphere that today sustains most life on the planet. How the air slowly became breathable remains an unanswered question, but in a study published yesterday (August 2) in Nature Geoscience, researchers are putting forth a novel hypothesis: that the gradually slowing rotation of the Earth, which led to longer days, allowed photosynthesizing cyanobacteria to pump more oxygen into the atmosphere than they had before.

“An enduring question in the Earth sciences has been how did Earth’s atmosphere get its oxygen, and what factors controlled when this oxygenation took place,” University of Michigan geomicrobiologist and study coauthor Gregory Dick says in a press release. “Our research suggests that the rate at which the Earth is spinning—in other words, its day length—may have had an important effect on the pattern and timing of Earth’s oxygenation.”

For billions of years, most life on Earth (largely single-celled microbes such as bacteria) breathed carbon dioxide. Cyanobacteria were some of the first organisms to develop photosynthesis, which involves taking in carbon dioxide and produces oxygen as a byproduct, and scientists have long believed that these microbes may have been involved in early oxygen production on Earth. But modeling studies were never able to reconcile how much cyanobacteria contributed to larger oxygenation events in the planet’s past, such as the Great Oxygenation Event (GOE) that took place 2.4 billion years ago and jumpstarted Earth’s shift to an aerobic atmosphere, nor could researchers discern why the first fossils of photosynthetic microbes are separated from GOE in the geological record by roughly a billion years.

In 2016, study coauthor Brian Arbic, an oceanographer at the University of Michigan attended a talk about cyanobacteria work being done by Judith Klatt, then a postdoc at the University of Michigan and now a biogeochemist at the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology. Members of the two labs began chatting, and realized that these large changes in atmospheric oxygen corresponded with changes in how quickly Earth was spinning around its axis. Four and a half billion years ago, for example, the Earth spun faster, and a day was only six hours long. Two billion years later, around the time of the GOE—which bumped atmospheric oxygen from negligible amounts to 20 percent of today’s values, the Associated Press reports—the planet had slowed, and a day clocked in at 21 hours.

To determine how cyanobacteria might fit into this association between Earth’s spin and burgeoning oxygen in the atmosphere, Arbic, Klatt, and their colleagues went looking for cyanobacteria growing in an environment chemically similar to what Earth may have been like just before the GOE. They found it in Lake Huron, at the bottom of the 80-foot Middle Island sinkhole, where thick mats of cyanobacteria grow in an oxygen-poor environment and use sulfur, rather than sunlight, as an energy source. “We actually imagine that the world looked kind of like the Middle Island sinkhole for most of its history,” Klatt tells the AP.

A scuba diver observes the purple, white, and green microbes covering rocks in Lake Huron’s Middle Island Sinkhole Phil Hartmeyer, NOAA Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary

The researchers brought the mats into the lab, where they exposed them to light for between 12 and 24 hours. The longer the mats were allowed to photosynthesize, the more oxygen they released. By plugging the numbers into a model, the team calculated the amount of oxygen cyanobacteria could have contributed globally and linked that quantity to changes in day length. Both variables tracked with one another—the GOE, for example, corresponded with a day length of 21 hours that plateaued for roughly a billion years, until perturbations in the Earth’s spin caused in part by tidal friction and planetary interactions with the moon led to even longer days and a handful of subsequent smaller shifts in atmospheric oxygen levels, including the Neoproterozoic Oxygenation Event and Paleozoic Oxidation Event. Just like in the lab experiments, cyanobacteria were able to produce more oxygen than they consumed as the days stretched out.

“The rise of oxygen [on Earth] is easily the most substantial environmental change in the history of our planet,” Woodward Fischer, a geobiologist at CalTech who was not involved with the study, tells Science. The current work represents “a totally new flavor of an idea. It’s making a connection that people haven’t made before.”

Timothy Lyons, a biogeochemist at the University of California, Riverside, tells Science that this finding also helps explain that confusing gap between cyanobacteria fossils and oxygen buildup in the atmosphere. Because day length was still so short in the ancient past, the cyanobacteria were essentially consuming as much oxygen at night during respiration as they produced during the day. Longer days tipped that balance and allowed oxygen to build up. “Long daytimes simply allow more oxygen to escape to the overlying waters and eventually the atmosphere,” Lyons says.

Other researchers, such as Benjamin Mills, an Earth system modeler at the University of Leeds, say that other factors, such as changes in levels of oxygen-binding minerals from ancient volcanoes, may also have contributed to early oxygenation. Nevertheless, changing day length “is something that should be considered in more detail,” he tells Science. “I'll try to add it to our Earth system models.”




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, GEORGECLERK

Large public gatherings are associated with SARS-CoV-2 breakthrough infections—detectable virus in fully vaccinated people—according to a report the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released Friday (July 30). According to multiple outlets, the data prompted the agency’s shift earlier last week to again recommending that vaccinated people wear a mask indoors in some circumstances.

The report focuses on 469 COVID-19 cases identified in Barnstable County, Massachusetts during July 2021 that were sparked by public summer gatherings. Approximately three-quarters of the cases were breakthrough infections, and of the cases that were DNA-sequenced, 90 percent were caused by the Delta variant.

In addition to the startling number of cases in fully vaccinated people, the report found that the vaccinated patients had comparable viral loads to the unvaccinated patients, which could indicate a capacity for transmission. Although this finding “just gives you an indication of how much viral RNA is in the sample, it tells you nothing about infectiousness,” University of Southern California clinical microbiologist Susan Butler-Wu tells Science News. She says that if an infected vaccinated person develops symptoms, “we already knew that they’d have higher viral loads [than asymptomatic cases],” but that high viral loads are not necessarily indicative of infectiousness. Yale University virologist Brett Lindenbach adds that the virus particles may be coated in antibodies, and therefore could be less infectious, but officials don’t yet have the data to be sure.

Nevertheless, CDC Director Rochelle Walensky cited the high viral loads as the impetus for the CDC’s updated mask recommendations in a statement last week. “High viral loads suggest an increased risk of transmission and raised concern that, unlike with other variants, vaccinated people infected with Delta can transmit the virus,” Walensky said Friday, according to the Journal. “This finding is concerning and was a pivotal discovery leading to CDC’s updated mask recommendation,” which urges everyone—vaccinated and unvaccinated—to wear masks in indoor public spaces in regions with high rates of Delta infection and in K-12 schools regardless of local infection rates.

Additionally, internal documents from the CDC originally published by the The Washington Post say the Delta variant is more transmissible than the 1918 pandemic flu and as transmissible as chicken pox. New studies this summer from Singapore, Scotland, and Canada suggest that in addition to being more transmissible, the Delta variant is associated with an increased risk of severe COVID-19, including hospitalization and death. As of today (August 2), the studies out of Canada and Singapore were preprints and had not yet been peer-reviewed.

While the variant appears to be driving an increase in breakthrough infections, The New York Times notes that 97 percent of people hospitalized for COVID-19 across the United States are unvaccinated, underscoring the vaccines’ efficacy against severe illness. In the Massachusetts data, 274 of the vaccinated patients experienced fairly mild symptoms such as fever, sore throat, cough, and headache, says the Times; only four of them were hospitalized, and there were no deaths.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, SEZERYADIGAR

The available scientific evidence does not support the use of ivermectin, an antiparastic drug, for the treatment or prevention of COVID-19 outside the context of clinical trials, according to a new report from Cochrane, an international organization that reviews medical research and provides guidance about clinical practice.

Ivermectin has been the subject of much misinformation during the pandemic, prompting multiple health organizations and one of the drug’s manufacturers to issue warnings throughout the past year that there is not sufficient evidence to recommend its use for COVID-19 beyond a trial setting. In the new report, researchers in Germany and the UK sifted through the literature on ivermectin and came to broadly the same conclusion.

“Based on the current very low- to low-certainty evidence, we are uncertain about the efficacy and safety of ivermectin used to treat or prevent COVID-19,” the authors write in their report, posted last week (July 28). “The completed studies are small and few are considered high quality. . . . Overall, the reliable evidence available does not support the use ivermectin for treatment or prevention of COVID-19 outside of well-designed randomized trials.”

“The hype around ivermectin is driven by some studies where the effect size for ivermectin is frankly not credible,” Paul Garner, the coordinating editor of the Cochrane Infectious Diseases Group, says in a statement. “Careful appraisal is the cornerstone of Cochrane’s work, and with such extreme public demands for a drug to work during the pandemic, it remains vital that we hold onto our scientific principles to guide care.”

The Cochrane review notes an “urgent need” for good quality randomized controlled trials of the drug.

The team’s final analysis included 14 randomized controlled trials with a total of 1,678 adults. Six of the studies were double-blinded and placebo-controlled—factors considered to improve the quality of evidence in drug trials. Nine of the 14 studies focused on moderate COVID-19 cases in hospital settings, four on mild cases in outpatients, and one on the use of ivermectin as a preventive medicine.

The team identified an additional 38 studies that failed to meet the review’s inclusion criteria, mainly because they contained problematic comparisons or data, or otherwise didn’t meet scientific standards for strong evidence. For example, nearly a third of the studies evaluated ivermectin alongside other treatments that varied between different groups of patients, making it difficult to extract the effect of ivermectin, specifically, from the data. Several studies classified people as COVID-19 patients without testing to make sure they had the disease with a PCR or antigen test.

One of the excluded studies, a widely cited paper first posted late last year on the preprint server Research Square, was withdrawn a couple weeks ago following allegations of data manipulation. The study, led by researchers in Egypt, claimed to have found a dramatic effect of ivermectin treatment on COVID-19 outcomes. However, researchers identified multiple inconsistencies in the data, The Guardian reported in July, particularly regarding the numbers of patients and their dates of hospital admission.

One patient was even reported to have left the hospital on the “non-existent date of 31/06/2020,” Jack Lawrence, a medical student in London who identified problems in the paper, tells The Guardian.

Another study that was not included in the Cochrane review, this one carried out in Argentina, has come under increased scrutiny from scientists in the last few days after epidemiologist and blogger Gideon Meyerowitz-Katz documented multiple inconsistencies—including numbers of patients that don’t add up and implausible effect sizes—on Twitter. “As far as interventional observational trials go, this is probably the worst one I’ve ever seen,” he writes.

The Cochrane review notes an “urgent need” for good quality randomized controlled trials of the drug, and identifies more than 30 ongoing studies. They include the PRINCIPLE trial run by the University of Oxford and the National Institutes of Health ACTIV-6 study.

“The findings from these studies may help to answer more clearly the question of ivermectin and its effects in treating and preventing COVID-19 in the future,” the authors write.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: The cotton bollworm (H. armigera) is one of the species discovered to have parasitoid killing factor genes.

© ISTOCK.COM, TOMASZ KLEJDYSZ

tI’s a scene straight out of your worst nightmare: dozens of tiny, milky larvae wriggle out of their still-living caterpillar host, leaving behind the scarred, gaping holes from whence they emerged. The larvae belong to a type of wasp called parasitoids, whose young dine on the flesh of hosts their parents pick out for them.

But research published Thursday (July 29) in Science suggests that not all caterpillars infected with parasitoid wasps will meet the same grisly end. The study identified a new family of proteins—parasitoid killing factors (PKFs)—that kill parasitoid larvae. PKF genes were found in several large double-stranded DNA viruses that infect lepidopteran insects (moths and butterflies), but also within the genomes of several Lepidoptera species themselves, suggesting that the genes have been swapped between viruses and infected hosts over the course of evolutionary history.

“I thought it was very well done,” says Stockholm University evolutionary biologist Naomi Keehnen, who was not involved with the study. “It’s very, very nice research.”

Studies of host-pathogen interactions often reveal evidence of evolutionary arms races, as organisms hone their strategies for virulence and defense. Virologist Jean-Michel Drezen of the University of Tours in France says viruses usually only encode genes that are absolutely necessary for viral replication and that are involved in adaptation to the host. In this case, however, the viral PKF genes adapted to the virus’s potential parasitoid competitors. “This is quite new in virology,” he says. Drezen has collaborated with some of the paper’s authors in the past but was not involved in the current study.

Insect virologist Madoka Nakai of Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology and her team first identified the PKFs in northern armyworm (Mythimna separata) caterpillars—a lepidopteran species—infected with entomopoxvirus. The researchers saw that when the caterpillars were infected with the virus, they were protected from certain parasitoid species. This wasn’t the first time researchers had noted such a connection; in the 1970s, University of California, Davis, entomologist Harry Kaya noticed that virally-infected caterpillars were protected from parasitoids, but didn’t understand the mechanism of protection.

To find that mechanism, Nakai’s group, working with researchers led by Salvador Herrero at the University of Valencia and Martin Erlandson of the University of Saskatchewan, exposed parasitoids to plasma from the virus-infected caterpillars that had been stripped of any virus particles. The wasp larvae died. By comparing the plasma proteins present in healthy versus virus-infected M. separata larvae, the researchers identified a 28-kDa protein—a PKF—that was only present in the infected insects. Using Edman sequencing—which identifies the sequence of amino acids in a peptide—they worked backward to match the amino acid sequence of the protein to sequences in the viral genomes. In addition to the PKF in the entomopoxvirus, they also found homologs in the genomes of ascoviruses and baculoviruses, which also infect insects. Some viruses had up to five PKFs in their genomes.

While visiting Herrero’s lab in Spain, Nakai presented her group’s discovery of the viral PKFs. While discussing the data with her over coffee, Herrero says he remembers thinking he should do a quick scan through his moth genomic databases, just to see if there was anything similar to PKF genes directly encoded in the moth genome.

Sure enough, they identified PKF genes in the moths as well, and the phylogenetic analysis suggested that horizontal gene transfer of PKFs between the DNA viruses and the insects happened multiple times throughout the evolutionary history of Lepidoptera.

Nakai says they don’t know yet whether the genes originally moved from virus to host or vice-versa, but the end result of the gene transfer is clear: “The common enemy is the parasitoid,” she says, “so they eliminate the common enemy.”

Previously, “it was expected that virally-infected larvae weren’t appropriate hosts for the development of parasitoids because of resource competition,” says Drezen, “But we did not expect that there was a specific mechanism to kill parasitoid wasps by the viruses, so I was quite surprised to read this paper.”

“It’s very clear that even though we thought that it was very basic, the immune system of insects is not as basic as we think,” says Keehnen. “And we still don’t really know exactly how it works—so I think finding a whole new gene family that’s involved with [antiparasitoid] responses shows that we really need to study more.” The researchers found that PKFs induce apoptosis in susceptible parasitoids.

Moving forward, the group plans to look for PKFs in other lepidopterans. They are also using CRISPR-Cas9 to make PKF knockout Lepidopterans in order to more clearly understand the roles of each PKF gene, says Nakai. An additional, more conceptual question raised by their research is why ascoviruses, which carry PKFs, are transmitted to Lepidopteran hosts by the very parasitoid wasps they can kill. “It’s a little bit strange,” says Nakai. “Why would ascovirus kill its vector?”

Further down the road, there may be agricultural applications for the discovery. According to Herrero, harnessing the power of “natural enemies” like parasitoids to manage agricultural pests has been common practice in both conventional and organic farming. Learning more about the PKFs may explain why some pests are resistant to parasitoid killing, and may help inform the design of better natural enemy solutions in the future.

University of Georgia entomologist Michael Strand, who was not involved in the study, notes that the PKFs are able to kill their insect target, but not their insect host, and the study shows that the PKFs only target certain subfamilies of parasitoids, suggesting that the genes are extremely specific in what they can target. In the future, he says, people may be able to manipulate PKFs to “make them boutique killers” of certain pests. That kind of specificity could be leveraged to avoid using “broad-spectrum, ‘I kill everything I touch’” pesticide strategies.

The study shows that “the insects that survived the virus had the opportunity to acquire that gene that gives protection against the parasitoid,” says Herrero—demonstrating that in this instance, at least, “what doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: An electron microscope image of monkeypox virions in a human skin sample from the 2003 outbreak

CYNTHIA S. GOLDSMITH, RUSSELL REGNERY

Earlier this month, the US Centers for Disease Control confirmed that more than 200 people in 27 states are being monitored for monkeypox after a Dallas emergency room patient was diagnosed with the rare disease. It was the first US monkeypox case in 18 years and the first ever for Texas, reports STAT.

The individual—identified as a man by the BBC—likely contracted the virus while in Nigeria and traveled with the infection through two US airports, potentially exposing people on his flights from Lagos to Atlanta and Atlanta to Dallas. Andrea McCollum, head of the poxvirus epidemiology unit at the CDC’s National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases in Atlanta, tells STAT there was little risk to the passengers of the Atlanta–Dallas flight because of its short duration. The virus doesn’t travel well in the air, she says, so the agency only considers a person who didn’t come into direct contact with an infected person at risk of contracting the disease if they are within six feet of them for three hours or more.

So far, no additional cases have been identified, and the observation period for people exposed to the infected man ends today (July 30).

The last US outbreak of monkeypox, in 2003, comprised 37 confirmed infections and 10 probable ones in five states; none were fatal. In that outbreak, epidemiologists concluded that the virus entered the US in a shipment of African rodents, then spread to pet prairie dogs and on to people.

To get a better understanding of the new case and its significance, The Scientist spoke with Anne Rimoin, a monkeypox expert and epidemiologist at the University of California, Los Angeles, via Zoom and email.

UCLA Fielding School of Public health and DR. Anne Rimoin

The Scientist: What is monkeypox?

Anne Rimoin: It's a rare viral zoonotic disease that primarily occurs in rainforested countries of Central and West Africa. Monkeypox is in the same family of viruses as smallpox (Poxviridae) but causes a milder infection. Monkeypox infections usually present with flu-like symptoms, fever, and a rash and are often confused with other rash-like illnesses including chickenpox and measles. There are two known clades of monkeypoxvirus–the Central African clade and West African clade. The West African clade is associated with less severe disease and lower mortality as compared to the Central African clade.

TS: How dangerous is it?

AR: Monkeypox is rare, but it can cause serious disease in humans. In Africa, monkeypox infections can be fatal in up to 10 percent of cases, but it’s important to remember that these cases generally occur in low resource settings without the kind of medical care that we have here in the United States. In comparison to smallpox, it is significantly less severe, less transmissible and associated with lower mortality.

TS: How do people catch it?

AR: Monkeypox infections are most often a result of direct contact with an infected wild animal, but human-to-human transmission can also occur. Monkeypox virus can be transmitted through contact with skin lesions, bodily fluids, large respiratory droplets, and contaminated materials such as blankets or bedding.

TS: And what kind of animals are usually involved?

AR: At present, the natural reservoir of monkeypox is unknown, however African rodent species are suspected to play a role in transmission. The monkeypox virus’s full host range is not yet well defined, and there are many animals that are susceptible to infection. The virus has only been recovered twice from an animal in nature. The first was an African rope squirrel in the Democratic Republic of Congo. And the second was from a dead primate that was found in Taï National Park in Cote d'Ivoire.

TS: How concerned should people in the US who didn't share a plane with this patient be?

AR: Cases of human monkeypox outside of the African continent are rare, and the likelihood of ongoing transmission from this case is low. Those individuals who were in close contact with the case on the plane are being monitored for symptoms. At present, monkeypox should not be a major concern for the average American.

TS: What about mutations? There's a lot of talk right now about variants; how likely is it that this virus will mutate and produce a more transmissible variant?

Early identification of infectious diseases, rapid contact tracing and isolation/quarantine are critical to prevent future pandemics before they start. The investment in these systems should be a public health priority.

AR: All viruses have the potential for mutation, but monkeypox is a DNA virus, which mutate much slower than RNA viruses [such as coronaviruses]. Of course, in the long term, that’s something that we should always keep an eye on. We must be aware of the changing epidemiological landscape and how that may impact the ability of this virus (or others) to become a more successful human pathogen. For example, the eradication of smallpox and subsequent cessation of global vaccination in 1980 has important implications for herd immunity to poxviruses. It is certainly possible that monkeypox or another poxvirus could eventually fill the void. Therefore, we need to continue to monitor poxvirus infections globally.

TS: What would you say is the major takeaway that people should get from this case?

AR: The big takeaway is this: this is a reminder that an infection anywhere has the potential to be an infection anywhere. The rapid expansion of global travel has made it much easier for an infectious disease that is acquired in one part of the world to be imported and spread quickly elsewhere. In the past few years, we have seen several cases of monkeypox exported from the African continent to the UK, Singapore and the US.

See “ Predicting Future Zoonotic Disease Outbreaks ”

We will likely continue to see increasing cases of poxviruses—not just monkeypox—because we have a worldwide decline in immunity to orthopoxiviruses. We have already seen outbreaks of camelpox in India, ectromelia virus (mousepox) in Europe and case of a novel poxvirus infection in Alaska in 2020. Poxviruses are common in animals, and with the declining immunity to poxviruses, we should be closely monitoring them.

The current monkeypox case should serve as a reminder that we have to remain vigilant and keep our eye on emerging infections globally. It underscores the need to have robust surveillance systems in place locally and globally to be able to detect them, and good systems in place to be able to contact trace to avoid onward spread.

TS: And how well are we doing on that front?

AR: I think that that we have a long way to go to be able to ensure that we have good disease surveillance. The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has definitely underscored the importance of long-term investment in disease surveillance. Early identification of infectious diseases, rapid contact tracing and isolation/quarantine are critical to prevent future pandemics before they start. The investment in these systems should be a public health priority.

Editor’s note: This interview has been edited by TS for brevity and by AR for accuracy and flow.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: When MDM2 (violet) and MDMX (red) are prevented from messing with p53 (blue), the famous tumor-surpressing protein lets endogenous retroviruses loose, ultimately helping the immune system spot cancerous cells.

© ISTOCK.COM, SELVANEGRA

The tumor suppressing protein p53 has earned the nickname “guardian of the genome” because of its well-studied arsenal of techniques for responding to genetic damage. When it binds to damaged DNA, it can activate DNA repair proteins, pause the cell division process until repairs are complete, or trigger programmed cell death if the damage is irreversible. Now, new research suggests p53 has another trick up its sleeve: it can force cancer cells out of hiding by making them go viral.

Often, tumors persist in the body because “cancer cells are hiding from immune cells,” says Galina Selivanova, a tumor biologist at the Karolinska Institutet in Sweden. She’s the lead author on the new study, published July 6 in Cancer Discovery, which finds that p53 stimulates the production of viral RNA within cancerous cells, prompting the immune system to go into overdrive to suppress tumors. This is unexpected, as the viruses it activates—endogenous retroviruses—are notorious for their ability to cause the kind of DNA damage that p53 is charged with fixing.

“The mechanism is novel,” says Maureen Murphy, a cancer biologist at the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia who studies p53 but was not involved in this study. She also says the study is strong overall and will likely translate clinically.

Harnessing endogenous retroviruses against cancer

Selinova and her colleagues worked with three in vitro human cancer cell lines: melanoma, osteosarcoma, and breast cancer cells. They boosted the activity of p53 in these cells by inhibiting other proteins known to gum up p53’s work: MDM2 and MDMX. (One of the inhibitors they used is a product of Aileron Therapeutics; three authors of the paper work at Aileron).

After the cells were exposed to these inhibitors, quantitative PCR tests revealed that expression of RNA from multiple endogenous human retroviruses increased. These viruses are once-infectious agents that, over evolutionary history, have settled into the genome. They collectively make up an estimated 8 percent of the human genome, and most are inert. Others, however, remain active and do have the potential to cause damage. When active, these viral sequences can multiply and insert themselves into new spots in the genome in harmful ways. That’s why there are several mechanisms in place to protect cells against retroviruses, Selivanova notes—including, usually, activating p53, which in most circumstances blocks the ability of retroviruses to access new parts of the genome.

In the team’s experiments, however, p53 did the exact opposite: it activated retroviruses. The researchers confirmed this using cell lines edited to lack the protein, which didn’t express the viral RNA seen in the other cells. Sequencing of cellular RNA revealed that p53 activated the retroviruses by inhibiting two proteins that normally quash their expression, LSD1 and DNMT1.

With these inhibitors out of the way, the retroviruses set about making copies of themselves in the form of double-stranded RNA—molecules that also happen to be a telltale sign of a viral infection. Although no external pathogens were involved, when they detected the double-stranded RNA, the cells acted as if they were infected, activating antiviral immune pathways, including the production of interferons—proteins that, among other activities, can stimulate ill cells to advertise their condition by sticking bits of their proteins on their outer cell membrane. Immune cells use these cell-surface antigens to identify and target infected cells, so increasing interferon production could translate to the cancerous cells losing their ability to evade immune detection.

See “Viral Remnants Help Regulate Human Immunity”

This apparent infection mimicry also happened in biopsy samples of two people with melanoma. The biopsies were injected with a dual MDM2/MDMX inhibitor (another Aileron product) that boosted the activity of p53, and in both, this increased activity led to greater retroviral expression, interferon activation, and the infiltration of tumor-killing CD8+ T cells.

“It’s an interesting mechanism by which you stimulate the immune system when you activate p53,” says Wafik El-Deiry, an oncology researcher at Brown University. El-Deiry, the first author of a 1992 Nature Genetics paper that shows how p53 binds to genes to suppress tumors, is also working with Aileron Therapeutics to study the benefits of MDM2/MDMX inhibitors.

Connecting cancer treatments

In addition to revealing the unexpected actions of a well-studied tumor suppressor, Murphy says Selivanova and colleagues may have uncovered the missing link as to why using radiation can be an effective way to control cancer. “Something that’s been known forever is that radiation actually enhances these endogenous retroviruses, and nobody put two and two together and said: ‘gee, radiation induces p53, and maybe that’s it.’”

For Selivanova, the next big question is how this mechanism is altered by mutated versions of p53, which she says are present in half of human tumors.

Selivanova says she hopes this knowledge can ultimately help patients. In the study, the researchers were able to shrink melanomas in mice by 75 percent in two weeks by combining an MDM2/MDMX inhibitor with an immune checkpoint inhibitor—an established cancer therapy that invigorates the body’s natural anticancer defenses. In mice with colon cancer, the pharmaceutical combo increased CD8+ T cell production in a manner similar to the retrovirus-interferon pathway in vitro. While this is not the first time researchers have combined boosted p53 with an immune checkpoint inhibitor, the team may have uncovered the hidden retroviral mechanism behind why the combination appears effective in cell lines and mice, says Murphy. Further work on retroviruses’ role could point toward ways to improve upon these therapies and other cancer treatments.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@John Allan Hobson, a prominent sleep researcher and psychiatrist, died on July 7 at his Vermont home due to diabetes complications at the age of 88. His work contradicted prevailing hypotheses of the day on the meaning of dreams and set the stage for much of the work investigating the rapid eye movement (REM) phase of sleep.

J. Allan Hobson in 2005 Harvard medical school

According to Dream Life, his memoir, Hobson was born on June 3, 1933 in Hartford, Connecticut, where he remained for his childhood. He and his brother Bruce were raised by their father, a lawyer, and his mother, a homemaker. He attended high school at what is now known as Loomis Chaffee School, a preparatory school in nearby Windsor. He obtained a degree in 1955 from Wesleyan University and earned an MD at Harvard Medical School in 1959.

From there, he completed internships, fellowships, and residencies in New York, Boston, and the University of Lyon in France. He had an appointment at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center as director of the Laboratory of Neurophysiology and taught psychiatry at Harvard for many years until his retirement.

When Hobson’s interests shifted to sleep research, it wasn’t yet widely accepted as a scientific area of study. In the early 1960s, many academics thought that dreams represented veiled subconscious desires and that the content of dreams could be interpreted through psychoanalysis. His earliest work centered on physiological aspects of sleep, such as drops in heart rate, blood pressure, and respiration, along with research on cats to understand shifts in sleep cycles due to drug use or brainstem trauma.

See “Mysterious Brain Waves May Connect REM Sleep with Visual Experiences”

In 1977, Hobson published a landmark paper describing the neurological components of dreaming. Dreams weren’t, he wrote, a person’s innermost desires. Rather, he suggested, dreams were caused by random neurological impulses that the brain tries to make sense of. He asserted that this activity did contain information, just not anything that could be used for psychoanalysis. Later in life, he was for a time openly critical of psychoanalysis in general.

“I’m skeptical about any absolute set of rules, scientific rules, moral rules, behavioral rules,” Hobson told The Boston Globe in 2011. “That’s one reason why I don’t feel bad taking on Sigmund Freud. I think Sigmund Freud has become politically correct. Psychoanalysis has become the bible, and I think that’s crazy.”

Although he later conceded that psychoanalysis was useful for addressing certain conditions, he remained steadfast in his view that dream analysis wasn’t helpful, Hobson’s former colleague Ralph Lydic tells The New York Times.

In addition to coauthoring more than 200 papers throughout his career, Hobson penned 20 books, beginning with The Dreaming Brain in 1988. Most of the books were about the science of sleep and the complexion of chemical activity in the brain when conscious or not.

In 1965, Hobson bought a farm in Vermont and passionately cared for it, according to many online reports from family and friends. He was able to convert part of a barn into a sleep study classroom and museum and welcomed guests there. This exhibit honored the science of sleep but also celebrated artistic renditions of the brain. His family held a memorial at the farm three days after his death.

Hobson is survived by his wife, daughter, four sons, five stepchildren, and four grandchildren.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Colored scanning electron micrograph of segmented filamentous bacteria (green) attached to the mouse intestinal wall at 6 AM (left) and 6 PM (right).

JOHN BROOKS

Microbes in a mouse’s gut synchronize the animal’s immune responses to its daily activity patterns, according to a study published yesterday (July 28) in Cell. Certain intestinal bacteria that are sensitive to the timing of mouse feeding drive rhythmic signaling in the innate immune system, researchers found, such that immune activity peaks when the mouse is most likely to come into contact with pathogens: when it’s eating and running about.

The findings identify the microbiota as an important link between an animal’s circadian clock and its immune system, says Christoph Thaiss, a microbiologist at the University of Pennsylvania who was not involved in the work.

“In a way, this was a long-awaited finding,” he says. While researchers knew that circadian rhythms in feeding could affect the activity of the gut microbiota, and also that some gut microbes influence immune signaling, “it was not known whether the relationship between the circadian clock and the microbiome . . . would affect components of the gut immune system. That’s exactly what they show here.”

See “Microbes Shape Circadian Rhythms in the Mouse Gut”

To establish these links between circadian rhythms, the microbiota, and host immunity, study coauthor John Brooks, a postdoc in Lora Hooper’s lab at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, started out by searching for any antimicrobial proteins—peptides secreted as part of the innate immune response—whose production in the mouse intestine showed rhythmicity.

He identified multiple proteins that were present at higher levels at the beginning of the night, when mice become active and start eating, than at the start of day, when they typically rest. Brooks was especially interested in the antibacterial peptide REG3G: this protein reliably cycled across the 24-hour cycle in regular mice, but not in germ-free mice, suggesting the microbiota was necessary to maintain the rhythm.

Sifting through images of mouse intestines for clues as to what might be driving the REG3G cycles, Brooks, Hooper, and colleagues noticed segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) clinging to the gut wall. These bacteria were already known to influence immune signaling, Brooks says, but what the researchers hadn’t realized before was that their behavior changed across the 24-hour cycle, with more bacteria attached to the gut epithelium at the onset of night than at the onset of day.

These antimicrobial proteins are energetically expensive to produce, so you want to produce them when they’re absolutely required. —John Brooks, UT Southwestern Medical Center

Inoculating germ-free mice with SFB caused REG3G to start cycling, they found, while SFB in mice lacking REG3G still showed rhythmic patterns in their attachment to the gut wall, suggesting it was indeed the bacteria that were driving REG3G cycles, and not the other way around. In another series of mouse experiments, the team connected the dots between bacterial attachment and REG3G cycles, showing that attachment triggers a “surprisingly complicated” cascade of immune signaling via cytokines and other proteins, culminating in a boost in levels of the antimicrobial protein, Hooper tells The Scientist.

Based on previous research by Thaiss and others, Brooks says he suspected that the SFB in a mouse’s gut were getting their own rhythms from the animal’s feeding patterns, which are regulated by the mammalian circadian clock. Sure enough, mice engineered to lack certain circadian clock proteins ate more randomly and didn’t show the same cyclic patterns of bacterial attachment to the gut wall; mice that fasted for 24 hours also lost their SFB rhythms. When the researchers fed mice only during the day, meanwhile, the SFB cycles—and all the associated downstream effects on the immune system—shifted by 12 hours.

Together, the results suggest that the mouse gut evolved to anticipate the riskiest time periods in the day and to prep immune defenses accordingly, Brooks says. “These antimicrobial proteins are energetically expensive to produce, so you want to produce them when they’re absolutely required,” he explains. “This work kind of ties the production of these antimicrobial proteins to the times in which you’re most likely to acquire a foodborne pathogen.”

Interested in whether these immune cycles might have practical consequences for mouse health, the team monitored the animals’ susceptibility to infection with a pathogen, Salmonella Typhimurium, at various times throughout the 24-hour cycle.

S. Typhimurium isn’t your typical bacterium, Brooks notes, because it’s better at infecting mice when the gut is inflamed. Accordingly, mice’s resistance to the bug varied as expected across the 24-hour cycle: animals infected at the onset of night, when SFB attachment and antimicrobial proteins levels were high, got sicker than animals infected during the day.

The team used Salmonella for this experiment because it’s one of the few pathogens that easily infect mice even when the animals haven’t been pretreated with antibiotics—something the researchers worried would disrupt the microbiota cycles they’d observed, Brooks explains. For Salmonella, the immune boost actually favors the pathogen, but in many cases the elevated immune activity probably protects the mouse from infection, Hooper says.

Listeria bacteria, for example, would likely show the opposite pattern from Salmonella, Hooper says. “We weren’t able to test Listeria directly because of the antibiotic issue, but our expectation there would be that the susceptibility to Listeria would go down when antimicrobial protein expression was high.”

Thaiss says he was particularly pleased to see the inclusion of the Salmonella experiment. “This was a big question in the field—whether the known circadian properties of the microbiome and the known circadian properties of the host . . . come together” to provide an evolutionary benefit for host defense against intestinal infections, he says. The demonstration that infection susceptibility varies across the day suggests that this is indeed the case.

It’s not yet clear how this kind of microbiota-driven immune cycling might play out in humans, says Julie Gibbs, a chronobiologist at the University of Manchester in the UK who was not involved in the work; SFB are present in people, but whether they attach rhythmically to the gut wall is unknown. Nevertheless, she says, the team’s findings hint at one possible explanation for a well-known association in human health: the link between disrupted sleep and disease risk.

“We know that shift working is generally bad for our health and has a negative impact on the immune system and risks of developing inflammatory diseases,” Gibbs says. In addition, “we know that shift work is associated with disordered eating. So I think it’s of interest for shift workers if this disordered eating may be affecting the rhythmic microbiome, which may be having knock on effects on our immune system and immunity.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Prion protein (shown in red) aggregating inside mouse neurons.

FLICKR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES, NIH

On Tuesday (July 27), five public research institutions in France announced they will suspend research on prions for three months. According to their joint press release, the decision was spurred by a case of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) in someone who may have been exposed to prions in a research lab.

According to Science, CJD is the most common prion disease in humans. Prions are infectious misfolded proteins that cause other proteins to misfold and aggregate in the brain. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention defines two types of CJD: classical, which generally arises through spontaneous protein misfolding in the brain, and variant CJD (vCJD), which is believed to be caused by exposure to the same prion that causes mad cow disease. There are no vaccines or treatments for CJD, which is universally fatal. The type of CJD can only be diagnosed by examining postmortem brain tissue.

An anonymous source tells Science that the woman newly diagnosed with CJD used to work in a prion lab in Toulouse. The woman is still alive, and doctors don’t know if she has classical or variant CJD.

“This is the right way to go in the circumstances,” structural biologist Ronald Melki—who works at a prion lab jointly operated by two of the French institutions adopting the moratorium, The French Alternative Energies Commission and the French National Centre for Scientific Research—tells Science. “It is always wise to ask questions about the whole working process when something goes wrong.” The other institutions participating in the moratorium are the French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health & Safety; the National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and Environment (INRAE); and Inserm.

According to a Google Translate translation of the press release, the purpose of the research suspension is to allow time to investigate “the possibility of a link between the observed case and the person’s former professional activity,” as well as to adopt any necessary additional safety measures in prion labs.

If the investigation reveals that the patient contracted CJD from a lab, it wouldn’t be the first time this has happened in France.

In 2010, INRAE lab worker Émilie Jaumain accidentally cut open her finger (through two layers of latex gloves) while cleaning lab equipment that was used with prion-containing samples, according to Gizmodo. Despite immediately alerting doctors to her potential exposure, Jaumain’s widower tells Science, she began developing painful symptoms in 2017 and severe psychological symptoms in early 2019, which led to a diagnosis of “probable vCJD.” She died the same year at the age of 33, and the diagnosis was confirmed after her death.

According to Science, independent safety reports found no safety violations in Jaumain’s lab, although Jaumain’s family’s lawyer tells Science there were precautions that could have saved the young researcher’s life, including wearing metal mesh gloves and soaking the cut finger in bleach. The safety reports did find at least 17 lab accidents within the last decade in French prion labs.

Neuroscientist Stéphane Haïk of the Paris Brain Institute tells Science that following Jaumain’s diagnosis, prion labs across the country began adopting additional safety procedures, such as using plastic scalpels and cut-resistant gloves.

“The occurrence of these harsh diseases in two of our scientific colleagues clearly affects the whole prion community,” Emmanuel Comoy, deputy director of CEA’s Unit of Prion Disorders and Related Infectious Agents, tells Science. The diagnoses “necessarily reinforces the awareness of the risk linked to these infectious agents,” he says.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: A low-magnification view of the connected network of tunnels that form a putative sponge protein skeleton fossil found in an 890-million-year-old rock. The field of view is about 9 millimeters.

EC TURNER

Scientists predict that sponges—among the most basic animals—arose a few hundred million years before the occurrence of the oldest confirmed fossil specimens, which date to about 500 million years ago. Now, in a study published today (July 28) in Nature, Elizabeth Turner, a geologist at Laurentian University in Canada, identified structures in 890-million-year-old fossils of organisms similar to modern bath sponges, potentially pushing back the emergence of the animals to at least that long ago.

The work “gives good evidence that there were sponges living 890 million years ago, and that’s much older than any firm recognition of fossil sponges so far,” says Robert Riding, a geologist at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville who did not participate in the study. That record, until today, was held by fossils of purported sponges that are about 635 million years old, although their animal identity is not accepted by all researchers in the field.

In fact, if the new fossil finds are confirmed to be sponges, “they would be not just the oldest sponges; they would be the oldest animals,” Riding points out. To find any fossil more than 200 million years older than previous animal fossils “is significant,” he says.

The discovery actually happened more than 10 years ago, when Turner was a graduate student at Queen’s University in Canada. Her thesis project focused on reef rocks, and she encountered the material described in the current paper accidentally in a tiny number of the specimens. “I thought I had an idea of what it might be, but there was no real way of proving it at the time,” she tells The Scientist. Over the past few years, other researchers published papers about how sponges get preserved in the rock record. The “accumulation of a critical mass of those papers that provided me, as of now, with a sufficient foundation to present my own work, which is comparable, but in rocks that are much older,” she explains.

In the study, Turner used light microscopy to examine 30-micron thick slices of 890-million-year-old rocks from fossilized reefs in Northwestern Canada, originally laid down as calcium carbonate deposits by cyanobacteria. In rare slices of rock, she found microscopic networks of connecting tubes of calcium carbonate that branch to form irregular three-dimensional shapes with similarities to modern bath sponges. Other researchers have confirmed similar structures as sponge-derived in younger rocks. This type of sponge doesn’t incorporate calcium carbonate itself, instead, it has a tough protein-based skeleton during life that after death is slow to decay and thus calcified more slowly than the surrounding material.

A fragment of the protein skeleton of a modern bath sponge (Spongia officinalis) highlights its three-dimensional meshwork. The field of view is about 1 millimeter. EC Turner

“There’s room to be skeptical,” says Drew Muscente, a paleontologist at Cornell College in Iowa who did not participate in the study. His work has focused mostly on the skeletons that some sponges produce, called spicules, usually made of silica or calcium carbonate. “These are unambiguous structures that sponges produce, so you would imagine some sponge at some point in Earth's history—perhaps the earliest sponges—had these structures that you identify,” he adds. It’s trickier to identify bath sponges because they do not produce spicules.

“Could these structures be sponges? Yes. Are we sure they’re sponges? I'm not,” Muscente adds, acknowledging that he may be “overly conservative,” but that the evidence is circumstantial at this point.

On the other hand, if researchers “embrace these structures as the oldest sponge fossils, it will help really shed light on, not just the origin of sponges, but the timing of the origin of animal life as a whole, because these would be the oldest animal fossils, period,” Muscente says.

“It’s really a milestone,” says Joachim Reitner, a paleontologist at the University of Goettingen in Germany. Reitner did not participate in the work, but has previously published studies identifying similar sponges in younger fossils. The paper serves as evidence that this type of sponge, and also the complex genetic tools needed to form their protein skeleton, was already present 890 million years ago, he adds. “It means that the origin of the of the animals was much earlier . . . maybe a billion years ago or so.”

Turner says a much older origin for animal life shouldn’t come as a surprise, as it’s been predicted by estimates of when genes evolved, but “what's going to be challenging for the scientific community is the fact that the age of these rocks—890 million years old—is well prior to two extremely important, dramatic geological events in Earth’s history . . . that other people have assumed inhibited either the evolutionary appearance of animals or their diversification or both.”

The Neoproterozoic oxygenation event, for instance, when it’s believed that oxygen in the atmosphere and deep ocean increased dramatically, is thought to have happened between 800 and 540 million years ago. Scientists have thus predicted that animal life would have been difficult before that.

“But sponges are the most basic animal type that we know, and some of them in the modern world and in the rock record have comparatively low oxygen requirements,” says Turner. It’s possible that sponges did appear 890 million years ago in a low-oxygen world, but survived due to their close proximity to the oxygen-producing cyanobacteria that made the massive reefs where these fossils were found.

“Animals emerged evolutionarily long before the first traditional animal body fossils appear in the rock record, so there was a long prehistory to animal evolution, which is not well recorded, and really needs further work,” she adds. “The rock record really needs to be much more thoroughly interrogated.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: The miSHERLOCK device glows brightly if a saliva sample contains SARS-CoV-2 RNA.

WYSS INSTITUTE AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY

Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, researchers have been striving to develop low-cost tests to detect the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in patient samples. Now, a team of researchers based at Harvard University’s Wyss Institute and MIT have unveiled a quick and inexpensive testing platform capable of distinguishing between major SARS-CoV-2 variants, according to a paper published Friday (August 6) in Science Advances.

The platform, called miSHERLOCK (pronounced “my-sherlock”), is fully self-contained from sample preparation to test readout. It requires no external equipment or instruments, and is eventually meant to be constructed by the user from 3-D printable parts and battery-powered electronics. The team was led by biomedical engineer James Collins, who is also cofounder and director of Sherlock Biosciences, a firm built around the CRISPR-based diagnostic tool called SHERLOCK which the platform employs (hence miSHERLOCK: it’s short for minimally instrumented SHERLOCK).

This device is not the first SHERLOCK-based test to detect SARS-CoV-2. Last May, a different platform employing the same CRISPR technology was granted emergency-use authorization by the US Food and Drug Administration for COVID-19 testing, and another recently developed SHERLOCK assay can deliver a positive COVID result similar to a pregnancy test.

However, those tests still require external steps and lab equipment for sample processing, while a miSHERLOCK test runs from start to finish within the self-contained device. Prepping raw samples for nucleic acid analysis takes several steps, including breaking open cells and viral particles to access the nucleic acids, stripping the sample of proteins and other cellular components that could interfere with the reaction—all while being careful to not degrade the nucleic acids; single-stranded RNA is particularly sensitive to degradation.

“The work described in this paper is really innovative, because it combines the instrument-free [platform] with CRISPR detection,” says University of Connecticut biomedical engineer Changchun Liu, who was not involved with the study.

Boston Children’s Hospital infectious disease specialist and study coauthor Rose Lee says the motivation of the miSHERLOCK project was to create a testing platform that would work in resource-limited settings, including clinics with limited access to lab equipment and trained lab technicians, or even within one’s own home. She says early on in the pandemic, conventional testing materials, such as nasal swabs and sample transport media, were in short supply. Lee recalls the team asking, “Could we create a simpler diagnostic that would allow for decentralized testing—particularly as the variants start to come out?”

The result was an assay requiring only a handful user steps and no equipment beyond what is included in the testing apparatus, which fits in the palm of a hand. The test requires two milliliters (less than half a teaspoon) of saliva. After the user spits into the tube and adds a few chemicals, the saliva is wicked down a column in the first 3-D printed reaction chamber, which is heated to 95 °C by the battery-powered heater. Viral particles are broken open, and any nucleic acids in the sample, such as the RNA genome of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, concentrate on a special membrane at the bottom of the column. Then, the user transfers the column to the second 3-D printed chamber (that runs at 37 °C) and pushes a plunger, plopping the membrane into a new tube and releasing water to activate the freeze-dried one-pot SHERLOCK reaction.

The diagnostic procedure requires that a user spit into the sample preparation chamber and then transfer the collection disc to the reaction chamber and press a plunger, which activates the reaction and minimizes the risk of cross-contamination. Wyss Institute at Harvard University

SHERLOCK, which stands for “specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking,” involves a couple of steps. First, any RNA in the sample is converted into DNA. Then, an amplification step makes copies of a specific region of a viral gene. The amplification uses an enzyme instead of PCR’s traditional temperature cycling to open up the target template DNA—meaning that the whole reaction runs at a constant temperature. Finally, a Cas12a enzyme bound to a SARS-CoV-2–specific guide RNA scans the DNA in the reaction mixture for the viral sequence that complements it. If it finds it, the guide RNA will bind to it and the Cas12a becomes activated—and begins indiscriminately cutting the nucleic acids around it, including a reporter probe that brightly fluoresces if it gets cut.

By the end of the reaction in a miSHERLOCK device, LED lights inside the reaction chamber shine on the sample, making positive tests glow brightly. In the case of dim fluorescence, the researchers have developed a companion smartphone app that helps users determine if they have a positive test, and also allows them to instantly report their result to local public health officials. According to the paper, the entire process takes about an hour, has a comparable limit of detection to current approved PCR tests, and the entire apparatus only costs about $15.

“I think this is one of the only examples where you can go from literally no equipment—like nothing beyond what is in the device itself—to actually generate a result in the span of an hour,” says Massachusetts General Hospital gastroenterologist and study coauthor Xiao Tan.

Spit happens

The authors say idea behind using saliva instead of more-invasive (and oft-dreaded) nasopharyngeal swabs was simplicity, and Liu adds that the non-invasive saliva collection is ideal for point-of-care diagnostics. “It’s more convenient than swab samples,” he says.

But as easy as it is to spit in a tube, extracting nucleic acids from saliva is a different story. Saliva is a complex mixture, says Tan, full of enzymes that “will basically kill off any reaction—or cause excessive false positives” because, like the CRISPR enzyme in the test, salivary nucleases can chomp through the assay’s reporter probe.

To neutralize the proteins and enzymes that would interfere with the assay, the sample column delivers a one-two punch: a three-minute incubation at 95 °C plus the chemicals added by the user inactivate the enzymes while leaving the viral RNA intact. In its current form, the researchers had to add the chemicals manually, but they envision a commercial version of the product coming preloaded with freeze-dried chemicals coating the inside of the tube that are rehydrated when the user adds their saliva.

In addition to being able to test for general SARS-CoV-2 infection, the specificity of Cas12a means that it can be used to distinguish between variants of the pathogen. By swapping out Cas12a’s guide RNA from detecting a generic SARS-CoV-2 sequence to one that detects variant-specific mutations, they were able to correctly determine which variant they had added to saliva samples greater than 95 percent of the time, although the limit of detection was different from variant to variant. The researchers designed another version of the testing platform where four reaction chambers can run side-by-side, with each using different variant-specific guide RNA. Although they admit miSHERLOCK can’t replace traditional sequencing to discover new variants, they say they hope it will aid in tracking variant spread across the world—especially in areas that don’t have easy access to sequencing equipment.

“The specificity is what's really exciting,” says MIT graduate student and coauthor Devora Najjar. “When we do the variant detection, we're detecting between SNPs within the spike protein, and that's super, super, super high resolution in terms of what you're looking for on a on a nucleic acid level.” She adds that it’s rare to have a test that is both so quick and specific down to the single base pair level.

Not ready for primetime—yet

The researchers say their goal is to make the entire testing platform cheap and easy enough for anyone to assemble from start to finish—and to eliminate steps that normally require equipment such as pipettes or thermal cyclers, but miSHERLOCK isn’t ready to be rolled out to home-bound patients or remote clinicians yet. Lee says the current iteration of the prototype was meant for academic publication, not at-home use, adding that while the 3-D printable plans for the reaction chambers are freely available, the current prototype still requires quite a bit of assembly

“I think that it would be really amazing if a person could 3-D print this test in their own house, get some components, assemble it themselves as if it were IKEA furniture, and then just buy the [components] that they can use,” says Helena de Puig, a postdoc at the Wyss and a coauthor. Alternatively, she says, users could either buy the 3-D printed parts and assemble them, or could even buy the device fully assembled. In any case, users would need to buy kits containing the freeze-dried SHERLOCK reaction components and parts of the test that can only be used once, like the RNA-trapping membrane or the plunger. Tan says they envision the SHERLOCK reaction components—which include the pathogen-specific Cas12a—being as easy to switch out as different flavors of instant coffee pods.

The four first authors of the miSHERLOCK paper, pictured right to left: Devora Najjar, Rose A. Lee, Helena de Puig, and Xiao Tan WYSS INSTITUTE AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY

In addition to the hardware needing to be adjusted for commercial manufacturing, the assay itself would need to be fully tested and approved by the FDA before it could be released to the wider public. One major limitation of the current study is that miSHERLOCK was only tested on 27 clinical samples, notes University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, infectious disease physician and molecular epidemiologist Jonathan Parr in an email to The Scientist. Parr develops CRISPR-based diagnostics for malaria but was not involved with the current study. The sample donors were all COVID-19 patients from the Dominican Republic and none were infected with variants of concern, he adds. While the authors acknowledge the paucity of clinical samples in their paper, Parr says “it raises concerns about the ‘real world’ performance of their assay nonetheless.”

In the paper, the researchers explained that few samples were available to test because saliva samples have not been routinely collected for SARS-CoV-2 testing. They had to make do with what they had, which is why their specificity tests were run on commercially available (but not otherwise infected) saliva samples that were “spiked” with different variants, and didn’t include tests on the now-dominant Delta variant. Najjar notes that Delta simply wasn’t a variant of concern when they were developing the platform a few months ago, but adds that the speed with which Delta has spread is a testament for the need for flexible testing platforms like miSHERLOCK. “The variants that matter one month might be completely irrelevant the next,” she says.

Beyond SARS-CoV-2

Hopefully sooner rather than later, there will no longer be a need for easy-to-use coronavirus testing platforms, but the researchers say miSHERLOCK won’t start collecting dust when that time comes. “The principle of the device can be used for many different things,” says de Puig. “If we just change the guide RNA and some components, then we can diagnose different infections. As long as there is nucleic acid material,” she says, you can build an assay around it.

The researchers say they are also thinking about modifying the assay to be able to process different sorts of samples, including blood and urine. Lee says she is already working with de Puig and Najjar on adapting the miSHERLOCK to diagnose acute tropical febrile illness. They are thinking about “having a multiplex device that could distinguish between malaria, Ebola, dengue—these types of things that are actually very clinically difficult to distinguish,” she says, by “using this kind of low cost, easily distributable, decentralized multiplexing device” in settings that may not have access to more traditional forms of clinical lab testing.

“Development of a SARS-CoV-2 assay is not novel in and of itself,” writes Parr, noting the fact that multiple CRISPR-based SARS-CoV-2 tests have been developed, and there are a growing number of CRISPR-based assays that can identify specific pathogen strains and mutations. “The important thing about this paper,” he says “is that the authors worked hard to make their assay simple and easy to use, all the way from sample preparation to final read-out.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: YOUTUBE, NTT DISRUPTION

Aubrey de Grey, a self-taught gerontologist who has promoted the idea that aging is a preventable, pathological phenomenon, has been placed on leave by the research foundation he cofounded and an investigation into alleged sexual harassment is underway, STAT reports today (August 11).

Last night, the female founders of two companies aimed at healthy life span extension, Laura Deming of the Longevity Fund and Celine Halioua of Loyal, relayed experiences they say they had with de Grey years earlier on Twitter and their personal blogs. De Grey posted a response on Facebook denying the allegations.

Both women describe situations in which de Grey, who cofounded the aging-focused SENS Research Foundation in 2009, explicitly spoke with them about sex. According to Halioua’s account, he even told her that it was her responsibility to sleep with SENS donors to encourage financial contributions. Deming was only 17 when, she alleges, de Grey told her he wanted to speak with her about his “adventurous love life.” Deming says that when she recently became aware that this was not a one-off incident, she was “angry to realize that Aubrey inappropriately propositioned more than one woman over whom he was in a position of power, many in the community knew about it, and no one did anything,” she writes.

SENS Acting Executive Director Lisa Fabiny tells STAT in an emailed statement that the foundation, where de Grey is chief scientific officer, first became aware of Deming’s and Halioua’s stories in June and has since commissioned an independent investigation of the claims.

“We respect the integrity of this investigative process, and it would not be appropriate to speculate on the outcomes while the process remains ongoing,” she writes. “We can promise that we will take seriously the findings and, if appropriate, take decisive action. We cannot and do not condone behavior that makes our colleagues and members of our scientific community feel victimized, targeted, or harmed.”

According to Halioua, de Grey is not the only SENS executive to have harassed young women at the foundation, and she further alleges that “SENS did not act” when first presented with the testimonies of such harassment. But Fabiny tells STAT, “No other allegations were brought to SRF management and no other employees of SRF have ever been accused of sexual misconduct.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A scanning electron micrograph of human sperm stuck together and immobilized by an antisperm antibody B. SHRESTHA ET AL., SCI TRANSL MED , 2021

Currently, most available birth control options are barrier methods or rely on hormones to prevent fertilization of an egg—both of which have drawbacks, such as discomfort or side effects, that make them less than ideal for some people. Enter antisperm antibodies, described in a study published today (August 11) in Science Translational Medicine. Researchers generated antibodies that recognize an antigen unique to human sperm. When delivered topically to the reproductive tracts of sheep, the antibodies successfully bound and trapped more than 99.9 percent of introduced human sperm. Some of the authors have spun out a company, Mucommune, in order to continue the development of contraceptives based on these antibodies.

“I’m a strong proponent of using antibody therapeutics in clever ways that benefit people, and I think they’ve latched onto something here,” says Janice Reichert, who directs The Antibody Society, a nonprofit that supports antibody research and development, and was not involved in the study. She explains that most of the hundreds of antibody-based therapies currently in clinical trials are targeted toward molecules involved in cancer or immune-mediated disorders and are delivered intravenously, making the topical and regional applications for contraception proposed in the current study unusual.

It’s not largely appreciated that human bodies secrete as many, if not more, antibodies into mucus as into either blood or lymph, says study coauthor Sam Lai of the University of North Carolina Eshelman School of Pharmacy. About a decade ago, Lai’s group began to investigate the mucus–antibody interaction in an effort to find better ways to protect against infections in the lungs, as well as sexually transmitted infections and unwanted pregnancies.

Previous work showed that some women’s bodies naturally produce antibodies to sperm that can lead to a type of immunological infertility. Lai’s group used the antigen binding fragment from one of these antibodies, which recognizes a sperm-specific antigen known as CD52g, in a study published in 2020, where they engineered an IgG antibody with four of the antigen-binding fragments and showed that it and the original, naturally-occurring IgG antibody with two antigen binding domains trapped sperm in vitro.

In the new study, Lai and colleagues added multiple antigen-binding fragments—6, 8, or 10—to an IgG antibody and then introduced expression plasmids into human embryonic kidney cells so the cells would produce them and researchers could isolate them. The team tested the antibodies’ ability to immobilize sperm in vitro, where the antibodies with extra antigen-binding fragments trapped sperm at least 10 times more effectively than the original IgG antibody with just two antigen-binding fragments.

To explore the effects of the antibodies in vivo, the researchers introduced the original IgG antibody, one with 6 or 10 antigen-binding fragments, or saline into the vaginas of female sheep, which are similar to the human female reproductive tract, and then simulated intercourse and delivered a human semen sample. Two minutes later, they retrieved the sample and analyzed sperm movement. At a high dose (333 micrograms of antibody), all three antibodies tamped down nearly all sperm motility, and at a low dose (33.3 micrograms), both modified antibodies, but not the original IgG, trapped more than 90 percent of sperm.

“It’s a lot of impressive work and a really interesting idea,” says Pascal Gagneux, an evolutionary biologist at the University of California, San Diego, who was not involved in the study. Some of the open questions, according to Gagneux, are how similar sheep and human vaginal mucus are and how successful the antibody will be at preventing pregnancy. “This thing better be really, really airtight, because even if it’s surprising how many sperm get incapacitated, as long as you have one, you could still theoretically get pregnant,” he says.

Lai agrees that the next step is to move into the clinic. Through their company Mucommune, the team is currently working on incorporating the antibodies into a vaginal film or ring that could be used during fertile periods to prevent pregnancy. “In the long run, we would also be interested in exploring other methods of delivery [such as injectables] that would satisfy the needs of different subgroups of women,” he says.

Coauthor Bhawana Shrestha, a former grad student and now postdoc in the Lai lab, says she was drawn to the project based on “the limitations of existing contraception.” People think the need for nonhormonal contraception is already met via intrauterine devices and other products, she adds, “but that is so far from the truth.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Colonies of baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)—a common gut fungal community member—and bacteria

© ISTOCK.COM, AKCHAMCZUK

In recent years, researchers have discovered that bacteria in the gut are necessary for robust responses to chemotherapy and immunotherapy, but their effects on radiation therapy remained unknown. Now, research published in Cancer Cell on July 29 demonstrates that not only are gut bacteria vital to radiation’s ability to fight tumors, but fungi—less famous members of the gut microbiome—may act as additional key regulators of the antitumor immune response.

The paper “represents the first demonstration that intestinal fungi may affect anti-cancer radiotherapy,” writes Giorgio Trinchieri, a cancer and immunology researcher at the National Cancer Institute who was not involved with the work, in an email to The Scientist. “I consider this paper an important contribution to the field.”

Researchers know that gut bacteria and fungi affect immune system function, and recent studies have shown that they also play a role in cancer development. Since certain cancer therapies generate antitumor immune responses, it makes sense that gut bacteria alter these drugs’ effectiveness as well: In preclinical models and previous human studies, effective chemotherapy and immunotherapy required intact intestinal bacterial communities. When researchers eliminated bacteria with antibiotics in mice, the effectiveness of chemotherapy drugs and immunotherapy decreased significantly.

See “Fecal Transplant Could Boost Immunotherapy to Treat Melanoma”

No one had studied the interaction between the microbiome and radiation therapy. So two researchers at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles joined forces—Stephen Shiao, a radiation oncologist, immunologist, and cancer researcher, and David Underhill, a microbiome and inflammation researcher—to examine it in mice. “We saw, interestingly, that [the efficacy of radiation] was affected by bacteria, like chemotherapy or immunotherapy,” said Shiao.

The team also saw that when the mice received antibiotics, fungi grew in the bacteria’s stead. “That was our aha moment,” he says, adding that it led to a hypothesis that perhaps an overgrowth of fungus was one of the reasons why, when gut bacteria are eliminated, cancer treatment becomes less effective.

Fungi in the microbiome have recently been shown to regulate inflammatory responses. To learn more about their role during radiation treatment, Shiao and his team used a mouse model of breast cancer, letting tumors grow and then irradiating them. When tumor-bearing mice received antibiotics, tumors grew back more quickly following radiation compared with controls who hadn’t received antibiotics, with no reduction in tumor cell proliferation compared to controls who hadn’t received radiation and less tumor cell death. Quantitative PCR of microbial ribosomal DNA obtained from mice feces revealed that antibiotics depleted bacteria more than 2000-fold, while fungal counts increased over 2000-fold. Giving mice with mammary tumors or melanoma an antifungal drug increased the radiation’s ability to delay tumor growth and improved survival, seemingly by increasing levels of tumor cell death after radiation therapy. They also created fungus-free mice and showed that radiation therapy was much more effective in them than in regular mice.

To determine precisely how fungi reduce the effectiveness of radiation therapy, the researchers examined the immune cell composition of tumors from mice that received the different treatments. Compared with mice receiving radiation alone, mice receiving radiation plus antifungal treatment had an increase in cell-killing CD8+ T cells. In mice receiving antibiotics plus radiation, they saw an increase in tumor-associated macrophages that attack these tumor cell-killing T cells. (Killing the bacteria leads to an increase in fungi.). When the team removed either these T cells or macrophages from the mice, the antifungal lost its tumor-slowing and life-prolonging effects.

In their paper, the researchers write that this likely means that bacteria are important for generating activated T cells after radiation therapy, while fungi promote macrophages that destroy these tumor-killing T cells. If correct, that might suggest that limiting fungi while ensuring a healthy gut bacterial community could boost the immune system’s antitumor activities. The group is now conducting small trials in early-stage breast cancer patients on the effect of long-term antifungal use on radiation therapy outcomes.

“This work does have important potential translational implications, with the ability to target fungi in the gut microbiota to enhance responses to cancer treatment, though further studies need to be done to assess the relevance and translation of these findings in human cohorts,” writes Jennifer Wargo, oncologist and director of the Program for Innovative Microbiome and Translational Research at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, in an email to The Scientist.

Shiao says the long-term goal of this research is “to develop the optimal microbiome composition—a mixture of some bacteria and some fungi that are the perfect balance—but we are trying to figure out what that is,” noting that it might be different depending on the situation and person. “Interventions for the microbiome are known and safe, so it could be translated pretty quickly,” he adds.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: A variety of plant spore fossils preserved in circa 480 million-year-old rock from the Canning Basin in Western Australia

PAUL STROTHER

A variety of fossilized plant spores have been found in rocks from Western Australia that date from the early Ordovician era—approximately 480 million years ago. According to a paper published in Science today (12 August), some of the spores may have belonged to early forms of land-dwelling algae, from which other land plants are thought to have originated.

“I think [the paper] is interesting for a few reasons,” says paleobiologist Philip Donoghue of the University of Bristol who was not involved with the study. “It extends the fossil record of [early land plants] by something like 20 million years. . . . Also, potentially [the fossils] provide a sort of intermediate between the Cambrian record and the later Ordovician records.”

Plants that live on land are thought to have evolved from algae—typically aquatic plants lacking stems, roots, leaves, and vascular systems. But when and how plants first adapted to life on land is a matter of debate. The first macrofossil evidence of land plants is in the form of 425 million-year-old specimens of Cooksonia, a primitive vascular plant. However, molecular clock estimates—which are based on, among other things, genetic mutation rates—have suggested an origin for land plants in the Cambrian period (approximately 505 million years ago).

This 80-million-year disconnect between the molecular and fossil data exists in part because molecular genetic changes always precede morphological ones, says Donoghue. Other researchers have suggested that it might also be because early land plants had soft, nonvascular tissues that would not have been well preserved.

In contrast to soft vegetative tissues, the spores of land plants have tough cell walls that protect them against drying out and enable their preservation and fossilization, says Boston College paleobotanist Paul Strother, who coauthored the new paper. For this reason, he says, “spores can be used as a proxy for land plants” in the fossil record.

This toughened quality of spores, in fact, is why it has long been hypothesized that spores were one of the earliest plant adaptations to life on land, says Strother. Just as the egg preceded the chicken, evolutionarily speaking, so spores preceded sporophytes, the spore-producing plant structures that can take the form of, say, fruiting bodies of moss, fronds of a ferns, trees, and so on.

Strother and colleagues have previously found fossilized land-plant spores dating from the mid-Ordovician period—approximately 460 million years ago—closing the 80 million-year gap somewhat. They’ve also found spore-like microfossils dating from the mid-Cambrian era. These spore-like forms don’t look like traditional land-plant spores produced by meiosis, but are preserved in the same way. They more closely resemble the haploid cells generated by modern-day Charophyte algae—the closest relatives to land plants. These land-plant and algal traits lead Strother to argue that the spores may belong to ancient algal species that had adapted to living on land. This interpretation has been questioned, however.

Now, Strother and coauthor Clinton Foster, a palynologist at the Australian National University, report the discovery of fossilized spores in rocks that fall right between their previous finds in terms of age.

The rock samples had been drilled from the Canning basin in Western Australia and prepared as slides back in 1958 as part of Australia’s search for oil—fossil analysis being a standard technique in the hunt for black gold. Knowing that the samples dated from the early Ordivician, Foster had been scouring the 60-year-old slides for potentially interesting microfossils when “he found these clusters of odd-looking spore-like things and, long story short, he eventually got hold of me,” explains Strother. Some of the spores in the samples resembled the previously discovered 460 million-year-old land plant spores, while others were akin to the mid-Cambrian spore-like fossils, Strother says.

The spores are “of intermediate age between the youngest verifiable land plants and the oldest putative ones,” says Richard McCourt, who studies the evolution and ecology of green algae at Drexel University in Philadelphia and was not involved in the project. This means “the fossil record is being filled in to the extent that it seems to reconcile the molecules and the morphology,” he adds.

The findings not only push back the fossil record of land plants another 20 million years, says paleobotanist Patricia Gensel of the University of North Carolina who was not involved in the research, they also add weight to the idea that the spore-like fossils belonged to land-based algae. “It’s supporting the idea that there were some land-dwelling algae and early [land] plants that lived together,” she says.

It just goes to show, continues Gensel, that “you never know what you’re going to find in fossil records. It really pays to keep looking.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: © ISTOCK.COM, KOTO_FEJA

Aclinical trial testing a novel gene therapy for a rare neurological disease has been put on hold after one of the participants in a Phase 3 trial developed a bone marrow disorder that can lead to cancer. The pause, announced Monday by the trial’s sponsor, bluebird bio, and mandated by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), was taken “out of an abundance of caution,” the company’s president of rare genetic diseases, Andrew Obenshain, said in a recent quarterly call.

The therapy targets cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy, which is caused by a mutation in the gene for an enzyme called adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP) that breaks down fats. The mutation causes fat to build up in the brain, where it breaks down the insulating myelin that allows neurons to communicate with one another. Because the gene is on the X chromosome, women typically have a least one good copy, so the disease primarily strikes men. Left untreated, it causes damage to hearing, vision, cognition, and coordination. It is often fatal.

Bluebird’s gene therapy uses an engineered lentivirus to correct the mutation associated with the disease. Lentiviruses belong to the same family as HIV—retroviruses—and have been widely used in gene therapies and other medical applications for many years. While other virus-based platforms using retroviruses had previously been linked to cancer among patients, it is only recently that a lentivirus has been implicated in such an outcome: in February of this year, bluebird bio paused another trial, one for a blood disorder, after two patients developed leukemia-like cancer, Science reports, although it was later determined that the virus was likely not the cause, and the trial resumed.

“Most in the field were hoping that we would not see such an event with lentiviral vectors,” Harry Malech, a gene therapy researcher at the National Institutes of Health, tells Science, adding, “I don’t think anybody’s been . . . saying this couldn’t happen.”

The cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy therapy involves taking samples of a patient’s bone marrow and treating the stem cells therein with the modified virus that contains a corrected copy of the gene that encodes ALDP. After a round of chemotherapy to reduce the person’s bone marrow cells, the treated cells are infused back into the patient. Thereafter, the patient’s stem cells produce healthy blood cells with a functional copy of the gene for ALDP. The therapy entered the market in Europe last month following a previous safety and efficacy trial that included 32 patients. A second trial, the one that has now been paused, was set to finish in 2024.

Speaking on the call, bluebird bio’s Chief Scientific Officer Philip Gregory said that one patient in the second trial developed myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), a blood disorder that sometimes leads to leukemia, and another two had abnormal bone marrow cells that could progress to MDS. When scientists examined their cells, they found lentiviral DNA inserted at a site in the genome that has previously been linked to MDS in retrovirus-based therapies, suggesting that the virus may have caused the changes.

Specifically, Gregory said the issue is likely caused by the virus’ promoter, the DNA sequence that “turns on” the therapeutic copy of the gene. To ensure the gene produces enough ALDP in the brain to be an effective treatment, the researchers needed a strong promoter, but as a consequence, the promoter had off-target effects, turning on other genes in the area around the mutation, including cancer genes, Gregory speculated.

Donald Kohn, a gene therapy researcher at the University of California, Los Angeles, who helped design the viral vector, tells Science that in the time since bluebird bio first began developing the therapy, researchers have identified other promoters that might be able to do the job with a lower risk of causing cancer. He adds that this particular incident shouldn’t preclude scientists from pursuing other lentivirus treatments, as the issue seems to come down to design, and Kohn doesn’t know of any other lentivirus therapies that use the same type of promoter.

Panam Malik, a hematologist at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital who was not involved in the work, similarly tells Science that virus-based platforms should be highlighted for the good they have done. “This is a severe adverse event,” she says, but adds, “we should never lose sight of the fact that so many patients . . . have been helped.” Despite this rare incident, the findings could “help scientists and researchers design safer and better vectors for the future.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ABOVE: Self-identified Negritos from various islands of the Philippines.

OPHELIA PERSSON

Until recently, scientists thought the modern humans with the highest proportion of Denisovan ancestry lived in Papua New Guinea and Australia. According to a new study published yesterday (August 12) in Current Biology, however, an Indigenous group in the Philippines called the Ayta Magbukon have 30 to 40 percent more Denisovan DNA than these other frontrunners, for a total of nearly 5 percent of their genomes.

Denisovans were a group of archaic humans first identified from a single pinkie bone in a Siberian cave. They coexisted with modern humans and other archaic human species, such as Neanderthals, for hundreds of thousands of years, until they went extinct an estimated 30,000 to 50,000 years ago. According to Gizmodo, only Pacific Islanders and Southeast Asians have substantial Denisovan ancestry. By comparison, most people in other parts of mainland Asia have less than 0.05 percent Denisovan ancestry, and people of African and European descent don’t have any.

“[The Ayta Magbukon] possess more Denisovan ancestry than anybody else on the planet today,” Uppsala University biologist and study coauthor Mattias Jakobsson tells Inverse. “So that was a surprise to us.”

According to Gizmodo, the researchers were originally interested in studying the human history of the Philippines as part of a massive collaborative effort with Indigenous communities, local governments, the National Commission for Culture and the Arts of the Philippines, and researchers at Uppsala University.

As a follow-up study to an earlier one studying human migrations to the Philippines, “we intended to look at the distant past by assessing the levels of archaic ancestry among the populations, especially that some populations in these regions were previously shown to have elevated levels of Denisovan ancestry and that Island Southeast Asia is known to be inhabited by various archaic species of Homo,” population geneticist and study coauthor Maximilian Larena tells Gizmodo.

To do this, the researchers analyzed the genomes of 1,107 individuals belonging to 118 distinct ethnic groups in the Philippines—including 25 groups self-identifying as “Negritos,” who are regarded as the earliest modern human inhabitants of the Philippines, according to the study’s authors. By comparing these genomes to Denisovan and Neanderthal genomes, they found that while the degree of Neanderthal ancestry was fairly uniform in their study population (and comparable to modern humans in other parts of the world), the degree of Denisovan ancestry was highly variable, and substantially higher among Negritos than in other groups.

These findings “are consistent with a model of an independent interbreeding event between Negritos and Denisovans within the Philippines, suggesting that Denisovans may have been in the islands long before the presence of any modern human ethnic group,” Larena tells Gizmodo.

University of Tübingen paleogeneticist Cosimo Posth, who was not involved in the study, tells Science News the new report suggests that “still today there are populations that have not been fully genetically described and that Denisovans were geographically widespread.”

Currently, the Denisovan fossil record is sparse, and according to Science News, Denisovan fossils can’t be identified by morphology alone. They have to be genetically sequenced, which can be difficult when extracting fossils from tropical climates where the ancient DNA degrades more quickly.

See “Denisovan Fossil Identified in Tibetan Cave”

The findings “further increase my suspicions that Denisovan fossils are hiding in plain sight,” among previously excavated discoveries on Southeast Asian islands, University of Adelaide population geneticist João Teixeira tells Science News. Teixeira was not involved with the current study.

“When it comes to Southeast Asia and the Southeast Asian Islands, we have more questions than answers as we don’t have a good archaeological record,” University of Colorado Boulder population geneticist Fernando Villanea tells Inverse. Villanea, who was not involved with the study, adds, “Now we have these incredible genetic findings and we’re having a hard time putting together a cohesive story.”

“By sequencing more genomes in the future, we will have better resolution in addressing multiple questions, including how the inherited archaic tracts influenced our biology and how it contributed to our adaptation as a species,” Larena says in the press release.

See “Neanderthal DNA in Modern Human Genomes Is Not Silent”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@