Susan Goldberg, Editor in Chief, National Geographic; Editorial Director, National Geographic Partners

Executive Team

Debra Adams Simmons, Executive Editor; David Brindley, Managing Editor/Magazines; Whitney Johnson, Director/Visuals & Immersive Experiences; Indira Lakshmanan, Senior Executive Editor/News & Features; Emmet Smith, Creative Director; Alissa Swango, Managing Editor/Digital; Michael Tribble, Managing Editor/Integrated Storytelling

News & Features

David Lindsey, Executive Editor; Patricia Edmonds, Senior Director/Short Form; Brooke Sabin, Deputy Managing Editor/Short Form; Peter Gwin, John Hoeffel, Editors at Large; Yudhijit Bhattacharjee, Heather Greenwood Davis, Nadia Drake, Robert Draper, Cynthia Gorney, Contributing Writers

Gretchen Ortega, Executive Assistant; Nia Cheney, Editorial Project Manager

Animals

Rachael Bale, Executive Editor; Christine Dell'Amore, Assistant Managing Editor; Oliver Payne, Senior Editor; Douglas Main, Senior Writer/Editor; Natasha Daly, Writer/Editor; Dina Fine Maron, Rachel Fobar, Wildlife Watch Reporters

Environment

Robert Kunzig, Executive Editor; Lori Cuthbert, Senior Editor; Laura Parker, Craig Welch, Senior Writers; Alejandra Borunda, Sarah Gibbens, Writers

History & Culture

Debra Adams Simmons, Executive Editor; Nancy San Martín, Deputy Managing Editor; Glenn Oeland, Senior Editor; Kristin Romey, Archaeology Writer/Editor; Rachel Hartigan, Senior Writer/Editor; Nina Strochlic, Writer; Tucker Toole, History Resident

Science

Victoria Jaggard, Executive Editor; Bijal P. Trivedi, Senior Editor; Jay Bennett, Editor; Michael Greshko, Maya Wei-Haas, Writers

Travel

George W. Stone, Executive Editor; Amy Alipio, Deputy Managing Editor; Anne Kim-Dannibale, Jennifer Barger, Senior Editors; Starlight Williams, Associate Editor

Copy Desk

Amy Kolczak, Deputy Managing Editor; Cindy Leitner, Senior Copy Editor; Caroline Braun, Copy Editor

Research

Alice S. Jones, Director; Elizabeth S. Atalay, Taryn L. Salinas, Heidi Schultz, Brad Scriber, Researchers

Photography

Kathy Moran, Deputy Director

Animals

Alexa Keefe, Assistant Managing Editor; Kaya Berne, Photo Editor; Alexandra Moreo, Associate Photo Editor

Environment

Anne Farrar, Assistant Managing Editor; Dominique Hildebrand, Photo Editor

History & Culture

James Wellford, Assistant Managing Editor; Mallory Benedict, Jennifer Samuel, Photo Editors

Science

Kurt Mutchler, Assistant Managing Editor; Todd James, Senior Photo Editor; Samantha Clark, Photo Editor

Travel

Maura Friedman, Photo Editor; Gail Fletcher, Associate Photo Editor

Julie Hau, Photo Editor; Elena Sheveiko, Senior Photography Specialist; Vi Nguyen, Maya Valentine, Photo Coordinators; Becky Hale, Mark Thiessen, Staff Photographers; Tom O’Brien, Photo Engineer; Breann Birkenbuel, Project Associate; David M. Barreda, Senior Photography Resident; Amr Alfiky, Photography Resident

Cartography

Martin Gamache, Director; Ted Sickley, Director/Cartographic Databases; Yanli Gong, Manager/Cartographic Databases; Matt W. Chwastyk, Christine Fellenz, Senior Editors; Riley D. Champine, Rosemary P. Wardley, Editors; Scott Zillmer, Editor/Maps

Infographics

John Tomanio, Director; Alberto Lucas López, Fernando G. Baptista, Senior Artists; Manuel Canales, Monica Serrano, Jason Treat, Senior Editors; Diana Marques, Associate Manager/Production; Taylor Maggiacomo, Christina Shintani, Soren Walljasper, Associate Editors

Interactive Storytelling

Kennedy Elliott, Director; Brian T. Jacobs, Ryan Morris, Senior Editors; Oscar Santamariña, Editor; Eve Conant, Senior Editor/Short Form

Design

Marianne Seregi, Director; Elaine Bradley, Hannah Tak, Tim Parks, Senior Editors; Sandi Owatverot, Nicole Thompson, Production Leads; T.J. Tucker, Contributing Designer; Nina Wescott, Design Resident

Video

Jennifer Murphy, Deputy Director; Dan Steinmetz, Senior Editor; Zach Baumgartner, Producer; Milaena Hamilton, Associate Producer; Kaitlyn Mullin, Senior Producer/Immersive Content

Mobile Storytelling

Sadie Quarrier, Deputy Director; Cosima Amelang, Senior Producer; Tiffany D’Emidio, Rebekah Barlas, Shweta Gulati, Producers/Editors

Podcasts

Davar Ardalan, Executive Producer; Carla Wills, Senior Producer; Eli Chen, Senior Editor; Amy Briggs, Peter Gwin, Hosts; Jacob Pinter, Brian Gutierrez, Laura Sim, Ilana Strauss, Producers

Social Media & Audience Development

Chris Thorman, Vice President; Josh Raab, Director/Instagram; Jeff Heimsath, Senior Editor; Sarah Polger, Senior Manager; Becky Davis, Sarah Gardner, Vanina Harel, Ashley Kalena, Managers; Lena Shareef, Senior Producer; Nathan Strauss, Producer; Delaney Gordon, Associate Producer; Danny Kerry, Specialist; Sid Dawson, Coordinator



Newsletters

David Beard, Executive Editor; Jen Tse, Senior Photo Editor

Multiplatform Publishing

Janey Adams, Director; Francis Rivera, Senior Strategist; Kimberly Pecoraro, Producer; Amy McKeever, Senior Writer/Editor

Production Services

Bill Reicherts, Director/Admin; Mike Lappin, Senior Manager/Production; John Chow, Manager/Imaging; Sean Philpotts, Director/Production

International Editions

Darren Smith, Deputy Director; Beata Nas, Translation Manager; Leigh Mitnick, International Editor

National Geographic History magazine

Amy Briggs, Executive Editor

National Geographic Kids and Family

Rachel Buchholz, Editor in Chief and Vice President, Kids and Family Magazines and Digital; Laura Goertzel, Digital Director; Eileen O’Tousa-Crowson, Design Director; Kay Boatner, Senior Editor/Digital Producer; Shannon Hibberd, Senior Photo Editor; Allyson Shaw, Editor/Digital Producer

Newsstand Special Issues

Bridget E. Hamilton, Editorial Manager; Linda Makarov, Editor/Design; Michael O’Connor, Production Editor
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From sunbaked Los Angeles to cornfield-flanked towns in the Midwest, United States communities large and small share a common summertime obsession: the public swimming pool. For many kids, these pools capture the season’s essence, setting the rhythm of days till school starts again.

Whether you’re a local or a visitor, a plunge into one of the country’s thousands of municipal watering holes offers a chance to cool off and find common ground with strangers, an increasingly rare opportunity in a polarized country.

Like many communal “bathing” rituals (Japanese hot springs, Turkish hamams), America’s public pools began with a civic push toward good hygiene and better physical health. Between the 1890s and the 1940s, both indoor and outdoor natatoriums sprung up around the country. “Neighbors played, chatted, and flirted with one another, but they also fought about who should and should not be allowed to swim,” says historian Jeff Wiltse, author of Contested Waters: A Social History of Swimming Pools in America.

Initially, social classes, races, and even the sexes mixed at some facilities. But by the mid-1950s, pools were public in name only: municipalities across the U.S. segregated swimming facilities along with busses, movie theaters, and other shared spaces. Protests and Civil Rights legislation gradually forced their integration, but communities fought to exclude people of color.

When St. Louis, Missouri, desegregated its Fairgrounds Pool in 1949, about 30 Black children showed up to swim only to be forced out by thousands of white protestors. Other facilities admitted people of color just once a week—usually the day the pool was drained and refilled for the white swimmers who showed up the rest of the week.

(Learn why U.S. public pools are still haunted by the legacy of segregation.)

When the 1964 Civil Rights Act definitively outlawed segregation in public places, many people began abandoning municipal pools for private swim clubs and backyard pools. Urban tax revenues shrank; city pools grew dilapidated, and many closed. Ironically, the people for whom public pools were originally created—poor and working-class families—often found themselves living far from spots to take a dip.

Today, there are more than 300,000 municipal pools in the U.S., open to anyone with a government I.D., a few bucks, and a towel. Curious about who was frequenting them now, I took my camera on the road and visited more than two dozen public pools.

If you want to get a feel for a place’s character, culture, and history, visit a public pool. Some are restored early 20th-century marvels, like Northern California’s circa-1926 Richmond Plunge. Others are surrounded by nature (the palm tree-framed Turkey Lake Pool in Orlando, Florida) or dazzling architecture (the Astoria Pool in Queens, New York, backdropped by the Robert F. Kennedy Bridge).

Some are inclusive, cold, refreshing versions of the melting pot, like Philadelphia’s Ridgeway Pool or Barton Springs in Austin, Texas. At the latter, both the chilly, spring-fed water and the blend of bathers (nine-to-fivers, free spirits, Latinx teens, University of Texas sorority members) still feel delightfully diverse. The 2021 movie version of Lin-Manuel Miranda’s musical In the Heights featured a joyous scene with 90 dancers hip-hopping and belly-flopping at Highbridge Pool in New York City.

(Dip a toe into the history and science of soaking in U.S. hot springs.)

Other pools reflect Americans’ continuing struggles to mix with people who don’t look, talk, or live exactly as they do. At Washington, D.C.’s Banneker Pool, established for Black residents in 1934, I saw people of all ages and skin tones, but little mingling (except in the diving-board line). Nonetheless, public pools remain vital sanctuaries for those who don’t live in gated communities or belong to private swim clubs. “Coming here kept me off the streets,” says Alex McCall, Banneker’s manager. “I’m going to love this pool till the day I die.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: DAVIS SQUARE PARK POOL, ILLINOIS A girl cannonballs into a public pool in Chicago, Illinois.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Both Theodore Roosevelt and John Muir might have applauded a bold proposal currently being fought over in California: Shift control of the 1.3-million-acre Sierra National Forest to the National Park Service, which would manage it as a national monument benefiting species, helping combat climate change, and inching the Biden administration’s “30 by 30 initiative” a bit closer to fruition.

Yet Deanna Lynn Wulff’s Unite the Parks campaign, which treats the national forest as the missing puzzle piece needed to link Yosemite National Park to the north with Kings Canyon to the south, remains politically fraught.

The sprawling national forest in California has thousands of mining claims, timber sales, grazing leases, and private inholdings, activities not typically found in national parks. A private Facebook group formed in 2015 to push back against Wulff’s campaign now has 5,500 members. The forest also lies in the congressional district of U.S. Representative Tom McClintock, a Republican who ardently supports multiple use of public lands and argues that logging is integral to forest health.

But the changing climate requires greater land connectivity to allow species—plants and animals—to retreat to more suitable habitats. Park Service management of the proposed Range of Light National Monument would arguably provide better protection for that connectivity and affected species. In the process, it would help slow the sixth mass extinction.

“It would be a very important step towards 30-by-30,” maintains Stuart Pimm, an expert on global patterns of habitat loss and species extinction based at Duke University. “I think it’s reasonable to say there are substantial concerns about how national forest lands in general protect biodiversity. That’s because, in all fairness to the Forest Service, they have a multiple-use mandate, and biodiversity is not the only part of that mandate.”

(Learn more about how the U.S. can triple its protected lands by 2030.)

Pimm adds that “for many people, the best value for forests is not to chop them down and convert them into wood chips or paper or anything else. The best value of those forests is as forests, preferably old-growth forests, and for the wide range of ecosystem services that those forests provide. This would be a move to increase the fraction of our lands that goes towards that 30 percent.”

An ecological awakening

Wulff came to realize her life’s mission while living in her tent on the floor of the Sierra National Forest.

“I’d wake up and the sun would be shining through the trees, and the birds would be singing, there’d be this flow of water,” she recalls. “Chipmunks running around, and the smell of the forest. Such a wonderful smell. This experience altered the rest of the course of my life.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

That was back in the mid-1990s, when Wulff was trying to make ends meet as a waitress in a lodge near Yosemite and called the forest home for a short time during the summer to save money. Today she’s striving to better protect nature by seeing the forest shifted from the U.S. Forest Service—which, she claims, “essentially functions as an agent of the logging industry”—to the National Park Service.

Transforming the national forest into the proposed national monument would create a rumpled, craggy, and forested 2.5-million-acre swath of parklands, or nearly 3 million acres when Sequoia National Park just south of Kings Canyon is factored in.

It’s a stunning landscape that rises to nearly 14,000 feet atop Mount Humphreys. Deep canyons cut through the High Sierra here and drain the boulder-strewn Kings, San Joaquin, and Merced rivers. A quintet of officially designated wilderness areas—Ansel Adams, Dinkey Lakes, John Muir, Kaiser, and Monarch—protect 528,000 acres dotted with sparkling lakes and threaded with hiking trails. There are threatened populations of Lahontan and Paiute cutthroat trout hanging on in some forest creeks, which help nourish more than 1,400 plant species, 82 mammalian species, and nearly 200 bird species.

Adding the forest to the National Park System would also protect the Nelder Grove of giant sequoias, a grove of a hundred or so trees which the Forest Service sees as increasingly important as climate change impacts similar groves in Kings Canyon and the Giant Sequoia National Monument; the roughly 100-mile-long Sierra Vista National Scenic Byway and 70-mile-long Sierra Heritage Scenic Byway that showcase the forest’s high country; and those five congressionally designated wilderness areas.

“It would be the end of commercial logging of the large living trees that still is going on” in the forest, Wulff says of the designation change. “It would remediate and restore the forest, and the ecosystems that support that forest. You’re planting trees, you’re restoring all those native plant species, and supporting all the wildlife that need those big trees and that need those native plant species.”

(Restoring protections for Bears Ears will likely spark legal fights.)

Uniting for conservation

Clipboard in hand and driving a worn-out pickup, Wulff initially pursued her audacious plan with a business-to-business, door-to-door campaign. Today she has a list of 200 or so scientists, researchers, and academics who support her mission, and nearly two dozen congressional backers.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Pimm is one of those proponents. Another is George Wuerthner, an ecologist and author of numerous books on natural history and national parks who says it was always Muir’s intent to see the land between Yosemite and Kings Canyon protected by the Park Service.

“The main reason I support the national monument idea is it would put the entire Western slope and some of the Eastern slope of the Sierra Nevada between Yosemite and Kings Canyon/Sequoia under similar management,” says Wuerthner. “In general, if the national monument were under National Park Service management, I feel we would have a more unified protected area that would guarantee the best management policies we have available to us.”

Wuerthner adds: “As you know, the Park Service’s general propensity is for protection, not exploitation, of the land. The Forest Service, unless it’s designated wilderness, has a much less protective philosophy.”

Although Forest Service staff declined to discuss the proposal, a shift toward more of a conservation approach in national forests is not new. In 1998 then-Forest Service chief Mike Dombeck said that, “We need to do a better job talking about, and managing for, the values that are so important to so many people. Values such as wilderness and roadless areas, clean water, conservation of species, old-growth forests’ naturalness—these are the reasons most Americans cherish their public lands.”

(To keep Earth flourishing, 30 percent of it needs protection by 2030.)

Wulff’s vision comes as the National Park Service faces crowding and overcrowding, with roughly half of the annual recreational visits to the National Park System centered on only about two dozen of the 423 units. (In 2019, 327.5 million people visited the most popular parks, though the COVID-19 pandemic dropped visitation to 237 million in 2020.) During a hearing in late July by the Senate Subcommittee on National Parks, the chairman, Senator Angus King (I-Maine) sounded in favor of easing crowding by adding more units to the park system to give people more room to roam.

“The law of supply and demand doesn’t apply here. The demand is here, but we can’t just go out and build more Glacier [National] parks,” said the senator. “Well, perhaps we need to bear that in mind as this committee and subcommittee considers new proposals for parks across the country.”

That would suit Wulff.

“You get to do this wonderful thing called saving the planet, so we should do it, right?” she says. “There’s no argument against it that makes any sense. The facts are on our side for doing this. It makes sense in terms of the environment, it makes sense in terms of the economy, and I also think it makes sense in terms of spiritual rejuvenation for the nation."

“We need something positive,” she adds. “This could be it.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@UNESCO recently added a number of new listings of “outstanding universal value” to its vaunted World Heritage List.

The Trans-Iranian Railway, the great spa towns of Europe, a lighthouse in France, 14th-century frescoes in Italy, adobe mosques in Côte d’Ivoire, an ancient solar observatory in Peru, and a “floating brick” temple in India are among the 34 new sites (37 including previously recognized places with significant boundary changes), based on nominations from 2020 and 2021.

Nations work hard to get their wilderness areas, archaeological treasures, and cultural sites on the list, which includes some 1,153 properties around the world. Inscription brings prestige and public awareness, and it can lead to all sorts of good things: tourism revenue, renewed commitments to preserve irreplaceable assets, and public and private funding for restoration work.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

In 2022, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) will celebrate the 50th anniversary of the treaty known as the World Heritage Convention. Its continuing goal is to foster global collaboration in identifying and preserving invaluable cultural and natural properties.

UNESCO officials do not see the list as a mere trophy case of superlative places. World Heritage status commits the home nation to protect the designated location. The 194 lands that have adhered to the World Heritage Convention are tasked not only with identifying future inscriptions, but also monitoring how an already-inscribed property is protected and managed.

(Here are 24 incredible photos of heritage sites in the U.S.)

If a site—through natural disaster, war, pollution, underfunding, or aggressive redevelopment—begins to lose its value, nations that have signed the treaty must assist, if possible, in emergency aid campaigns.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The World Heritage program has scored high-profile preservation successes. It exerted pressure to halt a highway near Egypt’s Giza Pyramids, block a salt mine at a gray whale nursery in Mexico, and cancel a dam proposal above Africa’s Victoria Falls. Its funds, provided by dues from the treaty's signers, have hired park rangers, bought parkland, built visitor centers, and restored temples. It relies on persuasive powers more than legal threats, but over a period of nearly five decades, the World Heritage initiative has quietly become a force for appreciating and safeguarding the world’s special places.

(Inside the ambitious push to protect a third of the world’s oceans.)

But what happens when a destination loses its World Heritage status, which happened recently when Liverpool was dropped from the list? As reported in Smithsonian, “the English city argued that redevelopment of its waterfront shouldn’t disqualify it from the list.” The argument didn’t sway a U.N. committee, which pointed to “the irreversible loss of attributes conveying the outstanding universal value of the property.”

2:53

Liverpool is one of three sites that have been dropped from the list, joining the Arabian Oryx Sanctuary in Oman and the Dresden Elbe Valley in Germany. But there are rising concerns that other sites—including Stonehenge and the Great Barrier Reef—might be delisted in the future.

Threats to our global treasures are mounting, and sadly the list of World Heritage in Danger now includes 52 sites. Not all of them are as far-flung as the rainforests of the Atsinanana, in Madagascar, which are threatened by illegal logging and lemur hunting.

(These breathtaking natural wonders no longer exist.)

In the U.S., Everglades National Park is on the list, due to serious degradation of its aquatic ecosystem. The Florida site was added to the endangered list at the request of the U.S., which suggests that international cooperation might help solve some of the world’s most pressing conservation problems.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Another UNESCO list recognizes and helps to protect fragile cultures, traditions, skills, and knowledge integral to a particular place. The List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity recognizes homegrown music styles, festivals, crafts, and foods. To get on it, countries nominate and promote their cultural practices before a UNESCO committee weighs in on whether, say, Chinese shadow puppetry or Argentine tango merits a spot.

(Singapore’s iconic, but endangered, street food, now has UNESCO status.)

As of 2020 (the most recent update), there are 584 practices on the Intangible Cultural Heritage list. These include the Uzbek art of wit performed at festivals, Kyrgyzstan yurt building, and the Brazilian capoeira martial art. The French gastronomic meal is on the list, recognizing its structure (apéritif, starter, main, cheese, dessert, liqueurs); appropriate wine pairings; and an elegant table setting. Passed from one generation to the next, the tradition cements social ties and marks French identity. Other inscriptions include Mexico’s Day of the Dead ceremonies, the Peking opera, and Portuguese fado.

More are added each year, with the committee set to review 2021 nominations at its 16th session, this November. It all goes back to UNESCO’s mission to promote peace through respect of the world’s varied cultures and common humanity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Alberta is rightfully famous for its Canadian national park royalty: Banff, Canada’s first national park, and Jasper, the largest national park in the Canadian Rockies. But, for getting back to nature—no matter your age, interests, or abilities—the lesser known national and provincial parks of southwestern Alberta are well worth exploring.

“It’s nice to visit the iconic parks, but it’s cool to think you’re discovering a hidden gem that not as many people have explored yet,” says National Geographic Travel photographer Kahli April. Although she lives just southeast of Banff National Park in the mountain town of Canmore, April says she regularly explore the wilds of southwestern Alberta, the ecologically-diverse region where the prairies roll into the Rockies.

Adds April, “To me, finding something new and experiencing something unexpected is what being in nature all about. There are so many good hikes in southern Alberta that people miss out on because they’re not thinking outside the box.”

Hikers who seek out trails away from the well-trodden Banff and Jasper tourist paths are treated to serene nature experiences in uncrowded places, such as Beauvais Lake Provincial Park, Waterton Lakes National Park, and Castle Provincial Park. Waterton Lakes is doubly noteworthy because it’s part of Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park, a UNESCO World Heritage Site uniting Waterton with neighboring Glacier National Park in the U.S. state of Montana.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: In spring and early summer, wildflowers bloom across the grassland regions of Waterton Lakes National Park, home to more than 400 flowering plant species. PHOTOGRAPH BY CELESTINE AERDEN, TRAVEL ALBERTA

Along with solitude, these parks offer a something-for-everyone selection of hiking trails. At Beauvais Lake Provincial Park, for instance, the South Shore Trail is a level, out-and-back route―3.7 miles (6 km) total―that’s ideal for families and for bird-watchers. The trail offers views of the lake and the surrounding wetlands, breeding habitat for an array of avian life including the common loon, sandhill crane, osprey, and trumpeter swan. Hikers with binoculars can spot some of the more than 180 bird species that have been observed in the park.

Beauvais Lake, located about 12 miles (20 km) southwest of the small town of Pincher Creek, is also home to bigger wild things, such as black and grizzly bear, elk, moose, and mule deer. Look for wildlife (from a safe distance) and see wildflowers, early settlers’ homestead sites, and summit views on the park’s Mount Baldy to Mount Albert Loop trail. The backcountry trek begins on the partially rolling Homestead Loop, and includes two steep climbs to summits: the Mounty Baldy Viewpoint, elevation 1,585 meters (5,200 feet), and the blustery Mount Albert Viewpoint, elevation 1,620 meters (5,315 feet).

To dial up the thrill level even higher, head to Waterton Lakes National Park (a scenic drive less than three hours from Calgary via AB-2 S) and the Crypt Lake Trail. Tackling the 10.5-mile (17-km) Crypt Lake route, considered one of the best trails in Canada, is a six-to-eight-hour (round trip) adventure that begins with a boat ride to the trailhead. From there the trail winds through a succession of natural wonders—including a dense forest, four waterfalls, and a low-ceiling rock tunnel—on its way to the shores of Caribbean-blue Crypt Lake.

For a shorter Waterton Lakes waterfall walk (or snowshoe trip in winter) try the 3-mile (5.2-km) hike to Lower Bertha Falls. Leashed dogs are permitted on the moderately difficult trail, which begins in Waterton Village, the charming in-park town site located on the western shores of Upper Waterton Lake.

With 120 miles (200 km) of hiking trails, Waterton Lakes National Park is one of April’s favorite southwestern Alberta destinations for year-round adventure. But, she says, many of the region’s provincial parks also hold a special place in her heart due to the diversity of landscapes and the breathtaking views.

April recently returned to one of her favorites, Castle Provincial Park near Pincher Creek, to hike Table Mountain’s classic southwestern route.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: The hike to the flat-top plateau of Table Mountain in southwestern Alberta’s Castle Provincial Park leads through forests of aspen and subalpine fir trees. Right: The snowcapped peaks of the Flathead Range are seen in the distance on the descent back to the Table Mountain trailhead in Beaver Mines Lake Campground.

While a top-of-the-world photo is the big draw for many hikers, the “fun part,” according to April, is the 6 miles (10 km) out-and-back trail. She encourages anyone who does the hike to savor all the scenery―not just the view from the top)―as the route weaves through a variety of different environments on its way up to Table Mountain.

“Even if you don’t want to climb all the way to the summit, there’s still a lot to see on the first half of the hike,” she explains. “You start out in a magical aspen forest where you’re completely surrounded by the canopy. It’s shaded and cool and so lush that you can’t even see the peak. At this stage, you’ve almost forgotten that you’re there to hike to the summit.”

Eventually, the trail leads into an open meadow, and Table Mountain comes into clear view. The meadow viewpoint is a good turnaround point for beginner hikers, says April, since the route quickly gets rockier and steeper from here. The more challenging second half of the trail parallels a rocky creek bed (that turns into a waterfall) before ending with a steep scramble to the 360-degree prairie-meets-mountain vista on the top.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Water cascades alongside the rocky gully that hikers ascend on the rugged second half of the Table Mountain trail. Right: Skeletal-looking remnants of dead trees dot the final stretch of trail leading up to Table Mountain’s flat-top plateau.

“It gets a little eerie before you pop up on the summit because there are weather-battered dead trees scattered all over the place that almost look like skeletons,” says April, who recommends that hikers wear sturdy hiking shoes with ankle support to safely navigate the uneven, rocky terrain and carry extra layers of clothing due to the temperature drop on the consistently windy summit.

“When you finally make it to the top,” she adds, “you can walk for a few kilometers along this very flat, table-like plateau, look back over the prairie, and get this really amazing view from the true summit (which is beyond a lower cliff that’s featured in most photos). The whole experience is pretty cool.”

The best time to climb Table Mountain is July to mid-September; however, there are off-the-beaten-path trails to explore every month of the year in southwestern Alberta’s national and provincial parks. Discover more hiking hidden gems in the province’s lesser known parks with Travel Alberta.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This month, the National Park Service turns 105. While that number is impressive, many other figures relating to the 423 units—including 63 national parks—the Park Service administers are more astonishing.

National Park units vary in size, from a small house in Pennsylvania (Thaddeus Kosciuszko National Memorial) to a park in Alaska that’s larger than Switzerland (Wrangell–St. Elias National Park and Preserve.) The system encompasses over 85 million acres; includes 85,000 miles of rivers and streams; 7,035 square miles of reservoirs, lakes, or ocean; more than 43,000 miles of shoreline; 21,000 buildings; 27,000 historic structures; over 18,000 miles of trails; and nearly 9,000 miles of roads.

These federal properties—from battlefields to national seashores—are chosen for the protection of their natural, historic, and cultural values and are specially designated by an act of Congress (or in some cases, an executive order), and maintained for public use. In 2020, visitors logged 1,054,952,540 recreation visitor hours.

Today the National Park Service performs environmental advocacy in a time of climate change; acts as a guardian of diverse recreational, cultural, and historical resources; and serves as an ambassador to park preservation around the world—inspiring other countries to follow suit. Since 1916, the mission—to preserve these treasured sites for the education, enjoyment, and inspiration of this and future generations—has not changed.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

As a result, visitors reap the rewards. As the Milky Way burns across the dark skies of Death Valley and the northern lights finish shimmering above Denali, the first sunbeams hit the continent at Acadia. Bats wing their way back into Mammoth Cave, the bison herds stir at Yellowstone, and the Colima warbler trills its first song at Big Bend. Priceless national treasures, parks were created for these creatures, the land and its waters, and a rekindling of the human spirit.

You can learn more about these sanctuaries in the National Geographic Atlas of the National Parks, which takes readers on an epic journey through the extraordinary and unique features that distinguish these wilderness areas.

This world of wonders includes countless superlatives, from the world’s largest gypsum dune field to the highest peak in North America. Here are a few of our favorite wild places. Click through for travel reference pages that will help you plan your next epic excursion to a national treasure.

Zoom out to see more of the extreme national parks mentioned in the article.

Only national park south of the equator

Located roughly 2,600 miles southwest of Hawaii, American Samoa is home to the National Park of American Samoa. Often overlooked, this park (on U.S. territory) comprises 10 volcanic islands (five inhabited), five distinct rain forest communities, and two coral atolls (one inhabited).

Smallest national park by area

The United States’ 60th national park doesn’t resemble other parks. In the half-century since its construction began, Missouri’s Gateway Arch National Park has been many things: a monument to Thomas Jefferson’s historic frontier, a commemoration of Lewis and Clark’s epic expedition—and, most recently, a national park. After a $380 million renovation, the miniature park features a waterfront green space laced with walking trails, an amphitheater, and a top-tier American history museum.

Oldest national park

Tucked up on the northwest corner of Wyoming with parts spilling over into Montana and Idaho, Yellowstone National Park—established March 1, 1872—is still one of the most imposing, a blend of land and water, forest and field, wildlife and geothermal features that often seem to be living things. Rather than a single focus, Yellowstone has five main hubs—Old Faithful, Grant Village, Lake Village, Canyon Village, and Mammoth Hot Springs—each of them linked to a unique geological or geographical phenomenon.

3:25

Newest national park

Spreading across more than 72,000 acres of wooded hills, deep ravines, and Appalachian plateau in rural West Virginia, New River Gorge National Park and Preserve offers sweeping views of a centuries-old oak and maple forest that stretch for miles along steep sandstone cliffs. Along with its stunning topography, its vast array of socially distanced outdoor activities—rafting, rock climbing, hiking, mountain biking—make the U.S.’s newest national park, opened in 2020, a pandemic-era destination par excellence.

World’s longest known cave system

Designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1981, Mammoth Cave National Park consists of more than 400 miles of caves, with new caverns discovered all the time. Black guides were instrumental in the early mapping of the cave—first working as enslaved people, later alongside whites as paid guides. The ancestors of the seven tribes associated with the historic use of the parklands—including the Cherokee Nation and Shawnee Tribe—once used the cave system to mine minerals like gypsum with mussel shell scrapers harvested from the Green River.

(This U.S. national park has the world’s longest cave system—and an unusual history.)

America’s largest barrier reef

Before it became a national park in 1992, Dry Tortugas National Park was an area steeped in legends of swashbuckling pirates, turbulent waters, and stolen treasure. Now the seven-island archipelago, located in the Gulf of Mexico, 70 miles off the coast of Florida, is known for sheltering the third-largest coral barrier reef in the world (99.8 percent of the park is underwater) and the only tropical reef in the continental U.S.

Greatest density of natural arches in the world

Perched high above the Colorado River, Arches National Park is part of southern Utah’s extended canyon country, carved and shaped by weathering and erosion. There are more than 2,000 arches in the park; the largest is Landscape Arch, which spans 306 feet (longer than a football field) base to base. New arches are constantly forming, while old ones occasionally collapse—most recently Wall Arch, which fell in 2008.

Hottest recorded temperature in the world and lowest point in North America

The largest national park south of Alaska, Death Valley National Park is known for extremes: It is North America’s driest and hottest spot (with fewer than two inches/five centimeters of rainfall annually and a record high of 134°F), and has the lowest elevation on the continent—282 feet below sea level. Even with these harsh conditions, the park still receives nearly a million visitors each year.

World’s largest living tree (by volume)

Nestled in California’s Sierra Nevada mountains, Sequoia National Park is nearly 97 percent wilderness. It is home to over 2,000 giant sequoia trees, including General Sherman Tree, the world’s largest tree, measured by volume.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Largest canyon in the world

Large enough to fit 19 Statues of Liberty stacked on top of each other, the Grand Canyon National Park is a sprawling gorge of layers in pink, red, and orange hues, revealing millions of years of geological history. Given the absence of roads, there are only three ways to explore below the rims: hiking, mule trips, river rafting trips.

World’s largest gypsum dune field

New Mexico’s White Sands National Park hit the big leagues in December 2019, becoming the country’s 62nd national park. It protects the largest gypsum dune on Earth, a remnant of bygone lakes and seas, a 275-square-mile basin that glitters white and stays cool to the touch. Visitors come to cruise the eight-mile Dunes Drive, hike one of the five established trails, or see the soft, translucent sand glow blue-white under a full moon.

Highest point in North America

Larger than the state of New Jersey, Denali National Park and Preserve is a vast wilderness that is mostly untouched by human hands, save for the one park road and a few scattered services. It is known for extraordinary wildlife and big adventures, from backcountry camping to mountaineering. And on a good day, the park’s famous—and often notorious—clouds will part to reveal the great massif of Denali itself, the tallest peak in North America at 20,310 feet high.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A year-and-a-half into the COVID-19 pandemic, few Americans are being mindful about how they stand in line. At airports, theme parks, highway rest stops, and fast-food joints, there have only been small changes in the thinking about queuing up.

But as the Delta variant—and renewed mask mandates—sweep across the country and world, is it time for airports, restaurants, and other attractions to reconsider the conventional wisdom about lines’ efficiency and safety? In an era when commerce and countries have been forced to whipsaw between being shuttered or open, businesses, social scientists, and travelers are contending with fresh policies (and some old issues) about how to wait around with other people.

Not all lines are created equal

Though humans have likely been forming lines of some sort for millennia, it was Scottish historian Thomas Carlyle who first mentioned the concept of a “queue” in his 1837 history of the French Revolution. He recalled patrons lined up outside bakeries in famine-plagued Paris. “The first come be the first served,” he wrote.

Fairness is perhaps the fundamental reason people put up with standing in lines, says Donald Norman, a cognitive design expert and author of the research paper The Psychology of Waiting Lines. “People get really annoyed when they feel that they’re not being treated like everyone else, and that there are people that seem to get ahead of them,” says Norman.

(Discover why planning a trip gives people so much satisfaction.)

MIT professor Dick Larson , and self-proclaimed “Dr. Queue,” agrees. “The number one complaint from queuers is not the magnitude of the delay, it’s the unfairness, particularly when people cut in front of you.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The modern travel industry has undermined the egalitarian basis for queues with a pay-for-sooner-play approach to the waiting game. A little (or a lot) of extra cash allows you to jump ahead with first-class airplane boarding, TSA PreCheck, or “skip-the-line” tickets to the Eiffel Tower or the Vatican. Critics say these practices create an inequitable, tiered experience; proponents argue that, for some vacationers, time is money. “Where there is a demand, there will be a market,” says Larson.

Still, the perception of fairness can be more powerful than reality. Said to have been pioneered at fast-food joint Wendy’s , a single, serpentine line means customers proceed on a first-come, first-serve basis. And studies show that people prefer a single line—compared with having to pick from multiple parallel ones—and feeling as if they’ve chosen the slowest one.

For that reason, Larson predicts that the COVID-19 pandemic’s six-feet apart, social-distancing floor stickers may be here to stay. “They assure the sense of social justice, first-come, first-serve, not just for social distancing, but also to keep people in line,” he says.

How you pass time is important

Physicists have long theorized that time is a human construct. After all, a five-minute wait when there’s nothing happening seems infinitely longer than the same five minutes spent playing a game on your phone. Occupied time feels shorter. “When people are bored, they get grouchy and irritable,” says Norman. Menus distributed to customers in line, magazines at the dentist office, and TVs in airport waiting areas are all designed to keep guests distracted.

(Why the pandemic is reshaping our comfort in crowds.)

When it comes to entertaining people in line, amusement parks were pioneers. In the 1930s, Knott’s Berry Farm in Buena Park, California, became one of the first theme parks in the U.S. because thousands of people were regularly lingering outside the fruit stand and restaurant to eat Cordelia Knott’s fried chicken. “To entertain guests while they waited to hear their name called over a loudspeaker from the restaurant,” Cordelia’s husband Walter (co-owner and berry farmer) assembled a hodgepodge of items—covered wagons, live monkeys on leashes, an 800-year-old redwood tree stump, says Knott’s historian Eric Lynxwiler. That turned the place into a roadside attraction and eventually, a theme park equipped with gravity-defying roller coasters.

The Knotts may have originated the theme-park line, but neighboring Disneyland in Anaheim, California, refined the waiting game. “Disney invented all sorts of schemes to make lines tolerable,” Norman says. “They wanted you to stay in the park the whole day, but they didn’t have enough rides to keep you busy the whole time.” (National Geographic Partners is part of the Walt Disney Company.)

Prior to going on a log flume or other ride, Disney guests file through rooms or corridors where they’ll learn about the background and history of the attraction. “The Indiana Jones Adventure: The Temple of the Forbidden Eye” ride at Disneyland has a half-mile-long queue snaking through a dimly lit faux “ancient” temple where visitors can decipher cryptic petroglyphs on the walls or hear archeologists making excavations. “It’s a way of making the waiting line seem like part of the entertainment,” Norman says.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Another strategy some theme parks and attractions employ? Posting estimated wait times, which are often longer than actual wait times. “One of the axioms of all service industries is to manage people’s expectations at one level and deliver higher than that,” says Larson.

Tech to the rescue

Long lines can be frustrating and disruptive to travel. When manpower is short, some companies and attractions are harnessing technology to reduce wait times. To avoid visitor bottlenecks, California’s Yosemite National Park and Colorado’s Rocky Mountain National Park recently implemented online reservation systems with assigned time slots.

Theme parks use tech too. Universal Orlando has an app that tracks waiting times and allows customers to book spots in the queue; attractions from Dollywood in Pigeon Forge, Tennessee, to Ohio’s rollercoaster-rich Cedar Point employ scannable skip-the-line wristbands.

Airline queues are going digital, too. Passengers on Southwest Airlines flights can now get their spot in line 24 hours before wheels up. The airlines’ cattle-car boarding remains despite COVID-19, but technology enables early birds (and people with extra cash or mileage status) to nab priority boarding. In January 2020, Delta added a feature on its app notifying customers when to board, a process similar to restaurant pagers that buzz diners when their tables are ready.

(Learn how technology might make travel during COVID-19 safer.)

Airports worldwide are also embracing technology to trim lines. At the Dubai International Airport in the United Arab Emirates, passengers on Emirates airlines can check in, complete immigration forms, and board planes via biometric facial and iris recognition technology that verifies passengers’ identities. Lufthansa, Air Canada, Nippon Airways, Japan Airlines, and TEVA Air all offer similar programs at select airports.

Due to a surge in wanderlust-filled travelers and a shortage of workers, long lines are likely to continue all summer. In the meantime, Larson hopes that travelers will embrace queues as another part of their vacation experience. “I hope to see an increase in sophisticated tourists,” he says, “who will look into these delays as just part of the trip itself.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s like a magic trick. When the first drop of chilled water hits pastis, the transparent spirit turns an opaque pale yellow, and a heady plume of aniseed aroma rises from the glass.

The old Provençal word for mixture, pastis draws its licorice-like flavors from the Mediterranean’s arid landscape and its melting pot of cultures. Aniseed-flavored drinks are found across the region: In Greece, it’s called ouzo. Italy has sambuca. In Turkey, it’s raki. All are usually knocked back as a shot after a meal.

Yet the ritual associated with pastis makes it stand out. This sweet spirit simultaneously awakens your senses and relaxes your mind. It’s an aperitif to sip after spending languid summer afternoons in golden-stone villages or on the beach.

Traditionally, the aperitif is associated with sleepy French village squares, and bars selling just one or two brands: Ricard or Pernod. But thanks to a burgeoning movement driven by artisanal distillers, drinkers are discovering a new wave of pastis made with a wide range of botanicals that add more flavor.

Zoom out to see more areas mentioned in the article.

The rise of Ricard

The origins of pastis’s popularity lie with another aniseed-based libation: absinthe. In the 1860s, France’s vineyards were ravaged by the phylloxera bug. With the wine trade in peril, people turned instead to the “green fairy.” Because absinthe is so much stronger than wine or beer, which led to a rise in alcoholism and nefariousness, the drink was banned in most countries worldwide. But the masses had already developed a taste for aniseed-based spirits.

(Read how absinthe made a comeback in its homeland after a century-long ban.)

The main producer of absinthe, Pernod Fils, switched to distilling aniseed to create a liqueur in Pontarlier, eastern France, and later in Avignon. Meanwhile in Provence, the rustic way to create a similar drink, pastis, was to macerate herbs in alcohol. Pastis had been around for a long time; it just never had a brand or a champion—until Paul Ricard.

“My grandfather was the son of wine merchants,” says Ricard’s grandson Francois-Xavier. “He wanted to be an artist, but his father insisted he join the family business, so he learned all the different roles and really got to know the culture.”

After being introduced to pastis by a local shepherd, Ricard began experimenting with his own concoction. “He would take his versions around the bars, and they’d tell him if it was too strong, too sweet,” says Francois-Xavier. “By the time the ban on aniseed-based drinks was lifted in 1932 [absinthe would remain illegal in France for 80 more years], he had perfected his pastis blend, and the market was ready.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Distilleries et Domaines de Provence uses custom-made copper stills to produce Henri Bardouin, one of the most popular artisanal pastis brands in the region. Right: A staff member plucks rosemary from the garden at Château Creissauds in Aubagne. Fresh herbs drive the flavors of the pastis produced at the chateau’s Maison Ferroni distillery.

“Another ban came during World War II, but when that was lifted, Pernod launched its own—Pastis 51. The two brands became archrivals until 1975, when the companies merged and became Pernod Ricard.”

From there, the drink’s rise was meteoric, and the resulting wealth allowed Ricard to buy two islands about 35 miles south of Marseilles: Île de Bendor and the neighboring Île des Embiez, where, in 1966, he established the Observatoire de la Mer (now called the Paul Ricard Oceanographic Institute). Bendor is also home to a gallery of Ricard’s artworks—mostly portraits of family members—and a museum of wines and spirits. The latter houses a jaw-dropping collection of more than 8,000 bottles, including cognac given to Napoleon Bonaparte in 1811.

But long before Paul Ricard commercialized pastis, the herbs that grow in the rocky terrain known as la garrigue in the hills above Marseille were being blended for medicinal purposes. As far back as the 11th century, the village of Forcalquier, at the foot of the Montagne de Lure, had a reputation for the healing of the sick, and for centuries the area was known for its pharmacists and apothecaries. By the 19th century, it was home to dozens of absinthe distilleries.

(Learn how ancient remedies are changing modern medicine.)

One of the few to survive to this day is Distilleries et Domaines de Provence, which creates the region’s most popular artisanal pastis brand, Henri Bardouin. Its blend includes more than 65 herbs and spices, which are either macerated or distilled.

“Bardouin loved to concoct different liqueurs from the herbs on Montagne de Lure,” explains Alain Robert, who took over the distillery reins in 1974. The spices used here have traveled from afar: licorice from Turkey, cardamom from countries in the Indian Ocean, tonka beans from Guyana.

The resulting mixture has a rounded, complex flavor. The aniseed is strong but balanced by other herbs and spices. Robert says that, like wine, Henri Bardouin can accompany any meal. “It brings out the flavors of the region,” says Robert.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Guillaume Ferroni holds star anise and licorice in his hands. Both herbs are the main ingredients in the pastis made at Maison Ferroni. Right: A Mauresque cocktail is served alfresco on Île de Bendor, with views of the town of Bandol in the distance. A Mauresque is a pastis made with Orgeat, a sweet almond syrup, and diluted with plenty of water.

A new generation

Of course, pastis isn’t just an accompaniment for Provençal dishes—many local chefs also cook with it. Among them is chef René Bergès, whose family-run restaurant La Table de Beaurecueil is located in Beaurecueil, a village at the foot of Montagne Sainte-Victoire. The mountain is said to have inspired artists such as Cézanne, Picasso, and Kandinsky.

Clad in a Hawaiian shirt and tartan-framed sunglasses, Bergès says his cooking is informed by his surroundings. “I’ve always liked to make connections between products from the region, be it lavender with fish, or thyme or rosemary in a soufflé,” he says.

Over a dish of fennel and red mullet with a pastis-infused sauce, Bergès goes on to explain the trick to cooking with pastis. “You can’t let it dominate, so you use it lightly,” he says. “And to flambé with pastis is heresy! Restaurants do it for the spectacle, but it burns off the flavor.” As for pastis pairings? “The best is fish. It’s good with bouillabaisse. When you add pastis at the end it enhances all the flavors,” he says. “It works with desserts, too, in frozen soufflés or with apricots.”

In nearby Aix-en-Provence, David Gabrielian, the owner of La Pastisserie, is doing his best to represent the lesser-known pastis brands. In his small shop, he stocks pastis from all over France and creates his own blends. The star of the show is Lis Estrella (Provençal for “point out the stars”), which has gentle caramel notes alongside the aniseed. “I want to help people discover pastis beyond the commercial brands,” he says. “Most people start off saying they don’t like it because they’re used to the big brands, but then they try Pastis Henri Bardouin, they like it, and that opens up their curiosity. Often they’ll leave here with three or four different bottles.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Inside the shop, a steady stream of customers come and go, many of them couples, many under 30. “The image of pastis is of old men with berets, but more women are discovering it—and young people too,” says Gabrielian, who often runs pastis discovery evenings.

On his shelves is a pastis from Distillerie de la Plaine, a tiny distillery in the backstreets of Marseille run by Guillaume Strebler. In the back of Strebler’s shop, behind a curtain, a string of verbena leaves dries across the doorway. Red stills trickle out pastis.

“I just wanted to do something else,” says Strebler, whose previous career was in the construction industry. “I thought I’d make a whisky, but that takes several years, so I started making pastis first and it’s taken off so well, I haven’t got around to making whisky.”

(The next great whiskey trail is not where you think it is.)

Strebler produces two different versions of pastis, the first is a standard blend but the other is more of a departure. “It’s more herbal and floral,” he says. “There’s still aniseed, fennel, and licorice, but I also use verbena and yerba maté, [a drink] similar to tea or coffee.” The result is delicious, a drink with an almost chocolatey smoothness with the verbena lending a gentle spearmint note. “This is one to savor, with just an ice cube. People who generally don’t like pastis, like this,” he explains.

But there’s one more to try: a pastis that’s specifically designed as a digestif rather than an aperitif. It’s produced by Guillaume Ferroni, the brains behind Maison Ferroni, a distillery at Château des Creissauds in Aubagne, near Marseille. Among a wide range of spirits made there, his sublime version of pastis ages for two years before it’s released as a “vintage.”

In the cool stone-arched cellar bar of his distillery, Ferroni hands tasters a glass of the Pastis Millésimé 2018, served neat. With its smooth, caramel notes, this golden liqueur is nothing like the others. It’s sweet, the licorice not at all overpowering, with a rounded flavor from the numerous botanicals. Ferroni uses fresh leaves rather than dried, grown in the château’s sun-scorched gardens.

“To qualify as a pastis, there must be a certain level of aniseed and licorice in the mix, but we use the minimum legal amount and enhance it with other flavors,” explains Ferroni, whose business runs pastis-blending workshops as well as pop-up cocktail events in Marseille. “But the lower level of anethol [the aniseed element] means it doesn’t go as cloudy.”

This incarnation shows just how diverse the drink can be. But is pastis still pastis without the ritual? To find out, head to the balcony of La Caravelle bar on the harbor side of Marseille’s Vieux Port for a glass of Henri Bardouin. You’ll find all the key elements one needs: the taste of aniseed, the pastis ritual, and, crucially, that all-important Provençal sunshine.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Buzzing with youthful energy and rooted in rich histories, Texas cities are endless sources of inspiration. Museums, live music venues, and vibrant arts and entertainment districts make cities like Austin, El Paso, Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio ideal destinations for a uniquely Texas weekend getaway.

Watch the world’s only twice-daily (at 11:30 a.m. and 4 p.m.) longhorn cattle drive in the Fort Worth Stockyards National Historic District. Browse the massive vinyl collection at old-school Cactus Music, Houston’s oldest independent music store. At Artpace San Antonio, a nonprofit gallery, sculpture garden, and residency program, see works by contemporary Texas artists and artists-in-residence. Need more inspiration? Check out these four only-in-Texas urban experiences.

San Antonio | The Saga

See the history of San Antonio in a new light at San Antonio | The Saga, the monumental video art installation by acclaimed French artist Xavier de Richemont. Mixing colorful lights, dramatic images, and choreographed surround sound, the 7,000-square-foot installation condenses the city’s more than 300 years of history into a dazzling 24-minute performance. The free shows—held three times nightly (9 p.m., 9:30 p.m., 10 p.m.) on Tuesdays, Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays—are projected onto the façade of San Antonio’s iconic San Fernando Cathedral.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Founded in 1731, the cathedral—one of North America’s oldest religious sanctuaries—is an apt canvas for the virtual history lesson, which uses high-definition projection mapping to “paint” images of indigenous cave paintings, Spanish colonists, the Battle of the Alamo, and other key chapters and figures in San Antonio’s story. Thunder, lightning, rain, and music—including Texas-Mexican conjunto, a lively accordion-based sound born in 19th-century northern Mexico and South Texas—provide the mesmerizing soundtrack. Watch it once for the spectacle and return multiple times (the art installation runs through 2024) to catch all the historical details.

Cosmic Coffee and Beer Garden, Austin

City life in Austin is meant to be lived outdoors. The Texas state capital city perennially ranks among the top places in the U.S. to live and visit, thanks to factors such as abundant green space, the hometown University of Texas at Austin, and live music played seemingly everywhere (including in the airport terminal). Austin’s ridiculously active music scene, plus a winning combination of warm nights and cold brews (the city is the craft brewery capital of Texas, too), naturally draw people to outdoor venues like Cosmic Coffee and Beer Garden.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Co-founded by native Austinites Patrick Dean and Paul Oveisi, Cosmic puts an authentically-Austin spin on the typical coffee-meets-beer-and-cocktails café. There are local food trucks like LeRoy and Lewis Barbecue, of course, but what sets Cosmic apart is the co-founders’ commitment to sustainability: Planet-friendly practices, such as on-site composting and waterfall gardens that attract pollinators, nurture Cosmic’s lush, outdoor space. Bring your dog, listen to the music, and learn about sustainable city life while exploring the leafy grounds, which include National Wildlife Federation Certified Wildlife Habitat.

Street Art

The walls can talk in Texas cities like Houston, Dallas, and Austin, where colorful street murals tell stories about Texas history, culture, and current events. In May, 2021, the inaugural Big Walls Big Dreams REFRESH HOUSTON mural-painting festival added more than 20 new works to the city’s impressive collection, which currently stands at more than 750 murals. The festival curator, Houston-based design house UP Art Studio, also curates Mini Murals, the award-winning civic program responsible for transforming about 300 traffic signal and utility boxes into mini-masterpieces. Take a self-guided Mini Murals tour by bike or on foot, and plan a driving tour of the city’s wall-sized murals using the Houston Mural Map.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

In Dallas, the Deep Ellum district is home to what’s likely the city’s largest concentration of murals: 130 and growing. One of the newest, the 30-foot-tall “Cultivate Harmony” mural by internationally renowned street artist Shepard Fairey, is impossible to miss―it’s 150 feet off the ground and wrapped around the water tower of Dallas’ historic Continental Gin Building. Fairey also collaborated with Canadian pop urban artist Sandra Chevrier on “The Beauty of Liberty and Equality,” a 12-story Austin mural completed in March 2020.

Mission San Juan Capistrano

Located less than 10 miles south of San Antonio’s most-famous mission, The Alamo, Mission San Juan Capistrano offers a window into the world of the Coahuiltecans, the collective name for the Indigenous peoples who lived in the San Antonio Missions. Originally established in East Texas in 1716 and moved to its present site in 1731, Mission San Juan was once a self-sustaining community. Residents forged the iron tools they used to work the land, which included extensive gardens, pastures, orchards, and crop fields. They also dug out the 6.7-mile-long San Juan Acequia, a network of dams, ditches, and sluice gates used to irrigate mission fields with water from the San Antonio River.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

By the mid-1700s, Mission San Juan was supplying corn, grapes, sweet potatoes, sugarcane, and other crops to trading partners across the region and in Louisiana and Mexico. Visit the mission’s Spanish Colonial Demonstration Farm—a partnership between the National Park Service and the San Antonio Food Bank—to see the restored San Juan Acequia in action and learn about the culture and contributions of the Indigenous people who built a thriving agricultural economy here nearly 300 years ago.

Axelrad, Houston

It’s true that Houston is Texas big. The sprawling city is the fourth largest in the U.S. (only New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago are bigger). Spend a weekend here, though, and you’ll realize that big-city Houston is actually a collection of smaller neighborhoods, parks, and community gathering places where it’s easy to feel at home. One such place is Axelrad, a beer garden and hangout space located in the far reaches of Midtown. Named for its street-facing building, a century-old former grocery store built by the Axelrad family, the creatively cool venue spills out over a roomy patio lined with hammocks and community tables.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Everything about Axelrad is designed to bring people together. There are the beers (more than 30 on tap and over 50 more in bottles, cans or craft buckets) and 10-plus house-specialty cocktails, the shareable bites from neighboring Luigi’s Pizza and a rotating selection of food trucks, and the daily outdoor performances—whether live bands, stand-up comedy sets, open-mic nights, or movies projected onto a huge wall. As part of its community-building mission, Axrelrad also regularly hosts public events, such as fundraisers for local nonprofits, voter registration drives, and adopt-a-pet days.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Monterey is California’s hot spot for ocean lovers. It’s home to the world-famous Monterey Bay Aquarium, where you can come face-to-face with otherwise elusive marine life such as cute sea otters, giant ocean sunfish, and hypnotic jellies. You can explore the very same tide pools that captivated John Steinbeck.

If your stomach’s seaworthy, you can even venture offshore into water so chock-full of whales, sharks, seals, squid, sea otters, and seabirds we call it the Blue Serengeti. Want more? Hop in and join National Geographic’s Summer Adventures on the Road, immersive online guides geared to families, to learn more about the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary.

Monterey was the original capital of California, so it has a special place in the state’s history. Add to all this its rich literary tradition and fantastic restaurants, and Monterey is the poster child for how a community can pull together to restore ecosystem health and create a thriving tourist destination.

I work at the intersection of science, media, and conservation. My National Geographic–funded research includes tracking and tagging giant ocean sunfish, consulting on ocean conservation solutions, studying the effects of nature imagery on incarcerated populations, and mapping human brain activity patterns in response to nature imagery. I am also an independent filmmaker.

Travel Tips

I always travel with reusable straws, bags, utensils, cups, takeaway containers, and a bag for picking up trash—particularly at the beach. I also have a mask and snorkel handy so I can peer into any body of water.

Read about the Monterey Bay Aquarium’s Seafood Watch program and familiarize yourself with what fish are the best to eat—or give eating meat a rest. Reduce your consumption of single-use plastic.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Be gentle when exploring the coastline. Don’t collect any animals from the tide pools in the National Marine Sanctuary. Don’t traipse all over the anemones, don’t litter, and don’t get so close to the seals, sea lions, and otters that they have to move.

(Sea turtles? Hummingbird charms? Here’s why you shouldn’t buy these wildlife souvenirs on your next trip.)

Traditional crafts

On Tuesdays from 4 to 7 p.m., check out the Old Monterey Farmers Market on Alvarado Street. The street is closed to cars, and farmers and local craftspeople have booths selling everything from fresh boysenberries and broccoli to Big Sur jade jewelry, poison oak honey, and handmade hats.

Must-read books

The Nobel Prize–winning author John Steinbeck is perhaps Monterey Bay’s most famous writer, and his books, particularly Cannery Row and Sweet Thursday, paint a vivid picture of what the area was like during the Great Depression. The Death and Life of Monterey Bay, by Stephen Palumbi and Carolyn Sotka, tells the story of how the health of Monterey Bay was restored through the passion of some amazingly colorful characters, including an eccentric mayor, a tech-savvy philanthropist, and sea otters. Eco-poet Robinson Jeffers is the most revered local poet and you could complement a reading of his poetry with a visit to Tor House.

(Here are 12 travel books you won’t be able to put down this summer.)

Take a class

Sign up for scuba diving classes at Bamboo Reef, learn to sea kayak at Kayak Connections, or take a pickling class at Happy Girl Kitchen.

Savor the flavors

Julia’s Vegetarian Restaurant pays locals to collect wild mushrooms and makes amazing dishes with them. Hula’s Island Grill is a great local place with a Hawaiian flair. Passionfish is the go-to place for seafood that is sustainably sourced. Happy Girl Kitchen’s mission is to enrich the local food community. They specialize in pickles and preserves but have a full café as well.

Get off the beaten path

Begin your literary tour by visiting the Robinson Jeffers Tor House, which is like stepping back in time to the bohemian days of Carmel and Monterey. Then stop at the Doc Ricketts Lab of Steinbeck fame, one of the only remaining buildings from the days of the canneries.

Cultural heritage

The Monterey Museum of Art always has interesting exhibits. I like the historic walking tour sites that trace Monterey’s past—especially the Custom House and the home of Robert Louis Stevenson, the author of Treasure Island.

Explore the outdoors

There is no shortage of ways to interact with nature in Monterey. One of my favorite pastimes is tide pooling along the road to Asilomar from the aquarium to look for anemones, octopuses, flatworms, and crabs.

Point Lobos, outside of Carmel, has some of the most beautiful ocean scenery in the world. It offers great views of harbor seals, cormorants, pelicans, and whales depending on the time of year. Depending on the season, you can also view sea lions at the Breakwater Coast Guard pier and harbor seals on the beach in front of the Hopkins Marine Station library located just south of the aquarium.

Related: Dreamy photos of California’s natural wonders Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. 1 / 20 1 / 20 <p>Just below the California-Oregon border, <a href="https://www.parks.ca.gov/?page_id=413" target="_blank">Jedediah Smith Redwood State Park</a> promises fairy-tale rainforest paths through towering redwood groves and secret rope swings over trickling creeks. Hunt for banana slugs, pitch a tent (dogs are allowed at campsites), and snorkel in the Smith River, the longest free-flowing river in California.</p> Just below the California-Oregon border, Jedediah Smith Redwood State Park promises fairy-tale rainforest paths through towering redwood groves and secret rope swings over trickling creeks. Hunt for banana slugs, pitch a tent (dogs are allowed at campsites), and snorkel in the Smith River, the longest free-flowing river in California. Photograph by Mason Trinca

For whale-watching, I recommend Monterey Bay Whale Watch with Nancy Black. The boats leave from Fisherman’s Wharf.

Go birding and kayaking down Elkhorn Slough in Moss Landing to see the hundreds of different bird species as well as the many sea otters that call the slough home. If kayaking is not your thing, check out Whisper Charters. This electric boat service provides binoculars, snacks, and a comfortable ride. Ask for Brian to be your tour guide—he is a wealth of knowledge.

Dr. Tierney Thys is an ardent ocean scientist, conservationist, science media producer, National Geographic Explorer, research associate at the California Academy of Sciences, and TED All-Star speaker. The National Geographic Society, committed to illuminating and protecting the wonder of our world, funded Explorer Thys’ work. Learn more about the Society’s support of ocean Explorers. Young adventurers can activate their inner explorer this summer by visiting some of North America’s most interesting places—virtually or in real life—and learn about wildlife, Indigenous history, geological characteristics and more with National Geographic’s Summer Adventure on the Road series.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Framed by overgrown Guinea grass and skinny koa haole trees, the patch of 123 acres on western Oahu island could be any other stretch of undeveloped land in Hawaii. But a closer look reveals concrete foundations, a crumbling rock wall, and the remnants of a metal fence. These are the only signs that indicate this was once the site of Honouliuli Internment and POW Camp, the largest incarceration center on these islands during World War II.

This hot, muggy part of “Hell Valley” on former sugarcane and pineapple farmland once held 4,000 prisoners of war and 400 innocent civilian internees, most of them Japanese Americans, in prefabricated barracks and tents. After the camp’s last occupants were released in 1946, nature, negligence, and a willful disregard for a dark era in United States history buried it for decades.

Efforts to tell the world about Honouliuli are still in progress. President Barack Obama proclaimed it a National Monument in 2015 and it was redesignated Honouliuli National Historic Site in 2019—the first steps toward opening it to the public. Archaeologists and researchers are currently investigating the site.

It will be many years before the site opens to tourists, as 10 other U.S. internment camps have. But there are other haunting echoes throughout the islands of this troubling period of anti-Asian discrimination, internment, and military rule.

An infamous day

Located less than 13 miles from Honouliuli, Pearl Harbor National Memorial is Hawaii’s most-visited attraction, drawing an estimated 1.8 million tourists annually. A commemoration this December will mark the 80th anniversary of the surprise Japanese attack on U.S. military forces in Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, and honor the more than 2,335 service members and 68 civilians who were killed.

After that “day of infamy”—the catalyst that thrust the U.S. into World War II a few days later—American officials deemed Japanese Americans “enemy aliens.” On the mainland, more than 120,000 of them were put in incarceration camps over the next weeks and months. On the Hawaiian islands, more than 2,500 Japanese Americans were rounded up (as well as 100 Germans and Italians). Detainees were imprisoned at Honouliuli or one of 16 other camps in California, Arizona, Wyoming, Colorado, Utah, and Arkansas.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Uncovering a hidden history

The effort to tell the story of the camp and its residents began in 1998, when a local TV news reporter contacted the Japanese Cultural Center of Hawaii, asking about the location of Honouliuli. Volunteers were stumped. “We had no documentation, so we started to ask people in the community,” says Jane Kurahara, a staff associate at JCCH. “Most didn’t know there was an internment camp in Hawaii.”

Over the next few years, the JCCH made calls trying to locate the exact location of Honouliuli and began collecting and archiving related letters, photographs, drawings, paintings, and oral recordings. In 2002, JCCH volunteers found the camp site after stumbling on a concrete aqueduct and a metal pipe that matched an old U.S. Army photo. Artifacts and history related to the camp can now be viewed at JCCH’s Honouliuli Education Center in Honolulu.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A drawing by a Japanese American detainee in the 1940s depicts Honouliuli Internment Camp. It’s among artifacts from the camp on display at the Japanese Cultural Center of Hawaii in Honolulu. Sketch by Dan Toru Nishikawa. Photographed by Brian Sato. Courtesy of the Japanese Cultural Center of Hawaii

“It isn’t a flattering part of history,” says Hanako Wakatsuki, superintendent of the Honouliuli National Historic Site. “People would rather talk about valor, heroism, and honoring.”

A bittersweet immigration journey

The JCCH and Honouliuli Internment Camp trace their roots to the Japanese immigrants who arrived in the Kingdom of Hawaii in the 1880s to work the sugarcane fields. They were brought in after the Hawaiian government, worried about growing Chinese dominance, restricted immigration from China. By the time Hawaii became a U.S. Territory in 1900, Japanese immigrants made up nearly 40 percent of the population, including women and children. These families formed a tight-knit community, opening Japanese language schools, temples, and teahouses.

(Explore Japanese American history at these little-known sites.)

But resentment and jealousy grew among other U.S. citizens as Japanese laborers moved from farming into more skilled work as mechanics and merchants. In 1924, the U.S. Congress passed the “Asian Exclusion Act,” halting Japanese immigration to the U.S. and its territories. This put Japanese and Chinese immigrants, who were not eligible for citizenship, in a Catch-22 that would be used to question their loyalty during WWII.

When President Franklin D. Roosevelt became the first sitting U.S. president to visit Hawaii in 1934, he praised the islands’ diversity. But privately, he worried about potential sabotage from the islands’ large Japanese population, and, in 1936, he urged the military to keep a list of “those who would be the first to be placed in a concentration camp in the event of trouble.”

That list was consulted in the days following the Pearl Harbor attack. Thousands of prominent Japanese American and immigrant businesspeople, newspaper editors, priests, fishermen, and politicians were detained and interrogated. They were brought to military camps, city and county jails, as well as a plantation gymnasium in Kauai, a Japanese language school on the Island of Hawaii, and the Sand Island Detention Camp in Oahu.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: During World War II, the U.S. military strung barbed wire along Honolulu’s Waikiki Beach to prevent enemy attacks. Photograph by Paul Popper/Popperfoto via Getty Images

Because it would hurt the Hawaiian economy to lock up one-third of its population, the confinement process on the islands was more selective than on the mainland. But following Roosevelt’s Executive Order 9066 on April 1, 1942, all Japanese American men, women, and children on the mainland were forcibly removed from their homes and sent to incarceration centers.

At Honouliuli, as at the other camps, Wakatsuki says, “People struggled. It was an uncomfortable existence. Separated from their families, they didn’t have their support system, space, or privacy. People were trying their best to stay motivated and handle it.” Some passed the time painting and drawing; others prayed and journaled.

Military rule

During World War II, life in Hawaii was restricted even for residents not confined behind fences or watched by armed guards. Curfews and blackouts were instituted; gas was rationed; and everyone had to carry gas masks. The courts were run by the military.

To guard against attacks, the military unraveled barbed wires on Waikiki’s white-sand beaches. Residents were fingerprinted and issued identification papers. “The Japanese immigrants, or issei, first-generation immigrants, had to obey additional restrictions,” says Kurahara. They had to surrender weapons, binoculars, shortwave radios, and cameras to the police, and weren’t allowed to gather in large groups, move without permission, or speak Japanese.

Japanese language schools and teahouses were shuttered or used for military purposes. The government took over Shunchoro Tea House and converted it into an emergency fire and first-aid station. “When the war broke out, all Japanese businesses had to cease,” says owner Laurence Fujiwara, Jr., the grandson of its original owners. “But people used to sneak up here to get information and talk story.” Renamed Natsunoya, the restaurant near Honolulu is the last remaining historic Japanese teahouse in Hawaii.

(Explore why the U.S. has so many Chinatowns.)

On the Island of Hawaii, some residents were held at the Hilo Independent Japanese Language School, where the kindergarten building was turned into a jail. The school, along with many others, never recovered.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Waves hit the shore at Waialae Beach in Honolulu, not far from interment camps where Japanese Americans were held against their will during World War II.

Before World War II, there were more than 180 Shinto Buddhist shrines and temples around Hawaii. These symbols of Japanese culture and religion were also targeted during the war. “There was this presumption that if you were Buddhist or not of Christian faith, you were un-American or anti-American,” says Duncan Ryuken Williams, author of American Sutra: A Story of Faith and Freedom in the Second World War.

Some were taken over by the military; others were vandalized, looted, and set afire. There were reports of soldiers desecrating Buddhist statues, using them for target practice, or simply throwing them in the river. Their religious leaders were also imprisoned, leaving it up to Japanese wives, elderly priests, and white priests to protect and maintain sanctuaries including Honpa Hongwanji Mission of Hawaii in Honolulu and the Izumo Taishakyo Mission of Hawaii. The latter, one of just a handful of Shinto shrines left in the U.S., is a striking wooden A-frame structure with a white torii gate that welcomes visitors for monthly blessings and autumn festivals.

The aftermath of war

By the end of WWII, not a single Japanese American was convicted of espionage. Decades later, reports surfaced indicating that military intelligence about Japanese sabotage in Hawaii prior to Pearl Harbor were fabricated.

Thousands of second-generation Japanese Americans (nisei) answered the call of duty when the U.S. War Department announced that it was forming an all-Nisei combat team in 1943. The segregated 442nd Regimental Combat Team and the 100th Infantry Battalion fought valiantly in France, Italy, and North Africa.

(Learn more about the Japanese Americans who fought for the U.S. in World War II.)

News of the soldiers’ heroic sacrifices may have led to the military easing restrictions on the islands in 1945. Such patriotism was credited to paving the way for Hawaii to become a state in 1959. “Their heroism in battle following years of distrust and prejudice has long been considered a major factor in convincing Congress to grant Hawaii statehood,” says Jim McCoy, director of communications of Pacific Historic Parks, a group overseeing monuments to U.S. history in the region.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The most-decorated unit in the U.S. Army, along with the Military Intelligence Service and the 1399th Engineer Construction Battalion, are honored in exhibits at the U.S. Army Museum of Hawaii, 442nd Veterans Club, and Pearl Harbor.

U.S. Senators Spark Matsunaga and Daniel Inouye, both veterans from Hawaii, were instrumental in the passing of the Civil Liberties Act of 1988, when the U.S. government formally apologized for the grave injustice done to Japanese Americans. For many, the official acknowledgement lifted their shame and started the healing process.

“My husband told me that a great weight came off his chest when he received the letter of apology written to him by his president,” says Kurahara, whose late husband was incarcerated as a teen at Tule Lake War Relocation Center in California. “It’s important to pass on the history of incarceration based on race prejudice, war hysteria, and the failure of political leadership. If we don’t, we remain ignorant of what has happened in the past, and it can and will happen again.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cats may not have nine lives, but Jacob the lion comes close. He’s already survived four tragedies that could have killed a lesser lion: Snaring, trapping, poisoning, and a buffalo goring.

Most recently the six-year-old African lion, one of Uganda’s tree-climbing lions, was caught in a wheel trap—similar to a bear trap—in neighboring Virunga National Park, within the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where his pride sometimes roams.

The trap severed his leg above the foot in August 2020, and after being treated multiple times by a crew of veterinarians with the Uganda Wildlife Authority, he’s figured out how to get around on three limbs, even joining his pride on hunts. He’s since been seen mating with at least one female, says Alex Braczkowski, a lion researcher and National Geographic Explorer who last filmed Jacob in his home, Queen Elizabeth National Park, in February.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: The snare wound of Jacob’s first injury in October of 2019. Despite a deep gash, the Uganda Wildlife Authority and partner NGOs managed to save his leg with a rapid response. Right: Uganda Conservation Foundation veterinarian Mustafa Nsubuga holds up the severed leg Jacob lost in the wheel trap in August 2020. After multiple rounds of treatment by several people, including Nsubuga, Eric Enyel, Bazil Alidria, and others, the wound healed and today Jacob gets by on three legs.

Braczkowski says his incredible resilience is an inspiration, especially on World Lion Day, which was created by National Geographic Explorers in Residence Dereck and Beverly Joubert in 2013.

“It just shows that if these animals are given half a chance to continue, they can still eke out an existence, and that’s pretty amazing,” says Braczkowski. “It’s heroic stuff.”

But Jacob’s plight also highlights some of the serious threats facing the species, which numbers only about 20,000 in the wild and is listed as vulnerable to extinction by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Poachers across Africa are increasingly targeting lions for their body parts, such as their teeth, claws, and bones, which are used in Southeast Asia (and a few African communities) as medicine or as status symbols, says Paul Funston, lion program director for Panthera, the global wildcat conservation organization.

2:34

Six lions within Jacob’s pride were poisoned in March 2020 by poachers, though he escaped unharmed. A few weeks later Jacob was gored by an animal—a Cape buffalo or a warthog—which left deep puncture wounds in his chest. And in 2019, Jacob was caught in a poacher’s snare before being rescued. (Read about 11 tree-climbing lions that died in 2018 due to poisoning.)

“It is vital that this trade is halted, as it has the real risk of driving many already heavily depleted lion populations to local extinction,” Funston says.

Growing threats

Jacob wears a radio-tracking collar, which alerts the Uganda Wildlife Authority when he stops moving, a sign that he may be injured. When Jacob lost his leg, the agency spearheaded an ambitious effort to save him, including multiple rounds of treatment, drawing on experts from several organizations, such as the Uganda Conservation Foundation and the Wildlife Conservation Society.

Despite the area’s popularity for tourism, the incidence of snaring has risen in recent years, not only to catch lions but to trap other mammals for bushmeat, Braczkowski says.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

As prey populations decrease due to snaring, lions in the area travel about six times further than lions in Kenya’s Masai Mara National Reserve to find food, research shows, and they are moving much more than they did a decade ago.

In Queen Elizabeth and surrounding areas, “the conservation of lions hinges on critical collaborations between the Uganda Wildlife Authority and NGO partners—and being at the right place at the right time,” Braczkowski says.

Conservationists agree that more needs to be done to combat the illegal trade in lion parts, such as more funding for guards to watch over the lions, organizing patrols to remove snares, improved collaboration to protect the animals, and more engagement with local people. (Learn more about snaring and how it has become the biggest threat to lions.)

Lions are well protected in about 15 to 20 percent of their remaining habitat, particularly in parts of southern Africa and East Africa, Funston says.

But if snaring and poaching remains uncontrolled, he adds, the species “may not continue to exist in certain regions of its range in coming years.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If you hike through a mountain bog along the West Coast of North America in midsummer, there’s a decent chance you’ll run into a false asphodel (Triantha occidentalis), an unassuming flower that shoots up dark green stalks with white blooms.

As it turns out, the false asphodel, found from Alaska south to California, has been hiding a secret from the human race: It’s a carnivore.

Recently, botanist Qianshi Lin heard from a fellow student at the University of British Columbia that the plant had structures on its flower stalk that looked a little like the sticky traps that other carnivorous plants, such as sundews, use to catch insects. So Lin decided to figure out if the same might be the case for this flower.

Lin’s research shows that, indeed, false asphodel, a plant known to science for over a century, traps and digests small insects. As much as two-thirds of the nitrogen—a vital nutrient—in its leaves comes from these animals, according to a study published August 9 in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

“This kind of plant turns the tables on animals and eats insects, which is quite cool,” says Lin, who is now a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Toronto.

Prior to this study, scientists knew that carnivory evolved 11 times in different types of plants. This discovery represents a twelfth independent evolution of the trait, Lin says.

Rare carnivores

False asphodels have some similarities with sundews, a genus containing over 150 plants that catch insects using sticky and often vibrantly colored hairs, before secreting enzymes that digest and liquify the animals, and absorbing them whole.

But these bog flowers are in a family of small herbaceous perennials, Tofieldiaceae, that has no known meat-eaters. False asphodels also have a very short growing season: sprouting after the snow melts in May, flowering in June and July, producing seeds and withering away by early fall. (Read more about carnivorous plants’ fatal attraction.)

Like false asphodel, most carnivorous plants are found in sunny places with nutrient-poor soil, where the ability to digest insects provides an advantage. However, producing structures capable of catching and devouring animals is energetically costly, and only 0.2 percent of flowering plants are thought to possess this ability.

One reason why this plant’s carnivory was overlooked is that these hairs are very small and grow only on the flower stalk—a feature unlike any known carnivorous plant, Lin says.

Botanists have found traps near flowers but not exclusively in this location, as is the case for this species, says Adam Cross, an ecologist who studies such plants at Curtin University in Australia, who wasn’t involved in the paper. Preying upon insects that might be pollinators could be counterproductive, Lin says—but the research shows this bog flower almost entirely catches small ants and flies, and not larger pollinators such as bees.

Andreas Fleischmann, a scientist with Botanische Staatssammlung München, a German herbarium and research center, says simply labeling the plant as a “carnivore” may miss some potential qualifications. He says the situation with this plant might be more aptly described as “defensive killing,” since the stick hairs also seem to have the function of preventing non-pollinator insects from entering the flowers.

“For plant carnivory, in my opinion, the main criterion is not so much if the plant digests the insects ... but essential is the attraction of prey,” says Fleischmann, who was not involved in the paper. And he’s not sure the sticky hairs of Triantha are attracting insects.

Revealing a plant's secret

Proving a plant is a carnivore is more difficult than it might sound. To do so, Lin first fed 150 captive fruit flies a medium containing nitrogen-15, a stable isotope of nitrogen that contains an extra neutron, and which can be used to track the transfer of nutrients from animals to plants.

Lin and colleagues then fed the fruit flies to 25 wild false asphodels growing in a bog in British Columbia, placing the insects on the flowers' stalks. After several weeks, the scientists harvested the plants and analyzed their chemistry. The results revealed the nitrogen-15 within its leaves, proving nutrients from the flies had been absorbed and incorporated into the plant. To be exact, 64 percent of the study plants' nitrogen came from the flies. (Learn how carnivorous plants eat salamanders.)

The researchers also examined the sticky hairs and found that they excrete phosphatase, an enzyme found in other carnivorous plants that helps break down tissue and release phosphorus, another important nutrient for plants.

The discovery shows how much plant scientists have yet to discover, even about previously well-known species.

“We need more observant botanists in the field to [discover] such cryptic carnivores,” says Hoe-Han Goh, a plant researcher at National University Malaysia who wasn’t involved in the paper.

Lin agrees. “This is a sign that there are more carnivorous plants out there waiting to be found.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Photos show why cheetahs are at risk—and how people are working to protect them

Photos show why cheetahs are at risk—and how people are working to protect them
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Record-setting heat scorching parts of the U.S. has sent many wild animals into crisis: baby birds jumping from nests, mussels boiling in their shells, and bears braving public beaches to get a drink of water.

Though it may not be as obvious, increased temperatures and extreme weather events spurred by climate change affects the animals closest to us too. Pet cats, dogs, rabbits, rodents and other small mammals, reptiles, and birds all experience and exhibit signs of overheating in different ways than we do. Here’s what you need to know about how your pets try to cope with heat—and how to help them.

How do pets cool down?

Pet owners “sometimes judge heat by how they feel, and that’s not what we need to do,” says Barbara Hodges, a veterinarian and director of advocacy and outreach for the Humane Society Veterinary Medicine Association, located in Davis, California,. A perfect example, she says, is that “people always forget how hot asphalt is,” because we never have to touch it. “You drive somewhere [with your dog] and think, Oh, I’ll just run across the parking lot into the clinic, not realizing that it would really hurt if you don’t have shoes on.”

Animals physiologically deal with heat differently than humans do. To regulate body temperature, we sweat through our skin, head to toe, and the sweat evaporates, cooling our bodies.

Dogs and cats sweat only through their paws and noses; rabbits and birds don’t sweat at all. Dogs rely on panting as their primary way of cooling down—it allows water to evaporate across their lungs, tongues, and moist surfaces of the mouth. Cats typically groom their fur to keep cool; the saliva evaporates off their fur.

While it may be tempting to shave your furry pet in the summer to help them stay cool, don’t do it, says José Arce, veterinarian and president of the American Veterinary Medical Association. It may seem counterintuitive, but fur acts as an insulator; it helps keep animals warm in winter and cool in summer, “like roofs of houses with layers of insulation,” Arce says. Plus, it protects them from sunburn, something they’re as susceptible to as humans.

Dealing with extreme heat

But this year’s extreme temperatures have put us “in new territory,” Hodges says. While pets have adaptations to deal with normal summers, they “don’t cope with extreme heat.”

Extreme heat “can overwhelm an animal’s thermoregulation, preventing them from shedding that excess heat and eventually leading to heatstroke, which can be fatal,” Arce says.

All pets are susceptible to heat stroke, but some are at higher risk, Arce says. Brachycephalics—short-headed dogs like pugs, bulldogs, French bulldogs, and Boston terriers—have narrow windpipes and can have trouble exhaling air, which means they may have trouble keeping themselves cool. Pets with cardiac issues and pets that are overweight, very young, or very old, can be similarly vulnerable, he says.

The environment they’re used to also matters, says Hodges. “A dog who has grown up in Phoenix is going to be much more used to warm weather than a dog that comes down to Phoenix for vacation,” she says.

Heat stroke can happen anywhere. “I’ve lived in Louisiana, Massachusetts, and Puerto Rico, and I’ve seen heatstroke [in pets] in all three places,” Arce says. Often, heatstroke can be triggered by leaving dogs in cars, even in 70-degree temperatures, for minutes, he says.

Never leave your pet in a closed car unattended under any circumstance, Arce says. If the outside air is 80 degrees, the temperature in a closed car will hit 100 degrees in about 10 minutes. (If you see a pet trapped in a hot car, experts advise that you try to locate the owner, call local animal control, and stay with the animal until help arrives. Read about the laws in your state to learn about who may intervene to rescue an animal trapped in a hot car.)

Even normal activities can lead to heat stroke when temperatures are extreme. “It used to be OK to leave a dog in the backyard for a couple hours on summer day,” Hodges says, but with rising temperatures triggered by climate change and frequent heat waves, it’s important to be more vigilant.

How to protect your pets from extreme heat

“You don’t want animals to be out of your sight for very long in extreme temperatures, whether it’s hot or cold, because things can change very quickly,” she says.

During heat waves, Arce recommends keeping your pets indoors and away from windows, and walking dogs early in the morning or later in the evening, when air and pavement temperatures have cooled. Provide plenty of water, and even ice packs for pets to lie against.

Signs that your pet may be in distress from heat exposure include lethargy, excessive panting (or any panting in rabbits), rapid breathing, shaking, drooling, excessive restlessness, and prolonged lack of appetite. If these symptoms occur, Arce says to contact a veterinarian for advice. More severe symptoms include vomiting and diarrhea. Purplish-gray gums and tongue and the inability to stand up are signs of extreme distress in dogs.

Birds may struggle to spread their wings away from their bodies or start panting. Although many reptiles are adapted to heat, extreme heat can still affect them. Signs of distress can include rapid breathing, heavy panting, excessive shaking, and appearing agitated. Reptiles may get disoriented and confused in extreme heat and stop moving around or lose consciousness.

Individual veterinarians are well-positioned to advise pet parents, Hodges says, but at an industry level, “I don’t think there’s been a concerted effort to focus on climate change and its impact on pets.”

With warming temperatures and more frequent and extreme weather events, she says, educating people about the risks to their pets is more vital than ever.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In the forests of New Guinea lives a small, drab bird with a deadly secret. It’s called the hooded pitohui, and its orange and black feathers are laced with poison.

Simply touching the feathers of a pitohui is enough to make your hands feel like they’re on fire. But ingest a bit of the batrachotoxin, called BTX for short, and the poison stops your sodium channels from working, leading to paralysis and even death.

“You can think about these poisons as kind of a natural drug. It’s something that the animals use to protect themselves, because it… either gives a very unpleasant feeling to the thing that’s trying to eat them, or in the worst case, it kills the thing that’s trying to eat them,” says Daniel Minor, a biophysicist at University of California, San Francisco’s Cardiovascular Research Institute. (Learn the difference between a venomous and a poisonous animal.)

Scientists believe that the pitohui does not manufacture its own toxins, but rather acquires them from its tiny beetle prey. The same mechanism is suspected in poison dart frogs of Central and South America, which also carry BTX in their brightly colored skin.

All of which leads to an intriguing question—how do poisonous animals like the pitohui keep from poisoning themselves?

For decades, the best theory has been that the birds and frogs evolved specially adapted sodium channels—a part of the body that’s necessary for nerves, brain cells, and muscle cells to function properly—that are immune to BTX. After all, there are several examples of animals that shrug off toxins by this method, such as Egyptian mongooses that can survive cobra venom.

But a study published today in the Journal of General Physiology overturns that notion.

The researchers provide evidence that pitohui and poison frogs have what they call “toxin sponges,” or proteins that mop up the fatal toxins before they cause damage.

Finding evidence for a “toxin sponge” protein

In the lab, Minor and colleagues recreated the genes responsible for the pitohui and poison frogs’ sodium channels and put them into living cells of various species exposed to BTX. These cells succumbed to the toxin, suggesting the poisonous animals’ sodium channels aren’t resistant to BTX. However, when they injected living frogs of different species with BTX, only the poison frogs survived.

“That gives us a clue that there’s something that’s basically shielding the channels from seeing this toxin,” says Minor. His leading theory is a sponge protein, something he’s identified before. In 2019, Minor’s lab found a toxin sponge that grants bullfrogs immunity to another potent poison called saxitoxin. Though he has yet to find something similar in either the pitohui or poison frogs, it’s certainly a goal, he says. (Read about a poisonous frog discovered in Peru.)

1:31

Rebecca Tarvin, an evolutionary biologist at University of California, Berkeley, who has researched how poison frogs tolerate another neurotoxin called epibatidine, is impressed by the results.

“Especially given my line of research, I was very surprised to see that the sodium channels of [poison frogs] are not sensitive to batrachotoxin, which is not what we had predicted,” says Tarvin, who is also a National Geographic Explorer.

But she also cautioned against overgeneralizing the results. “This is only one of the many toxins that the frogs have,” she says. “But for the case that they tested, I’m convinced.”

Studying toxins can lead to medical breakthroughs

Though distant island birds and rainforest frogs may seem like a niche topic to study, unraveling their biological magic can have applications for people everywhere.

“Toxins have historically played an important role in helping us target specific proteins and discover the function of those proteins, and also serve as the basis for drug design,” says Tarvin. (Find out how venoms could one day save your life.)

For instance, one component of bullfrog poison has been shown to possess some anti-cancer effects in lab tests, while the tetrodotoxin present in various creatures, from pufferfish to newts, has been targeted as a source of new anesthetic drugs.

“For me, the most interesting question is, Why the hell don’t these animals kill themselves with this toxin?” says Minor. “But this is [also] going to tell us something really fundamentally important about biological systems."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Photos show why cheetahs are at risk—and how people are working to protect them

Photos show why cheetahs are at risk—and how people are working to protect them
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@White-tailed deer, a species found in every U.S. state except Alaska, appear to be contracting the coronavirus in the wild, according to the first study to search for evidence of an outbreak in wild deer.

Researchers with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) analyzed blood samples from more than 600 deer in Michigan, Illinois, New York, and Pennsylvania over the past decade, and they discovered that 152 wild deer, 40 percent of the deer tested from January through March 2021, had antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. Another three deer from January 2020 also had antibodies.

Their presence means that deer likely had encountered the virus and then fought it off. The animals didn’t appear sick, so they probably had asymptomatic infections, the agency says. Roughly 30 million white-tailed deer live in the U.S.

“The risk of animals spreading SARS-CoV-2 to people is considered low,” the USDA told National Geographic in a statement. Still, the results may suggest that “a secondary reservoir for SARS-CoV-2 has been established in wildlife in the U.S.” says Jüergen Richt, a veterinarian and director of the Center on Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases at Kansas State University who was not involved in the USDA’s work. If the virus is circulating in other species, it could continue to evolve, perhaps in ways that make it more severe or transmissible, undermining efforts to slow the pandemic.

At present there’s no evidence that SARS-CoV-2 is having any detrimental effect on deer. And for humans, our infinitely greater problem is spread from other humans.

Earlier this year, researchers established that deer are susceptible to the virus when infected in the lab—and that they can pass the virus to each other. But scientists didn’t know until now if infections were occurring in nature. The only species with lab results indicating that they had contracted the virus in the wild had been mink, though cats, dogs, otters, lions, tigers, snow leopards, gorillas, and a cougar have all had outbreaks in captivity or in zoos. (Learn more about efforts to vaccinate some of these animals.)

The new USDA report was posted on a preprint website, which means it hasn’t yet been peer-reviewed. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention didn’t respond to request for comment.

Human transmission

“At present there’s no evidence that SARS-CoV-2 is having any detrimental effect on deer. And for humans, our infinitely greater problem is spread from other humans,” says Daniel Bausch, a Switzerland-based zoonotic diseases expert and the director of emerging threats and global health security at the nonprofit FIND, which works to develop tests for poverty-related diseases.

The USDA says the risk to people who hunt white-tailed deer is not high. Though researchers posit the virus may have originally jumped from animal to human at a wet market in China, where wild animals were slaughtered and sold for food, differences in food preparation procedures matter.

There’s “no evidence that you can get COVID-19 by eating [contaminated] food, including wild hunted game meat,” the USDA says. The department is not issuing new guidance, pointing instead to existing government recommendations on good hygiene when processing animals, which include properly cooking and storing meat, and cleaning and disinfecting all knives, surfaces, and equipment.

Exactly how deer may have been exposed to the virus remains uncertain, though researchers suspect they were infected by humans. “Multiple activities could bring deer into contact with people, including captive cervid operations, field research, conservation work, wildlife tourism, wildlife rehabilitation, supplemental feeding, and hunting,” the USDA researchers wrote. Other possibilities include that they contracted it through contaminated wastewater or from exposure to other infected species like mink.

Researchers also don’t know if the deer are passing the virus among themselves or to other species.

Widening the net

There’s a chance that the deer didn’t have SARS-CoV-2 at all, Bausch says; another explanation is that the USDA’s tests detected antibodies for other coronaviruses, a phenomenon known as cross-reactivity.

The USDA says that’s unlikely. Researchers used a commercially available SARS-CoV-2 antibody screening test that has been highly accurate with other species. The USDA also helped rule out the chances of cross-reactivity by testing a subset of the samples using a second type of antibody test even more specific to SARS-CoV-2. That second test’s results mirrored the earlier findings, suggesting that the tests were truly picking up SARS-CoV-2 antibodies, the USDA told National Geographic in a statement.

Pre-pandemic blood samples from deer also shore up the results: If the tests were just detecting antibodies for other coronaviruses, antibody levels in deer likely would be similar in samples taken both before and during the pandemic. Yet when the researchers tested 239 samples collected before January 2020 from a slightly wider pool that also included deer from New Jersey, they had only one positive test—from 2019. (The USDA says that the single outlier was almost certainly a false positive since it had a very low level of antibodies. Richt says that the USDA’s false-positive conclusion sounds reasonable.)

Bausch says that performing the two types of tests gives him greater confidence in the results. Still, it’s always possible that cross-reactivity is an issue. “There are many coronaviruses that circulate in animals and likely many that we’ve yet to discover,” he says. The most definitive ways to rule out cross-reactivity, he says, would be to isolate a virus on cell culture—perhaps by testing respiratory secretions from deer—but that would require finding a deer when it had an active coronavirus infection.

Exposure to the virus seemed to vary widely by location, the researchers found. Of the four states, Michigan had the largest percentage of deer with SARS-CoV-2 antibodies—67 percent. That was followed by Pennsylvania with 44 percent, New York with 31 percent, and Illinois with 7 percent of samples showing antibodies. The deer with coronavirus antibodies were also concentrated in specific counties, the USDA writes, “with nearly half of the 32 counties sampled showing no evidence” of coronavirus exposure, the study says.

“These results emphasize the need for continued and expanded wildlife surveillance to determine the significance of SARS-CoV-2 in free-ranging deer,” the USDA says. Now, the researchers wrote, it’s also important to look for the virus in predators and scavengers that may eat deer.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The largest grouper in the Atlantic Ocean is so big that it can eat a four-foot-long shark in one gulp and makes noises so loud that nearby scuba divers feel an effect much like a sonic boom. These fish, named goliath groupers after the giant of Biblical legend, can reach more than eight feet long and weigh over 800 pounds. But their gargantuan size offers little protection against the proposed lifting of Florida’s fishing ban for this threatened species.

Until 2018, goliath groupers were classified as critically endangered throughout their range, in tropical and subtropical Atlantic waters, in large part because of overfishing. In Florida, where they’re mainly concentrated on reefs around the southern coast, fishing for the species hasn’t been allowed since 1990.

Nonetheless, the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC), which regulates hunting and fishing in the state, announced in May that it’s considering lifting the ban. “Goliath groupers have continued to increase in abundance since the fishery was closed in 1990,” reads a statement the commission emailed to National Geographic. “For a variety of reasons, some fishermen want harvest to be allowed, including desires for reduced interactions with goliath while fishing, opportunities to harvest a very large fish, and belief that harvest access should not be restricted indefinitely.”

The decision to open the discussion, however, has sparked fierce debate. It’s hard to establish how many goliath groupers there are in Florida waters because fish are hard to count. Still, most scientists agree the species is recovering, but populations are not yet where they should be. Three years ago, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, the scientific body that evaluates the global conservation status of species, improved the goliath grouper’s status from critically endangered to vulnerable.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Goliath groupers hover in the Warrior Reef, made of concrete from a demolished high school in Jupiter, Florida. Goliath grouper numbers have improved since the 1990 fishing ban, but many scientists say they’re still too low to reopen fishing. Photograph by Jennifer Hayes, Nat Geo Image Collection

“We should applaud our successes,” said FWC Chairman Rodney Barreto in a May press release, in which he argued the ban has been in place long enough. “Just because we’ve been doing something for 30 years doesn’t mean we need to keep doing it the same way.” His point of view is supported by many fishermen, who claim goliath groupers are a scourge whose growing populations need to be knocked down so they stop picking off other sportfish.

But many marine scientists, including Christopher Malinowski, a conservation biologist who studied goliath groupers during his Ph.D. research at Florida State University, say their recovery has faced setbacks in recent years and that their numbers are still too low to justify lifting the ban.

“At this point, the data do not support opening even a limited fishery,” he says. “The decision by FWC to move forward with their plan to develop a limited harvest of goliath grouper is not based on the best-available science.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Swimming with Goliath

Florida is the only place in the world where divers can reliably see the goliath groupers, and the opportunity to develop a scuba industry around it could be lucrative, opponents of the proposed fishery argue.

“The economic value to the state of Florida of an ecotourism diving industry focused on viewing goliath grouper far outweighs the value of a limited fishery,” says Felicia Coleman, the former director of Florida State University’s marine laboratory.

David Doubilet, a National Geographic Explorer and photographer, describes swimming with goliath groupers as “a highlight of my underwater life.”

“You don’t just see them; you hear them booming like percussion instruments,” he says. “When you see them, they resemble dirigibles lined up in the wind, except the wind is the water current. They’re large enough creatures to form their own bait ball, with cigar minnows surrounding them in huge schools so dense that you sometimes can’t even see the goliath inside.”

1:25

The American Sportfishing Association, a nonprofit trade group that has advocated for lifting the ban, did not respond to a request for comment. In a public statement at an FWC meeting in May, Kellie Ralston, one of the organization’s policy directors, said, “We support the exploration of a conservative harvest for goliath grouper if the commission feels it's supported by science.”

Christopher Koenig, a retired marine biologist at Florida State University and Coleman’s husband, says FWC ignored important data when it decided to start discussions about lifting the ban. “Data presented at the recent FWC meeting was simply wrong,” he says, citing two recent population surveys he says should have been included: Both found goliath groupers in Florida have declined by half since 2010—when their numbers peaked after the ban went into effect—resulting from severe cold weather in the 2009-2010 winter. “Passing over important surveys to conclude that the population is growing is tantamount to cherry-picking, selecting data that supports your position even if it’s not the truth.”

Red tides in recent years also have killed many goliath groupers, Coleman says, and the degradation of mangroves, where juveniles spend most of their time, has prevented new generations from surviving to adulthood, a six-year process.

Decision is months away

This isn’t the first time Florida regulators have discussed lifting protections for Goliath groupers. In 2017, U.S. Senator Marco Rubio, a Republican from Florida, tweeted a link to a news story headlined, “Florida weighs goliath grouper hunt” and commented that he “can tell you 1st hand that they are no longer endangered.” When asked what he meant, his office did not respond. At the time, the species was still classified globally as critically endangered.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

A 2018 discussion about lifting the fishing ban ended after a three-hour public meeting held by FWC in which all but a handful of speakers expressed opposition. This time, however, FWC is moving forward and creating a detailed plan for further consideration.

In response, Coleman, Koenig, and Malinowksi wrote an open letter to FWC that was signed by nearly a hundred marine scientists and conservationists, including photographer Doubilet, from around the world, and they’ve gathered 3,000 signatures on their change.org petition.

There is no deadline for FWC to make a final decision, but it likely won’t be until at least October. If the commission votes in favor of allowing fishing, it will draft a rule laying out regulations such as how many fish could be caught, where, and with what equipment. The draft rule then would be subject to a months-long public review process. In the meantime, red tides in Florida this summer continue to kill goliath groupers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Just off the historic Pony Express Road in western Utah lies a picture-perfect vista of the American West: miles of sagebrush grasslands set against the foothills of the Onaqui Mountains. And, until early July, nearly 500 mustangs grazed and galloped through it. It’s one of the most well-known populations of free-roaming horses in the United States—a draw for tourists, photographers, and horse lovers.

On July 13, the helicopters showed up. Operated by private contractors commissioned by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), the low-flying helicopters drove hundreds of startled horses off the public lands and into holding pens. On a hillside nearby, activists opposed to the roundup protested and documented the event.

From July 13 to July 18, BLM rounded up 435 stallions, mares, and foals from the Onaqui Mountain Herd Management Area, one of 19 it manages in Utah. One young mare suffered a broken ankle in the frenzy and had to be euthanized. The agency gave fertility control injections to just over a hundred mares and stallions before releasing them back to the wild. The rest—about 350 horses—were sent to holding facilities, to enter permanent captivity.

BLM is required by law to manage wild horse and burro populations in a way that it deems sustainable for the horses, the burros, the public lands they live on, and the ecosystem they inhabit. The Onaqui herd, BLM says on its website, was so big that it was beginning to degrade the land, and because of drought, the horses haven’t been able to find enough to eat and their health was declining. The bureau determined that a sustainable size for the Onaqui herd should be between 121 and 210 horses and that, nationwide, there should be no more than 26,000. It has the authority to round up the rest.

Today, 86,000 free-roaming horses live on nearly 28 million acres of public lands across 10 western U.S. states, and 55,000 taken off the land now live in government-run quarters. With no natural predators, their numbers are growing by 15 to 20 percent each year, according to the bureau. In the first half of 2021, BLM removed 4,391 horses, aiming to bring that number up to total of nearly 11,600 by the end of the year. BLM did not respond to requests for comment.

Managing this horse population, including caring for captured horses, costs taxpayers about $100 million a year. Nonetheless, most Americans know very little about them, including where they came from, where they live, or even that they run wild in the American West by the tens of thousands, according to a 2020 survey by Utah State University. But for activists, scientists, the government, and livestock owners who lease public lands—and whose animals compete with horses for forage—approaching how to deal with the rising population of wild horses humanely and sustainably is an intractable dilemma that grows every year.

The controversy

The Onaqui herd “gather,” the technical term for the rounding up of free-ranging horses, renewed outrage among activists and the public, leading to protests at the Utah State Capitol and outcry on social media.

“People have named these horses, and know them,” says Neda DeMayo, executive director at Return to Freedom, a wild horse sanctuary and advocacy organization. “This tragic roundup could have been avoided by implementing a successful fertility control program years ago.” Because the herd is so easily accessible, she says, they would have made for the ideal case study for relying exclusively on on-range fertility control, with drugs administered via a dart gun or by temporarily corralling the horses.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Wild mustangs roll and graze in the grasses of the Onaqui Herd Management Area in western Utah. BLM, which is tasked with managing the country’s nearly 86,000 free-roaming horses, determined that the herd had grown too large to sustainably live on the land.

Many activists argue that roundups are inhumane, saying that they break up families, traumatize individuals, and force free-ranging animals into confinement for life. “Horses live in herds. They are social, sentient beings and they suffer when separated from family bands,” DeMayo says.

It’s a “chaotic process to gather and bring horses into a trap site. Horses are pressed into an area where suddenly they’re all smushed together. They’re frenzied,” adds Celeste Carlisle, a biologist with Return to Freedom.

Many scientists, including those at BLM, argue that the land simply cannot support the growing number of free-ranging horses, which aren’t a native species—or even a wild one, depending on whom you ask. They’re descended from domestic horses brought to the continent by Europeans starting in the 16th century. “All of the horses are feral—they were released,” says Terry Messmer, a professor in the department of wildland resources at Utah State University. “They came [into] an ecosystem they didn’t co-evolve with.”

Reducing the impact of horses roaming public lands is an increasingly urgent issue as worsening droughts and warming temperatures intensify competition among wildlife—and livestock—for food and water, says Carlisle, who is also a member of the National Wild Horse and Burro Advisory Board, a group of scientists that advises BLM. (Some activists argue that BLM unfairly targets horses and instead should look to reduce the number of livestock grazing public lands.)

“We’re up against dramatic change to the western landscape,” Carlisle says. “Ecological-based decisions have to be the priority.”

Emotions can run hot when it comes to how best to control wild horse numbers, so finding a solution that satisfies everyone is far harder than with other wildlife. Horses hold a “special place in peoples’ hearts,” Messmer says. Traditional population control methods such as hunting, which is used to manage wolf and elk numbers, would be out of the question for horses in the eyes of the American people, he says. “Wolves have always been at a distance. You can’t put a bridle or saddle on a wolf. You can’t tame a wolf. But you can tame a feral horse. You can establish a relationship.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

A way forward

At the root of many activists’ frustrations is what they see as missed opportunities to test alternatives to roundups. More than 60 percent of BLM’s $100 million horse and burro management budget goes to caring for horses already in permanent holding, leaving limited money remaining to pursue innovative measures.

Many activists call for a permanent stop to roundups and instead a mass rollout of birth control darting. But it’s easy to oversimplify the situation, Carlisle says. Every population of horses is different. Some, like the Onaqui herd, are easily accessible, but others are not. In some areas, she says, accessing any animal means several hours of driving in a four-wheeler, and even then, horses aren’t approachable on foot. So in certain situations, “that unfortunately means gathers have to occur so that we can utilize fertility control.”

In addition to the issue of access, there are so many wild horses that it’s not feasible to give fertility control drugs to all the mares. “You have to combine [fertility control] alongside gathers in areas that are really stressed…[areas where] if you left horses out there, they would die,” she says.

In places where there isn’t enough food and water to support horses and other local animals—which is increasingly common both because of climate change and growing horse numbers—horses will die. “And it won’t be a soft graceful death. Dying of thirst or starvation is a slow, painful deterioration,” Carlisle says.

“But how do you go to a protest and hold up a sign that says all that? This information isn’t easy to explain....It’s really hard to figure out how we do this non-lethally, humanely, and sustainably, in the best way we can while the West is literally burning.”

The biggest challenge, she, Messmer, and DeMayo agree, is building trust among everyone who works on the issue. “No matter what BLM says, [advocates] don’t believe them,” DeMayo says. “No matter what advocates say, they’re seen as overly emotional. This is why we started sitting down with other stakeholders. We wanted to try to humanize each other.”

Both Messmer and Carlisle are part of the Free Roaming Equids and Ecosystem Sustainability (FREES) Network, which comprises 80 different organizations that work on horse and rangelands issues. Coordinated at Utah State University, FREES brings stakeholders together to discuss science-based solutions and improve communication.

Engaging local communities and creating individualized plans for each herd is key, the network says in a position statement. Its members also want to ramp up fertility control on the range.

“The gold standard would be if the reproductive birth rate could be slowed so you don’t have populations growing,” says Carlisle, who manages a successful fertility control program at the Return to Freedom sanctuary, which is home to more than 500 rescued horses.

“The issue is solvable,” says Messmer. “Not everybody is going to get everything they want, but [there has to be an acceptance of] certain things they can live with.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@You may have heard of “murder hornets,” or Asian giant hornets, which made international headlines after a small number were spotted in the Pacific Northwest in 2019 and 2020. They are currently confined to the far northwestern corner of Washington State, in part due to a targeted campaign to find them and eradicate their nests.

Even so, the discovery of these aggressive, two-inch-long insects known for decimating entire honeybee colonies led to concern throughout the United States, with many people misidentifying local wasps as murder hornets. What many people are actually seeing, according to entomologist Justin Schmidt at the University of Arizona, is a harmless native wasp with an equally fierce name: the cicada killer.

The name is fitting. Females are large, measuring up to an inch and a half in length, and they prey exclusively upon cicadas, which they find, grapple with, and inject with venom. This paralyzes the cicada, which the wasps then carry back in flight to their subterranean lairs. Since mid-July, cicada killers have been emerging from their underground burrows and buzzing around people’s yards.

Cicada killers go after the more dependable seasonal cicadas, not the periodical species, such as Brood X, which descended upon the eastern U.S. in May. Though there are four species of cicada killer in North America, all of them are similar in appearance and behavior.

Despite their large size and bright yellow and brown coloring, cicada killers are harmless to humans—they’re “gentle giants of the wasp world,” Schmidt says. Male cicada killers don’t sting, and, unlike Asian giant hornets, female cicada killers avoid people and rarely deploy their stingers. You’d actually have to handle them to ever be in danger, says Schmidt, who has received thousands of stings and in the process created the Schmidt Sting Pain Index.

When it does happen, a female cicada killer’s sting is very mild, almost negligible—it feels like a mere pinprick, and hurts less than the sting of a sweat bee, says Joe Coelho, a physiological ecologist at Quincy University in Illinois who studies the predators. For comparison, the Asian giant hornet’s sting hurts much more, akin to being “stabbed by a red-hot needle,” researcher Shunichi Makino said in a previous interview.

But even though cicada killers are a “big, scary-looking insect, they have nothing. They can’t afford to sting you because they call their own bluff. It’s amazing how afraid people are of them based on appearance alone,” Coelho says.

Anatomy of a hunt

To find well-camouflaged cicadas, female cicada killers search trees using their large eyes and keen vision. When they attack, they inject the insects with a cocktail of fast-acting venom, irreversibly preventing the cicada from moving. How it works, nobody knows, Coelho says. But it turns them into zombies of sorts, all the better to be fed upon by the wasps’ young. Research by one of Coelho’s past graduate students showed that envenomated, paralyzed cicadas can actually live longer than normal, healthy cicadas.

But if she’s successful, the female must now carry her heavy quarry back to her nest using her powerful wings, all while holding the cicada with her middle legs. Coelho’s research shows that eastern cicada killers (Sphecius speciosus) actually succeed in hunting and ensconcing cicadas more than 80 percent heavier than them—nearly twice their weight—which should not be physically possible. They do it, Coelho explains, by “cheating” a little: carrying the cicadas up trees or other vertical surfaces and furiously flying toward their hole. This can be repeated multiple times until they reach their home, during which time they drag the cicadas underground.

Back in her subterranean chamber, the female lays an egg on her immobilized prey, which will provide food for the growing larvae. To produce a male offspring, the wasps only need one cicada. But females, which are roughly twice as big as males, require two cicadas to develop properly. Once a chamber within the nest contains one or two cicadas, she seals it off, makes another, and keeps hunting.

3:43

In a good year she may create and fill more than a dozen of these chambers; a single wasp may hunt and kill more than 30 cicadas after emerging around mid-July and dying about six weeks later.

Once the larval wasps feed on the cicadas, they hang out underground over winter, then emerge after finally developing into full adults in mid-summer the next year, starting the cycle over again.

Wasp bluff

Most cicada killer sightings are actually males, which surface from their burrows shortly before females each summer, explains John Alcock, an entomologist at Arizona State University. When the females appear, the males viciously compete to mate with one, each of which only breeds once. Unlike females, males are aggressive, and will chase and buzz at animals that approach their territory, including humans. They even go so far as pretending to sting, a behavior called pseudo-stinging.

The males “are very loud and obvious, and people get freaked out,” Coelho says—especially since the insects seem to prefer disturbed habitats and areas with open ground and low vegetation, such as suburban lawns.

Yet the species is a crucial predator in the ecosystem, helping keep populations of cicadas in check. Their incredible hunting abilities also provide a fascinating natural history lesson for children, Schmidt says. (Learn more: 'Murder hornet' mania highlights dangers of fearing insects and spiders.)

“So if you do have some cicada killers in your yard,” Alcock says, “rejoice rather than run for the wasp spray.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Chinchillas, docile South American rodents with big, round ears and soft, thick fur, are about as sensitive to sounds as humans. That’s one reason why medical researchers use them to study hearing loss, such as exposure to hazardous noise levels—studies ethics review boards would never allow to be done on humans. In the United States, Moulton Chinchilla Ranch, in Minnesota, seems to be the only company that breeds and sells chinchillas for medical research.

But after being cited for more than a hundred alleged animal welfare violations between 2013 and 2017, owner Daniel Moulton is in court this week fighting to keep his operating license.

At his facility, which has roughly 750 chinchillas, inspectors with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) found animals with weeping wounds, eyes crusted shut, and a range of injuries, including in one instance the partial loss of a limb, according to the agency’s court complaint.

The agency is seeking civil penalties of an unspecified amount and revocation of Moulton’s license, which would prevent him from continuing to breed and sell chinchillas and bar him from reapplying for a license.

The USDA has been “going after me,” Moulton tells National Geographic. He says his animals receive good care and regular veterinary visits. In his opening statement, delivered to a D.C.-based judge in a teleconference because of the pandemic, he disputed the animal welfare allegations, arguing in his opening statement that USDA inspectors don’t understand chinchilla care and are trying to drive him out of business.

“We inspect every animal in the morning and at night and look at them during the day when we’re there,” he said. He added that he does weekly safety checks of their cages and that he’s been raising chinchillas for nearly 55 years.

This is the first federal animal welfare case involving research animals to go before a judge in six years, says Eric Kleiman, a researcher at the nonprofit Animal Welfare Institute. Most animal welfare infractions are settled by correcting the issues, paying a fine, or both. But in a case of chronic or severe infractions, the agency issues a formal administrative complaint with the court. If the facility owner disputes the allegations, the case must proceed with a court hearing.

This chinchilla proceeding is “a case study of everything that is wrong with the animal welfare system,” he says. According to Kleiman, the business should have been shut down and its animals seized years ago.

The Animal Welfare Act, the federal law that regulates the treatment of animals sold as pets and used for research and exhibition, sets low standards for required minimum care, animal welfare advocates say. The USDA’s enforcement of the law has also fallen off dramatically during the past five years. Under former President Donald Trump, the agency changed its enforcement process to work more closely with license-holders to fix problems instead of documenting them as citations and pursuing fines or other penalties.

“It takes these extreme situations where a person has years and years of severe violations to get USDA to do anything about it” beyond follow-up inspections, says Deborah Press, a former USDA lawyer who is now associate general counsel at Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, a Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit that opposes animal research. “USDA has the dual task of promoting agriculture and also protecting animals used in animal industries, so these two interests are completely at odds,” she says.

‘Avoidable suffering’

More than 80 of the alleged violations USDA inspectors reported during the four years were for poor or nonexistent veterinary care that caused animals’ “immense avoidable suffering,” USDA lawyer Rupa Chilukuri argued before an administrative law judge.

Chinchillas requiring urgent veterinary care still hadn’t received it after multiple inspections, months apart, records show.

Moulton said in court documents and in his opening statement that he “obtained the assistance of at least seven vets” during that period. One provided routine checkups every six months, he said.

Dirty and unsafe cages also were ongoing problems, according to USDA’s complaint. Inspectors noted filthy drinking water, buildup of feces, and exposed nails and sharp wires facing in toward the animals. In July 2014, an inspector found that “the decomposing body of a deceased newborn chinchilla was underneath an enclosure, buried in waste,” according to the complaint.

USDA filed its complaint in 2018 but has continued to find welfare problems at Moulton Chinchilla Ranch, according to its records. During a May 2021 site visit, inspectors noted that the waste build-up in one part of the facility had attracted “excessive flies” and that the ammonia smell was so pungent that it irritated inspectors’ throats and eyes and put animals at risk.

Many of the inspectors’ observations have been backed up by an undercover investigation by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) from October 2020 to January 2021. The investigator found numerous chinchillas with untreated injuries, including open wounds with exposed bone, and three freezers holding bags of chinchilla remains, says Dan Paden, a vice president at PETA. (Moulton tells National Geographic that the animals died over the course of multiple years and that he had been keeping them to skin for the fur market. “Why throw away a perfectly good pelt?” he says.)

In video footage reviewed by National Geographic, Moulton told the investigator that he spends only about 45 minutes a day caring for his hundreds of animals—and that typically he’s the only person caring for them. (In court, Moulton said his wife sometimes assists him. She has not been accused of wrongdoing.)

“I’m hard-pressed to recall another USDA-licensed facility where as large a number of animals have suffered and died without any effective intervention from the USDA or from local law enforcement,” Paden says.

PETA’s findings have led to a criminal investigation into whether Moulton violated Minnesota’s animal cruelty law. Rice County attorney John Fossum, whose office is handling the case, says they expect to make a final determination on whether to file charges this week.

Chinchillas for sale

There are 85 USDA-licensed chinchilla dealers in the U.S., but most raise their animals for the pet trade. Moulton says he sometimes sold his for pets, but now he exclusively supplies them for research. He sold “about 30” in the past month, he says, and recently fielded two calls from military installations seeking hundreds.

“I’m the only one providing these animals for research,” he says. (The USDA doesn’t keep records on which companies sell animals for that purpose, though it confirmed that two other companies known to sell them to laboratories no longer have active licenses. A third told National Geographic that it’s going out of business.)

Moulton’s ranch is the only chinchilla supplier listed on a central shopping website for research animals, as Science reported on July 16. The site, the Laboratory Animal Science Buyers Guide, published by the American Association for Laboratory Animal Science (AALAS), also includes the ranch in its “vendor showcase,” a paid advertising section that allows companies to highlight their products more prominently for the 13,000 laboratory industry professionals in its “trusted network.”

The association lists vendors who ask to be included and doesn’t accredit facilities, according to Doug Taylor, president of AALAS. “It’s really the buyer who should look at [a facility’s history and licensure] and decide if this is a vendor I want to work with,” he says. If Moulton loses his USDA license, AALAS would “in all likelihood” remove the facility from their guide, he says.

The case against Moulton and his chinchilla ranch has court dates scheduled through September. The judge has barred journalists and other attendees from sharing witness testimony or the presented evidence until the end of the trial to prevent witnesses from being influenced or harassed.

Wildlife Watch is an investigative reporting project between National Geographic Society and National Geographic Partners focusing on wildlife crime and exploitation. Read more Wildlife Watch stories here, and learn more about National Geographic Society’s nonprofit mission at natgeo.com/impact. Send tips, feedback, and story ideas to NGP.WildlifeWatch@natgeo.com.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sharks, among the fiercest predators in the ocean, are also some of the most vulnerable. Three-quarters of open-ocean shark and ray species are threatened with extinction, primarily because of overfishing.

For years, scientists have warned that these plummeting numbers could be catastrophic. Because sharks are top predators that help keep the food web in check, it would logically follow that they are keystone species—species that have a disproportionately large effect on their ecosystems. Without keystone species, ecosystems change or even disappear. (Here's why keystone species are so important.)

For sharks, however, this idea has long been mostly theoretical. The fish and their marine habitats are tough to study, requiring special gear just to get in the water and observe them. The more than 500 known shark species also vary in size, prey on different animals, and live in dramatically different environments, where it’s almost impossible to pinpoint the influence of one species.

These complexities have bedeviled past efforts to study how sharks affect their ecosystems from the top down. For example, a 2007 study seemed to provide clear evidence that a loss of great white sharks in the North Atlantic led to an over-abundance of cownose rays, which in turn decimated populations of scallops, clams, and oysters. But scientists have since questioned whether the bivalve decline may have been influenced by some other factor—such as boating traffic.

You’re going to need a bigger screen. Tune in to the biggest SharkFest ever, spanning six weeks and airing across four networks and Disney+.



“We want simple, but it’s not going to be,” says Michael Heithaus, a marine ecologist at Florida International University and founder of the Shark Bay Ecosystem Research Project, which has studied the bay, an 8,800-square-mile refuge in western Australia, for more than two decades. (Read about the most fascinating shark discoveries of the past 10 years.)

Shark Bay research has shown that sharks support their ecosystems not necessarily as hunters, but as regulators. By keeping their environments stable and resilient, sharks could help slow climate change and dampen the effects of extreme weather events, such as heat waves and hurricanes.

Untangling an ecosystem

Shark Bay is an ideal place to study how sharks interact with their environments. Its tiger sharks are seasonal, allowing researchers to observe how other animals behave when they’re present and when they’re gone. The UNESCO World Heritage Site also has healthy populations of predators and prey and dense meadows of temperate seagrass, which slow water currents, keep the water clear, and provide habitat and food for many species. Seagrasses also trap carbon dioxide, a potent greenhouse gas, and stabilize the sediments on the ocean floor that store the gas. Once carbon dioxide gets stuck in the sediments, it can stay down there for tens of thousands of years.

6:53

“I don’t know of another place like it on Earth,” says Rob Nowicki, an affiliate research scientist at Mote Marine Laboratory who has worked with Heithaus in Shark Bay. “It’s the perfect setting to test this stuff on a really large scale.”

Since Heithaus, a National Geographic Explorer, launched the project in 1997, researchers have been collecting data on all the elements of the Shark Bay ecosystem, providing the groundwork for untangling their intricate relationships.

One important discovery, published in 2012, showed that tiger sharks exert control over Shark Bay’s inhabitants, such as dugongs (relatives of manatees) and sea turtles, by essentially scaring the herbivores away into tropical seagrass meadows, which are less effective carbon sinks than temperate seagrasses. In other words, losing tropical seagrasses isn’t as detrimental to the environment as losing temperate ones.

But in places where sharks have declined and sea turtles have been protected, such as the Caribbean and Indonesia, the reptiles have begun to overgraze on seagrass, which could hamper efforts to lessen global climate change, according to Trisha Atwood, who leads the Aquatic Ecology and Global Change Lab at Utah State University.

“Over the past two decades, we’ve realized that ecosystems like seagrass are actually some of our best carbon stores in the world,” Atwood says. “They can sequester carbon much faster than any terrestrial forest.” (Read how the Amazon rainforest is now emitting carbon dioxide instead of trapping it.)

Building on the 2012 research, in 2015, Atwood found that Shark Bay tiger sharks also keep herbivores from disturbing the carbon-filled sediments beneath temperate seagrasses.

“We’re not suggesting that we shouldn’t be protecting sea turtles,” she says. “What we’re suggesting is that you need to protect the sharks so that they can help regulate their eating.”

Recovering from extreme weather

Shark Bay has also offered insight into how sharks might make ecosystems more resilient to the effects of climate change.

In 2011, an extreme marine heat wave hit Shark Bay and destroyed about 90 percent of its temperate seagrass, leaving what remained particularly vulnerable. Knowing the seagrass would need plenty of time to recover, researchers took it as an opportunity.

“We wanted to know what happens in a bizarro world of Shark Bay where the tiger sharks had been fished out,” Nowicki says. “Would the dugongs be able to come in and finish the job that the heat wave had started?”

Nowicki and colleagues divided the bay’s seagrass beds into plots and simulated how they would fare both with and without sharks present. They found that the seagrass beds that were not protected by tiger sharks spiraled out to the point of collapse. Meanwhile, the plots patrolled by them were more stable, as the sharks provided the seagrass more time to recover. (Read how seagrasses fight ocean acidification in the Chesapeake Bay.)

The study shows that tiger sharks are a true keystone species in Shark Bay, Nowicki says—and they probably are elsewhere too.

“It raises a giant red flag that having robust populations of big sharks can be important for the stability of ecosystems,” says Heithaus, a study co-author. “As ecosystems take more punches, we probably want to err on the side of having intact predator populations rather than cross our fingers and hope it’s okay.”

Keeping it together

Shark Bay has offered a glimpse into the important role sharks can play as predators, but Heithaus says the question now is how applicable that model is across the world. “You can’t just study the sharks themselves—you have to study all aspects of the ecosystem.”

For instance, Heithaus says there’s also evidence that baby bull sharks, which can swim in fresh water, deposit vital nutrients upstream in the Everglades—but it remains to be seen how much this infusion of nutrients matters.

Nowicki likens shark diversity in an ecosystem to the supports that hold up a bridge, with the loss of each species cutting down another pillar holding the structure together.

“The problem is we don’t know when that is going to result in a collapse,” he says. But with predators like sharks “we need to care—because we stand to lose more by losing them.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@2:01

From the northern reaches of Europe and Asia, across the Arabian desert, and southwards into the horn of Africa, the saker falcon migrates throughout late fall and early winter.

Thousands of years ago, nomadic desert-dwelling Arab tribes trapped and trained these raptors as hunting partners, catching food to feed their families and then releasing them back into the wild at the end of the season.

Today, the saker falcons’ migration is marked with a different tradition: In Saudi Arabia, hundreds upon hundreds of falconers from around the world gather with their birds, paying homage to this ancient practice’s roots.

According to Hussam A. Al-Huzaimi, chief executive officer of the Saudi Falcons Club, the 2017 launch of the annual King Abdulaziz Falconry Festival was just another milestone in the upward trend of interest in modern-day falconry.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

“More people are taking this hobby they learned from their grandfathers and sharing it with a new generation,” Al-Huzaimi says over Zoom from Riyadh, where planning for the 2021 festival is presently underway. But falconry faces a challenge.

“Some species of falcon have become endangered in some parts of the world,” he says. In some cases, the species they traditionally prey upon — like the ground bird the houbara bustard — also face extinction. “This hobby is about continuance of an ancient tradition — and its survival relies on initiatives, policies and innovative practices that ensure sustainability. We wanted a way to help preserve this heritage of falconry, and also, to create a platform for the practice of falconry in a sustainable manner,” Al-Huzaimi says. “How did we do this? We started having races — competitive, high-stakes falcon races.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Falconer Barghash Al-Mansouri taking part in the race at KAFF. The best-performing falcons and their owners will take home millions of dollars in prize money.

Falconry for the future

At the King Abdulaziz Falconry Festival, the very same falconry training and husbandry techniques developed by ancient civilizations for subsistence hunting are now being applied to this new form of the pastime: racing.

To Al-Huzaimi, it’s “the ultimate way of practicing falconry.” His ancestors may have disagreed — but the world is a different place than it was millennia ago, he says, and especially in the Middle East, where tens of thousands of falconers fly multiple birds each, maintaining a balance between civilization and wildlife calls for new approaches. The Saudi Falcons Club, which hosts the festival, see the event as a new chapter in the centuries-long history of wildlife conservation efforts led by falconers — a history stretching back to at least the 13th century. Today, the falconry community’s conservation initiatives span the world, from the U.S. to Australia, across Europe, Asia and the Middle East.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

In Saudi Arabia, the government wildlife authority regulates falconry hunting to protect and rehabilitate wild prey populations. Other initiatives focus on raptors themselves: One, the SFC’s Hadad program, encourages Middle Eastern falconers to donate wild falcons, working with ecologists to safely return these birds to their native habitats. So far, Hadad has received more than 100 wild birds, donated by their owners to be released back into the wild. Meanwhile, Al-Huzaimi says, the festival exclusively admits falcons bred in captivity to participate in order to discourage the capture of wild falcons.

Ancient traditions meet pioneering technology

Increasingly, falcons — including sakers, peregrines and hybrids including the gyr shaheen, gyr pure, gyr taba, and gyr qarmoucha — are being bred and trained not to hunt, but to race. At the KAFF, these races are 400-meter sprints which test the birds’ reaction time, vision and speed. Owners of the best-performing participants stand to win millions of dollars in prize money.

Winning birds are tested to confirm the absence of performance-enhancing drugs, just like in the Olympics, Al-Huzaimi says, and, just like in the Olympics, this millennia-old artform collides with modern technology, like microchip tagging and laser timing systems.

At the finish line, third-party referees use high-tech photo finish technology, snapping thousands of frames per second to determine the winner, just as judges determine the winners of Olympic speed events.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Falconry events like this beauty competition at KAFF are growing increasingly popular in the Middle East. Over the past four years, KAFF has repeatedly broken its own participation records, drawing over 2,000 falcons to its races and pageants in 2019.

'The Grand Prix of falconry'

Year after year for the past four years, KAFF has broken its own participation records, according to Al-Huzaimi, drawing over 2,300 falcons in 2019 and even finding a place in the Guinness Book of World Records.

In the future, he envisions the festival as “the Grand Prix of falconry,” showcasing not just races but the art, culture and customs of falconry, experiences that transport visitors to Arabia’s ancient past, and new layers of education and youth involvement the SFC believes will help falconry thrive for many generations to come.

Excitement around the event continued to grow even during the coronavirus pandemic at the 2020 festival, drawing falconers from across Europe and Asia to participate. Festival organizers anticipate an even bigger response in 2021.

Admission is free, and “non-falconers” flock to the races, too — although Al-Huzaimi questions whether there is truly any such a thing as a “non-falconer”:

“In a way, everybody is a falconer,” he says. “If you go back thousands of years, to your ancestors, you will see someone in your family has been a falconer.” In this way, he says, this “cultural and civilizational heritage” connects us all.

Find out more about the intricacies of training falcons, as well as conservation efforts currently underway to preserve these fierce and majestic creatures, here.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Community members pay their respects as they walk past the new grave sites of Lakota youth who died at an Indian boarding school in Carlisle, PA after their arrival between 1879 and 1896. The skeletal remains of nine children were returned to the Rosebud Sioux Tribe for reburial in ancestral lands following a six-year effort led by Tribal youth. Six were buried side by side on July 17. Three others were returned to family members for private burials.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Archaeologists excavating the remains of Guanzhuang—an ancient city in China’s eastern Henan Province—have discovered what they believe is the oldest-known coin mint, where miniature, shovel-shaped bronze coins were mass produced some 2,600 years ago.

Their research, published today in the journal Antiquity, gives weight to the idea that the first coins were minted not in Turkey or Greece, as long thought, but in China.

The walled and moated city of Guanzhuang was established about 800 B.C., and its foundry— where bronze was cast and beaten into ritual vessels, weapons, and tools—opened in 770 B.C., according to Hao Zhao, an archaeologist at Zhengzhou University and the paper’s lead author. But it wasn’t for another 150 years that workers began minting coins outside the southern gate of the inner city.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Using radiocarbon dating, the team determined the mint began operating sometime between 640 B.C. and no later than 550 B.C. While other research has dated coins from the Lydian Empire in what is now Turkey to as early as 630 B.C., Zhao notes that the earliest mint known to have produced Lydian coins dates to sometime between 575 B.C. and 550 B.C.

The Guanzhuang mint, Zhao says, “is currently the world’s oldest-known securely dated minting site.”

During their excavation, the researchers found two spade coins—which look like shrunken versions of the gardening tool—and dozens of clay molds used to cast them. One coin was in near-perfect condition: Just shy of 6 inches long and about 2.5 inches wide, the bronze coin weighed about 27 grams, or less than six sheets of standard-size computer paper.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Strong evidence, not proof

Coins are often found “bundled together and completely lacking any of the original context of their production or their use,” says Bill Maurer, a professor of anthropology at the University of California Irvine and director of the Institute for Money, Technology and Financial Inclusion. “But in this case, you’ve got the whole mint, and you’ve got the casts that were used.”

The completeness of the discovery is what’s remarkable, says Maurer, who was not involved in the research. Finding both coins and their molds is what allowed the researchers to radiocarbon date the mint, lending weight to their assertion that it’s the oldest known in the world.

Coins are typically discovered isolated or hoarded away from where they were made, stashed in the rafters of a house or buried in a hole in the ground, Maurer says, “completely divorced from any sort of context that you can definitively say was associated with the coins themselves.”

If such coins are found with evidence of fire damage, researchers can radiocarbon date them—but they won’t be sure “if that burning has anything to do with the time period during which the coin was used,” Maurer explains, or if the coins were instead burned in a haphazard fire.

But here, “you've got a foundry which is full of carbon residue associated with the production of the item itself,” Maurer says, which can prove how old the coins and mint actually are.

George Selgin, director of the Center for Monetary and Financial Alternatives at the Cato Institute, says that while the discovery is impressive, “It doesn't change our basic understanding of when the first coins were produced. And it doesn’t necessarily mean that China did it first.”

That’s because while this research proves how old this particular Chinese mint and its coins are, it doesn’t definitely conclude that the Chinese remnants are older than the Lydian coins “often cited as an alternative starting point for coinage,” says Selgin, who was also not involved in the research.

Trade or taxes?

Zhao and his team speculate that the mint’s location—close to the presumed seat of the official city administration—could signal that “the minting activities were at least acknowledged by the local government.” But they hasten to add that conclusions can’t yet be drawn: “Political involvement in spade-coin production [remains an issue] for further research,” they wrote.

There are two prevailing theories about the origins of money: that it was created so that merchants and customers could barter, or so that governments could collect taxes and debts.

Maurer says while the discovery proves nothing, what it “demonstrates—in the routinization, the standardization, and the mass production of these items associated with a political center— lends weight to the hypothesis that anthropologists and archaeologists have long held: that money emerges primarily as a political technology, not an economic technology.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mysterious, ancient female figurines have been found by the dozens all over Denmark, and as far afield as England and Russia: inch-long bronze depictions of long-haired women, often wearing crested helmets and long dresses, and armed with shields and swords. The small amulets date back more than a thousand years, to the height of the Viking Age.

But because Viking women weren’t typically buried with weapons—unlike their male counterparts—researchers reached into sagas and mythology to explain the armed female figurines and concluded that they represented Valkyries, the mythical warrior women ancient Scandinavians thought were responsible for transporting slain warriors to the afterlife.

“The images had always been understood in terms of what we know of Norse mythology,” says Pieterjan Deckers, an archaeologist at the Free University of Brussels.

In a paper published today in the journal Medieval Archaeology, however, Deckers and his co-authors argue that the “Valkyrie” pendants represent actual women who played a central role in Viking festivals or ceremonies. Furthermore, they propose the armed female figurines are part of a larger set of ritual objects that suggest gender roles in Viking-era Europe may have been more complex than previously thought.

Viking ‘assembly line’

The key to the latest research was the 2017 discovery of what seemed to be a jewelry workshop dating back to the early ninth century—near the dawn of the Viking Age—at a trading outpost called Ribe on Denmark’s western coast.

Archaeologists from Aarhus University found over 7,000 fingernail-size clay fragments in and around the small workshop. Painstakingly piecing the fragments together, the team realized they had evidence of a Viking-era assembly line: Artisans would carve a single figurine, then press each side into clay to make two-sided molds. Melted bronze was poured into the clay molds, which were broken and discarded after the metal cooled.

“Using one model, you can make hundreds of [figurine] copies,” says Soeren Sindbaek, an archaeologist at Aarhus University and co-author of the study.

To figure out what sort of objects the workshop was casting, researchers used scanners originally designed for dental implants to create 3D computer models of the shattered clay molds, then digitally reassembled the pieces. With a copy of the mold, they could then reconstruct the amulets they produced.

“They’re creating an image of an artifact that does not actually exist out of scattered puzzle pieces,” says National Museum of Denmark archaeologist Leszek Gardela, who was not involved with the research. “It’s quite innovative.”

Ritual warriors

One of the reconstructed molds was for mass-producing the familiar “Valkyrie” pendants. But the more molds the researchers reassembled, the more they began to doubt the idea that the figurines represented mythical Valkyries: The workshop was churning out not just figurines of women carrying weapons and shields, but also depictions of men tugging their hair as well as other, more everyday objects, including wheels, horses, and other non-mythological imagery.

All of the figurine examples produced at the Ribe factory can also be found on one of the rare visual representations that has survived from the Viking Age: Known as the Oseberg Tapestry, the 1,200-year-old embroidered cloth depicts a ritual procession involving wheeled carts, horses, women carrying weapons, and people wearing horned helmets or animal costumes. Many of the tapestry’s images are a match for the Ribe molds.

“I’m sure this is what the small amulets are showing,” says Sindbaek. “We’ve got exactly the same range.”

Taken as a set, the amulets manufactured at Ribe might provide a new look into a ceremony that had special meaning for people in Viking Age Scandinavia. “Women were really prominent in these rituals,” Sindbaek says. “Of course they would be—in the home setting, they were central characters.”

What the “Valkyrie” figurines and scenes from the Oseberg tapestry don’t depict, Sindbaek says, are women who served as warriors in real life. Although women were known to fight in the Viking Age, and women were very occasionally buried with swords and other weapons, the design of the female figurines from Ribe and elsewhere suggests something else is going on: The woman are depicted holding shields and swords, but also wearing antiquated helmets and long dresses.

“It’s not showing us combat—you couldn’t go into battle in a dress with a long train,” Sindbaek says. “Female warriors were a thing, but that’s not what they’re showing us in these amulets.”

Instead, the researchers say, the amulets may depict a space where traditional Viking gender roles melted away. “What the pendants are showing is ambiguity,” says Aarhus University archaeologist Sarah Croix, a co-author of the paper. “You have female individuals bearing weapons, and a male pulling his hair, which is a female gesture.”

Colleagues say that’s a refreshing change from some recent scholarship that narrowly focuses on warrior women in the Viking Age. “They steer away from a simplistic interpretation of women and weapons, where they’re all Valkyries and warriors, and argue for something else,” Gardela says. “It’s good to remember there’s no one fixed way of interpreting this material.”

For Croix, who spent a decade working at Ribe and masterminded the scanning and 3D reconstruction of the clay fragments, the pendants add a layer of complexity to our view of the Viking era—and show that today’s discussions and debates about gender and identity are nothing new.

“It’s an important reminder that we can’t assume ideas about gender roles are fixed or permanent,” Croix says. “Male and female roles have been changing and differ from one culture to another.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For a year now, David Mellehe has carried his dead brother Ralph’s cell phone alongside his own. He pays the monthly charges. He keeps its battery full. Ralph’s rosary beads drape around David’s neck. Ralph’s watch is on one wrist. On the other is his black bracelet, as well as a replica of a tattoo of their parents’ names Ralph had inked on his skin one Mother’s Day. After Ralph died, David got the same tattoo.

“I'd pay with my life, if I could just see Ralph again, just for a few minutes not more,” David says. “Just for two minutes.”

Ralph left some of the items David now wears at the headquarters of his firefighting brigade when he and nine colleagues were dispatched before the explosion happened shortly after 6 p.m. on August 4, 2020, to extinguish a blaze at the Port of Beirut in the Lebanese capital. He was just 23 years old when he died with his co-workers in an inferno that ignited one of the largest non-nuclear explosions in history. The blast that lofted a white mushroom cloud over Beirut that day killed at least 216 people, injured more than 6,500, forced hundreds of thousands from their ruined homes, and left entire neighborhoods looking like war zones.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: The Port of Beirut has resumed functioning although piles of wreckage remain a year after the blast. The hazardous ammonium nitrate was stored across a road from residential neighborhoods. Nobody has explained yet how it ignited or why it had been at the port since 2014.

It happened because a portion of some 2,750 tons of ammonium nitrate, a chemical used as fertilizer but also in explosives, blew up. The combustible material had been improperly stored in the port’s Warehouse 12 since 2014, with the knowledge of a handful of senior political, judicial, customs, and security officials, but unknown to the public.

A year after the tragedy, nobody has explained yet how the ammonium nitrate ignited, or why it was even there. Nobody has been held accountable for keeping the deadly cargo within walking distance of residential neighborhoods, or for the catastrophe that ensued. There have been no answers, no justice, and no peace for grieving families such as David’s, and they are enraged about it.

“They sent my brother to his death,” David says. “I blame those who sent them, who let them go there knowing what was there. I didn't know, you didn't know, but some people knew.”

Ralph and other first-responders like him, as well as soldiers stationed at the port, could have died at any time in the line of duty. Instead, they perished in an avoidable tragedy, one many blame on the country’s leaders. For their families, the senselessness of their children’s deaths while in service to their country is particularly agonizing and heightens their rage at Lebanon’s dysfunctional ruling class.

People at the port that day weren’t the only ones to die. In Beirut, grief and anger are widespread. Many of the dead were simply going about their lives. They died in their workplaces, in their cars, in restaurants, in the streets, in their homes, or later succumbed to wounds. Toddlers and teenagers were killed in their bedrooms.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Instead of pushing for the truth and accountability, Lebanon’s corrupt entrenched ruling class has protected its own, stymieing an ongoing judicial investigation by refusing to lift the immunity of officials whom the judge wants to question. The politicians and their cronies in the judiciary collaborated to oust the first judge investigating the case after he dared to charge several ministers and the prime minister, demanding they appear for questioning as suspects. The judge who replaced him has focused on some of the same officials. He could face the same fate as his predecessor.

For David Mellehe and many other Lebanese who survived the trauma, the explosion is not in the past, it’s still with them, part of their present, a bleeding wound that won’t heal. It was not just one tragic day, it’s an ongoing tragedy, one made worse by a ruling class of politicians and security and judicial officials who not only refuse to take responsibility for failing to protect Beirut, but who for decades have failed to effectively manage the country.

To the Lebanese, the explosion is the gravest manifestation of how they have suffered under the country’s dysfunctional leadership. The oligarchy has so severely mismanaged the state that it has pushed Lebanon into what the World Bank has called “a deliberate depression,” a crisis that ranks “in the top 10, possibly top three, most severe crises episodes globally since the mid-19th century.”

It has been a nightmarish year in what has become a rapidly failing state. The country has been rudderless since the prime minister and his cabinet resigned after the explosion. A new government hasn’t yet been formed due to political infighting and petty personal disputes. The currency has lost more than 90 percent of its value, plunging more than half of a once-middle income country into poverty. Banks have imposed strict monthly withdrawal limits that have left depositors watching the value of their trapped money melt away. People have lost their life savings. Triple-digit hyperinflation has taken hold. The price of bread (set by the Ministry of Economy) has increased at least half a dozen times this year. A third of the children in Lebanon are going to bed hungry, according to UNICEF.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Ralph Mellehe’s casket snakes through the streets in an hours-long procession in his Beirut neighborhood of Ain al-Remmane. Women tossed rice and flower petals, and men set off fireworks and gunshots, in an emotional outpouring of collective grief.

Long snaking lines at gas stations have become common sights due to crippling shortages that are made worse by smuggling across the border into sanctions-stricken Syria. Electricity outages have become so severe that state power rarely comes for more than an hour or two a day. Private generators that fill in the gaps can’t keep up. In some areas, there is no power (state or private) for extended periods, or people simply go without electricity because they can’t afford the exorbitant rates demanded by generator operators. Forget about air conditioning. On a recent weekend, the Ministry of Health’s COVID-19 vaccination drive was cancelled due to the unreliability of electricity as well as internet outages, which meant health facilities couldn’t access the national online platform. Pharmacies are out of basics, such as infant formula and Panadol. Thousands of doctors, nurses, and other professionals have fled, while others are looking for any way out. Desperation has driven up petty crime. Even the Lebanese army has had to put its hand out to the international community for help to feed its troops. And then, almost as an afterthought given the enormity of all the other problems, lurks the coronavirus pandemic.

There is a heaviness, an exhaustion, a humiliation to what passes for everyday life in Lebanon these days, fueling a seething hatred of the political class and dread of what new or deeper crisis tomorrow will bring. After the explosion, Lebanon’s president said matter-of-factly that if the country didn’t quickly form a government and correct course, it was headed to hell, and that’s where it seems to be going. But hell, it turns out, isn’t a single destination. It is a bottomless pit, with every new crisis revealing another deeper level of misery, and still the Lebanese state continues its descent.

In blast-ravaged areas of Beirut, much has been repaired thanks to NGOs and private initiatives, not the absent state. But some buildings still look like they were destroyed yesterday. Many apartments haven’t replaced windows that were blown out a year ago. But that is just material damage.

The more profound impact is often invisible. It can manifest in actions such as a protective older brother keeping his dead sibling’s phone line alive because he can’t stand to let something so closely tied to his brother die.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

At times when I talk with David, who is 30, he speaks of his younger brother Ralph in the present tense. “I have a brother who is beautiful,” he tells me, describing a handsome blue-eyed man who wanted to be a firefighter because he loved a challenge and hoped to rescue people. “I’m still waiting for Ralph to put his key in the door and come home,” David says. “Ralph is still alive. He still lives with me. Ralph is here near me.”

At other times, the sharp pain of reality and the untempered anger it invokes cut like stab wounds. “They deprived me of saying, ‘brother.’ Who will be the best man at my wedding? Who will stand near me? Do I put a photo of my brother? No. I can’t accept it,” David says. “If you're thirsty, you can drink water. If you're in pain, you might say it hurts. If you’re happy you smile, but there is no relief for this feeling.”

The only thing that might come close to cooling his burning heart, he says, is to “take justice for my brother with my hands.” Ralph’s body, like that of many who died at the port, was torn apart by the force of the blast. “My brother shouldn’t have died like that. He was young and strong. I can’t accept that I received my brother in pieces, and not all of him. His coffin was weighed down with bricks and bags of sand and bolted shut,” David says. “I can't stay silent about that, and I don’t care who is found responsible, even if it's my own father. God forbid, I will kill my father to take justice for my brother.”

Justice is rarely present in Lebanon. It barely even visits. Countless tragedies over the decades, including bombings and political assassinations, have gone unresolved and unpunished in this land of impunity. And so it’s no surprise that some Lebanese fear that the investigation into the Beirut explosion will also fail to identify the perpetrators or deliver justice. Many are calling for an independent international investigation.

The family of Hamze Eskandar, a 25-year-old soldier stationed at the port who was killed in the explosion, say that while they trust the judge in charge of the investigation, they’re not hopeful that he will be able to work unimpeded by powerful political interests. “Everything is politicized here. They won’t let anybody do what needs to be done and work properly on this case,” Hamze’s eldest sister, Salam says.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Hady Fowal, 12, takes a break from helping older boys and men maintain a roadblock with burning tires at a recent protest on the highway to Tripoli. “I should be in school,” he says, “but my parents can’t pay rent. We are hungry.”

“They can’t even form a government,” her father Hussein tells me from a living room turned into a shrine. Images of Hamze, including a poster about four feet long, adorn the room. “Nobody cares that people died, or if people live, they don’t care.”

“We wake up and turn on the TV and wonder what problem is waiting for us today,” Salam says. “We are in Lebanon. You can’t anticipate anything. Today we’re alive; tomorrow we might not be.”

The country’s decay at the hands of the same leaders who failed to prevent the explosion only adds insult to the Eskandars’ deep injury. “We didn't expect to reach a point where ministers and members of Parliament are pretending that none of them know anything. Two hundred and sixteen martyrs. Nobody asked, nobody cares,” Salam says. Her brother and others, she says, “were sacrificed for nothing, for the lies and corruption of them. They set the city on fire. Hamze left us and tore our hearts out.”

The Eskandars are a family blighted by the intergenerational trauma that haunts many Lebanese. The patriarch, Hussein, lost his father in the 15-year civil war between Christians and Muslims that ended in 1990. He disappeared at a Christian militia checkpoint. “We never found him,” Hussein says. Hussein served in the Lebanese army, which split along sectarian lines in the war. He still has shrapnel in his body from wounds he received during the conflict. In the 1980s, he was kidnapped by a Palestinian armed faction and presumed killed. His parents even held a funeral for him. He was eventually released and returned home. “So when Hamze was missing, we thought he might return, the way baba did,” Salam says. Hamze did return, four days after the blast, after his body parts were identified from his parents’ DNA samples.

“When my son entered the army, I knew that we might lose him at any time. You don't know when his time is up, he's a soldier, but I didn't expect to lose him like this,” Hussein says. “If he'd died in battle, I wouldn't be this upset.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

As the eldest of two sons with three older sisters, Hamze felt a responsibility to provide for his parents and siblings. His dream, Salam says, was to get his parents out of their cramped apartment in an overcrowded, impoverished neighborhood of Beirut and to build them a house in their hometown of Hermel, a three-hour drive outside Beirut. “He never let us down. He always supported us all even though he was younger than most of us,” Salam says. The family’s heartbreak wasn’t confined to Hamze’s passing. “Hamze was my mother's greatest happiness, and Hamze took her away. His death broke her. She died two months after him.”

The family’s matriarch, Sabah, contracted COVID-19 and died of a heart attack. “After he was martyred, mama stopped taking her medications and going to her medical appointments. She stopped everything. She surrendered,” Salam says.

“She'd pray, 'Dear God, take me to him, don't keep me apart from him,’ ” Hussein says.

“Mama was very strong, we didn't expect her to break and die,” Salam says. “She was our strength, but we didn't know how to help her cope with Hamze's passing.”

In the town of Ablah in the Bekaa Valley, an hour and a half’s drive out of Beirut, the parents of another young man in the Lebanese military who was killed at the port, George Maalouf, are also struggling to cope with the loss of their middle child.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Portraits of George Maalouf, known to his family by his childhood nickname, “JouJou,” are displayed at his parents’ home in Ablah in the Bekaa Valley. George served in the military and was at the port on the day of the explosion. His grief-stricken parents Rita and Elias are building a memorial, a white stone chapel, near their front door in his honor.

George was 32 when he died. He was supposed to get married that September. The apartment he’d been saving money to build since he was 18 is finished and empty above his parent’s. Outside, at the entrance to their home, George’s parents Elias and Rita are building a memorial in the spot where they all used to enjoy their morning coffee. It’s a little white stone chapel.

“I talk to Joujou all the time,” Rita says, using her son’s childhood nickname. “I was talking to him before in the kitchen. I lit a candle for him and told him that he melted my heart like this candle. I swear, may they be deprived of their children the way they deprived me of mine.”

“May they all get sick, all of them, and suffer,” her husband Elias says through tears.

“Those traitors in Parliament,” Rita says, “those deaf-blind mutes who don't want to see us or hear us, they have no conscience.”

A year on, and the Maaloufs, like other families, are drowning in a deep pain. They keep replaying George’s last weeks, recognizing signs they believe foretold their unfathomable loss, such as George’s response to the sudden death of a young neighbor. “He said, ‘Death comes for all of us, but Jesus was resurrected,’ ” Rita said. “I swear to God, it was as if God was preparing me. Joujou said, ‘Mama, don't be afraid, every person dies at his time.’ He was so calm when he said it.”

Rita remembers how she couldn’t take her eyes off her son the night before the explosion, before he returned to the port the next day. “It was the last time I saw Joujou. I didn’t see him the next morning.” She blames herself for missing his call that morning. She was hanging the laundry and didn’t hear the phone. “I could have heard his voice one more time.”

“The day of the explosion,” Elias says, “the weather was like this, calm. No wind. If I tell you, you won't believe me; there was a small whirlwind in front of our house. It lasted a few minutes, and then it disappeared.”

Rita and Elias start to sob. “It was Joujou's soul. For sure, it was Joujou,” Rita says. “I am certain of it, certain of it! I am certain of it!”

“You know, when I'm really in pain, when I'm really, really hurt, and I feel like I can't control myself anymore,” Rita says, struggling to speak, “I tell myself, it's not just your heart Rita. The hearts of 216 other mothers are also hurting like you. I am not alone. That's what I tell myself to keep going. There are 216 other hearts that feel the same pain, that share the same beat. That's what I tell myself.”

And they all want justice.

Rania Abouzeid is a Beirut-based journalist, a frequent contributor to National Geographic, and the author of No Turning Back: Life, Loss, and Hope in Wartime Syria and Sisters of the War: Two Remarkable True Stories of Survival and Hope in Syria. Follow her on Twitter @raniaab
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In Jakarta’s Pulo Gebang Main Bus Station just a few days ago, thousands of people waited in snarled lines to claim one of the 10,000 COVID-19 shots being offered in the country’s latest emergency vaccination push.

Meanwhile, across the city, others were making a more somber pilgrimage to the city’s new mass cemetery for COVID-19 victims. There, families laid flowers and whispered final goodbyes while backhoes dug new graves just steps away. Originally designed to hold 7,200 bodies when it opened in March of this year, the city is planning to add nearly 25 acres to accommodate more remains as the country confronts a record high of COVID-19 deaths.

As the second wave crashes through the fourth most populated country in the world, the government of Indonesia and its citizens are struggling to respond. Competing priorities and delayed vaccination campaigns and lockdowns, among other issues, have created a dire situation. Conditions will likely get worse for many before they can improve, experts say.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

With more than 49,000 confirmed cases a day, Indonesia is now a major epicenter of the COVID-19 pandemic, along with Brazil and the United Kingdom, which are reporting 54,517 and 39,315 cases a day respectively.

Indonesia also is the latest country in Southeast Asia to face a major outbreak due to the Delta variant, and many believe that the reported cases are a severe undercount of the situation. More than 27 percent of people taking COVID-19 tests are infected, indicating that many more cases are circulating throughout the population undetected. A recent survey of antibodies in Jakarta, the country’s capital, suggests that nearly half of the city’s 10.5 million people may have already been infected.

Meanwhile, the healthcare system across the country is straining under the pressure. Last week hospitals were running out of rooms and oxygen in Java, while this week Bali is experiencing a similar crash. Jakarta’s hospitals are currently at 73 percent capacity, according to the vice governor. In the first half of July alone, 114 doctors died from the virus. More than 1,500 healthcare workers have died since the beginning of the pandemic.

For now, the COVID-19 death rate is around 2.6 percent—compared to 1.8 percent in the United States or 2.8 percent in Brazil—but this number is set to rise as the virus spreads to Indonesia’s more rural islands with weaker healthcare infrastructure.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Barreling toward the peak

In an emergency effort earlier this month, the government enacted social distancing measures that restricted travel, indoor dining, and closed certain in-office workplaces. This week the government adjusted the restrictions to allow traditional markets and some restaurants, mosques, and malls to reopen. Mass vaccination campaigns also are underway.

Of the approximately 270 million people in Indonesia, only about 6 percent have been fully vaccinated. The latest push resulted in the distribution of nearly 874,000 doses. The government is aiming to administer two million doses per day starting in August. But without their own vaccine, the country must rely on international supplies.

“We need lightning-fast action globally so that countries like Indonesia have access to the vaccines needed to avert tens of thousands of deaths,” Sudirman Said, secretary general of Indonesian Red Cross, said in a statement late last month.

Coupled with the initial slow vaccination rollout, testing remains out of reach for many of the most vulnerable. The government provides free testing for those who present symptoms or have come into contact with someone who tested positive. Otherwise, the PCR test, which can detect the virus before a person becomes infectious, can cost more than $60 USD while the average worker makes a little less than $200 per month. A positive result can also add an economic hardship for those with limited income.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Fauzi, an informal worker, sells instant coffee near Hotel Indonesia Roundabout, a popular pedestrian area in Jakarta in December 2020. Most of his customers are also informal workers, who have been hit hard by the pandemic. Before COVID-19, he could earn a $25 per day. In December 2020, he struggled to make $10 a day.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A healthcare worker prepares a dose of the Sinovac COVID-19 vaccine during a mass vaccination program held at the Indonesian Red Cross emergency warehouse in Mampang, South Jakarta, Indonesia on July 16, 2021. The program lasted 10 days and aimed to vaccinate 10,000 people. The government hopes to administer two million doses per day starting in August.

“Many people are queuing to the lab for testing, but once they learn the price of the test many decide not to take it,” says Eusebius Pantja, an economist at the MINDSET Institute in Indonesia.

“They want to get tests but if they get a positive test they have to stop working. How can they maintain their lives? It limits the incentive to get tested,” adds Aloysius Gunadi Brata, an economist at Atma Jaya Yogyakarta University in Indonesia.

The federal government claims that 84,766 people have died from COVID-19 in Indonesia since the beginning of the pandemic. But Irma Hidayana, a co-founder of Lapor Covid, a collective that gathers and shares information on the pandemic in Indonesia, believes it’s a severe undercount. She along with more than 150 volunteers regularly compile municipal COVID-19 data from 180 cities and 34 provinces. They argue that the federal government has “disappeared” more than 20,000 deaths in the national count, which is far below what lower level governments are reporting.

“Cases right now are soaring because they don’t receive the real information,” says Hidayana. “People don’t understand what is going on in terms of the spread of the virus and how dangerous it is. And then, as a result, they don’t follow the public health social measures.”

‘Maybe they’ve gone bankrupt too’

Since the start of the pandemic, more than 1.12 million Indonesians have been pushed into poverty while working longer hours and risking infection. More than two million people fled crowded cities to work in agriculture.

“Unemployment has not dropped sharply—from 6 percent to 7 percent only. But they’re moving from high productivity jobs to low productivity,” says Faisal Basri, an economist at the University of Indonesia.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Many who remained in cities during the pandemic are struggling economically.

“I want everything to go back to normal again, like before the pandemic. There are too many restrictions now, how can I earn money? Many of my regular customers never show up anymore, maybe they’ve gone bankrupt too,” says Yani, a bean sprouts seller who works at the Kebayoran Lama Market in Jakarta. Even though she is putting in longer hours, she now earns half of what she did before the pandemic.

Business is also slow for Ahmad Afwan, a food delivery worker who now sometimes waits hours between orders. “If I don’t earn enough money for our food, I just hope my wife will understand,” he says.

Across the country, 31 percent of families experienced food shortages in the past year, according to a recent U.N. report. Even before the pandemic, more than seven million children in Indonesia were stunted due to malnourishment.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Fishermen and workers at the port of Muara Angke, a densely populated area in North Jakarta, receive free meals from Wonder Food Indonesia in December 2020. The non-profit, established in March 2019, provides up to 3,500 meals each week to mainly low income communities. Due to recent COVID-19 restrictions, Wonder Food Indonesia stopped providing food for three weeks this month.

“After the pandemic we probably will have a lost generation—children in this situation cannot get enough good food,” says Hendro Utomo, founder of Foodbank of Indonesia, a non-profit that manages food equity programs and food banks throughout the country. The organization is currently struggling to acquire food donations and protect its volunteers from the recent outbreak. Four team members died from COVID-19 in the past month alone.

Other hunger organizations like Wonderfood Indonesia, which redistributes unsold groceries and food donations throughout Jakarta, stopped delivering 3,500 free meals to low income communities for nearly a month due to recent social distancing restrictions.

What the GDP hides

Despite the economic strains, Indonesia’s economy—the largest in Southeast Asia—only shrank 2.1 percent last year. In comparison, the U.S. GDP contracted 3.5 percent in 2020.

The top 10 percent of Indonesians became wealthier during the pandemic, says Basri, the economist. He has only seen an economic impact on the rich in Bali because of the lack of tourism.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Basri claims that the government has been reluctant to impose severe lockdowns like those in Wuhan and Northern Italy because the national relief fund cannot financially support those most in need through such a freeze. At the same time, the government gave a major tax break to the automobile industry by temporarily eliminating the luxury tax. “As you can see, there are policies favoring the rich,” says Basri.

Meanwhile, other pandemic measures threaten to permanently widen the gap between the haves and have-nots. Children from working poor parents have a harder time with remote learning, which could lead to a cascade of long-term disadvantages, warns economist Susan Olivia with the University of Waikato in New Zealand. Under the current healthcare strain, people with non-COVID-19 related illnesses will defer care, and children may not receive other vaccines and checkups on time. Stress and food shortages also could have long-term health effects, especially among youth.

“[The government] should use this crisis as a good opportunity for reform,” Olivia says.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@U.S. officials tell the New York Times that the Biden administration is planning to recommend getting a booster shot eight months after a second dose of the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines. Third shots could be available as soon as mid-September, beginning with nursing home residents, health care workers, and emergency workers.

that the Biden administration is planning to recommend getting a booster shot eight months after a second dose of the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines. Third shots could be available as soon as mid-September, beginning with nursing home residents, health care workers, and emergency workers. The U.S. officials also expect to recommend a second dose for those who received the Johnson & Johnson vaccine but is awaiting the results of a clinical trial studying the shot’s two-dose regimen.

The Biden administration is reportedly concerned that the vaccines’ protections are waning, particularly in the face of the more transmissible Delta variant. Israel, which was among the first countries to launch its vaccination campaign, has already begun administering boosters as data has shown declining protection from severe disease among its elderly population.

The news comes just days after the U.S. authorized the use of boosters among people with weakened immune systems—and weeks after the World Health Organization called for a moratorium on booster shots as it attempts to address inequities in the global vaccine rollout.

COVID-19 vaccines have reached consumers in record time. Though the process can typically take 10 to 15 years, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has granted emergency authorization to vaccines made by Pfizer, Moderna, and Johnson & Johnson in less than a year. Before now, the fastest-ever vaccine—for mumps—took four years to develop in the 1960s.

Even after a vaccine is authorized or fully licensed, it faces potential roadblocks when it comes to scaling up production and distribution, which also includes deciding which populations should get it first—and at what cost.

Yet several efforts are underway to help produce and distribute the vaccines more quickly. Here’s everything you need to know—including primers on how vaccines and clinical trials work, the latest news on vaccine distribution and safety, and a detailed breakdown of each of the candidates that have reached phase three and beyond.

Vaccines and clinical trials

More than 60 vaccines are still going through a three-stage clinical trial process that’s required before they are sent to regulatory agencies for approval. Given the urgent need, some vaccine developers have compressed the clinical process for SARS-CoV-2 by running trial phases simultaneously.

VACCINE CLINICAL TRIAL PROCESS Phase one: Checks the safety of a vaccine and determines whether it triggers an immune response in a small group of healthy humans. Phase two: Widens the testing pool to include groups of people who may have the disease or be more likely to catch it, to gauge the vaccine’s effectiveness. Phase three: Expands the pool up to the thousands to make sure the vaccine is safe and effective among a wider array of people, given that immune response can vary by age, ethnicity, or by underlying health conditions.

The COVID-19 candidates, like all vaccines, essentially aim to instruct the immune system to mount a defense, which is sometimes stronger than what would be provided through natural infection and comes with fewer health consequences.

To do so, traditional vaccines use the whole coronavirus, but in a killed or weakened state. Others use only part of the virus—whether a protein or a fragment. Some transfer the instructions for coronavirus proteins into an unrelated virus that is unlikely or even incapable of causing disease. Finally, cutting-edge vaccines under development rely on deploying pieces of the coronavirus’s genetic material, enabling our cells to temporarily make coronavirus proteins needed to stimulate our immune systems. (Find out more about vaccines and how they work.)

TYPES OF VACCINES Nucleic acid: Relies on injecting snippets of a virus’s genetic material, either DNA or messenger RNA (mRNA), into human cells. It spurs the production of viral proteins that mimic features of the coronavirus, training the immune system to recognize its presence. Knocked-out virus: Uses a non-infectious form of the coronavirus that can no longer cause full-blown disease but can still provoke an immune response. The virus can either be fully inactivated or weakened. These modes are considered the most classic ways to make vaccines. Viral vector: Essentially a “Trojan horse” presented to the immune system. One type involves introducing a piece of DNA from SARS-CoV-2 into another unrelated germ—for example, an adenovirus, which typically causes the common cold. When this modified adenovirus is injected into humans, the hope is that it will instruct cells to make coronavirus proteins and will trigger an immune response. Protein: These vaccines are typically made from coronavirus proteins, which can be synthesized or brewed in labs like beer. Some versions involve coating a carrier—such as nanoparticles—with proteins to better aid delivery and uptake by cells.

U.S. vaccine rollout

In the United States, more than 59 percent of the population has received at least one dose, and 50 percent are fully vaccinated. As of August 17, the U.S. had administered more than 357 million shots of the authorized vaccines and had distributed more than 415 million doses.

On August 16, the New York Times reported that U.S. officials have decided that most Americans should get a booster shot of the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines eight months after their second dose. Officials in the Biden administration tell the paper that the country could begin offering third doses in mid-September, beginning with nursing home residents, health care workers, and emergency workers. Those who received the Johnson & Johnson vaccine will likely also be eligible for a second dose, but officials are first waiting on the results of a clinical trial testing the vaccine’s two-dose regimen.

Biden administration officials have signaled in recent weeks their concern that the vaccines’ protections have begun to wane, particularly with the rise of the Delta variant. The New York Times cites data from Israel showing that the Pfizer vaccine’s protection against severe disease has fallen among elderly people who were first to get the shot. Israel has already begun administering booster shots to its vulnerable populations.

The news comes just weeks after the WHO called for a moratorium on booster shots through at least September to help efforts to vaccinate at least 10 percent of people in every country. The organization asked wealthy nations to share their doses instead of administering boosters. “We cannot and should not accept countries that have already used most of the global supply of vaccines using even more of it while the world’s most vulnerable people remain unprotected,” WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said in a press conference.

The U.S. has already amended the emergency use authorizations for the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines to allow administration of a third dose to people who have had solid organ transplants or who are equally immunocompromised. The two-dose regimen seems to be less effective in protecting against COVID-19 for people with weakened immune systems, who are more likely to become seriously ill from the disease. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention endorsed the FDA’s decision on August 13 following a meeting of its vaccine advisory committee. Shots are expected to be available immediately..

Meanwhile, the National Institutes of Health have launched phase two clinical trials to assess whether a third dose of the Moderna or Pfizer vaccines would produce a protective antibody response among kidney transplant recipients whose immune systems did not respond to the first two doses.

Vaccines remain effective at preventing most severe illness, even for breakthrough infections of the Delta variant. But there's concern over the potential for transmission. On July 30, the CDC published preliminary data from a Massachusetts COVID-19 outbreak that suggests vaccinated individuals who are infected with the Delta variant may carry similar viral loads as an unvaccinated infected individual. Those data come in the form of proxies based on how quickly samples from the infected people yielded a positive SARS-CoV-2 result. The data will require follow-up research to confirm.

On July 29, U.S. President Joe Biden said that his administration is rolling out a new COVID-19 vaccine policy for federal employees. Employees who do not disclose their vaccination status or are unvaccinated must wear masks at work, test for COVID-19 once or twice a week, socially distance, and stop almost all travel for work.

The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs has mandated that its 115,000 frontline healthcare workers must be vaccinated and, on August 9, U.S. Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin told troops that COVID-19 vaccines will be mandatory for active duty service members “no later than mid-September.” Austin noted the mandate could come into force even sooner if the FDA grants full approval to Pfizer’s vaccine first—which the regulatory agency is expected to do according to news reports that say the FDA is speeding up its timeline to approve the vaccine by early September. State and local governments are also implementing vaccine mandates among their employees. On August 11, California became the first state to require all teachers and school staff to either get a vaccine or undergo weekly COVID-19 testing. The mandate goes into effect on October 15.

On July 27, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention updated its recommendations on masks. The agency now urges their universal use in indoor public spaces by people living in regions with at least “substantial” COVID-19 transmission, where 50 or more new cases per 100,000 people have been reported over the past seven days. More than two thirds of all U.S. counties have “substantial” spread or higher, and cases are trending upward nationwide.

The CDC also recommends indoor masking in public spaces for vaccinated people who live with anyone vulnerable to the disease, such as unvaccinated children and immunocompromised individuals. All teachers, students, and staff in schools, whether vaccinated or not, should also wear masks, according to the new CDC guidance.

Unvaccinated individuals likely still account for the greatest viral transmission, since the total number of breakthrough cases is relatively low, CDC director Rochelle Walensky, stressed during the July 27 briefing.

The CDC has approved Pfizer’s vaccine for emergency use in adolescents ages 12 to 15, which is seen as key to helping the country reach herd immunity. States, which are still responsible for rollout decision making, subsequently widened eligibility to include all people 12 and older.

But the country’s immunization campaign remains focused on adults who have been less eager to get the vaccine. Efforts include a website to help people find vaccines, as well as an increase in walk-up vaccination sites, pop-up clinics, and increased funding and access to clinics in rural areas. On June 2, Biden announced a new slew of incentives and efforts to remove barriers to vaccination, from free beer to free childcare coverage. Pharmacies are also extending their hours, and the Biden administration is partnering with Black-owned barbershops and beauty salons to administer the vaccines.

The Biden administration has dedicated nearly $20 billion to the vaccine rollout as part of the $1.9 trillion COVID-19 rescue package proposed in January and signed by Biden on March 11.

Global vaccine rollout

The World Health Organization is also coordinating global efforts to administer vaccines, with an eye toward delivering two billion doses by the end of 2021. It is leading an initiative through the COVAX Facility to ensure that all countries have equitable access. COVAX has distributed more than 206 million doses to 138 participants. The WHO has approved the Pfizer-BioNTech, AstraZeneca-Oxford, Johnson & Johnson, Moderna, Sinopharm, and Sinovac vaccines for emergency use.

On May 27, however, COVAX acknowledged that the crisis in India created a shortfall of 190 million doses. In a joint statement, COVAX administrators said the consequences of that shortfall “could be catastrophic.” They called on world leaders to share more doses and commit additional funding to the global effort. On June 3, the Biden administration said that it will share 80 million doses by the end of June; 75 percent of those doses will be shared through COVAX and the rest will go to countries experiencing surges and to U.S. neighbors. The U.S. also announced on June 11 that it will purchase 500 million doses of the Pfizer vaccine and donate them to low- and middle-income countries. Two hundred million doses will be delivered by the end of 2021 and the rest will be delivered in the first half of 2022.

On June 13, national leaders at the G7 summit announced plans to donate 870 million doses to the global vaccination effort. Most of the doses will be distributed through COVAX, with the aim to deliver at least half of them by the end of 2021. Pfizer, Moderna, and Johnson & Johnson have also pledged to collectively provide around 3.5 billion doses of their vaccines to low- and middle-income countries by the end of 2022. The European Union also said it would donate at least 100 million doses by the end of 2021. On August 6, China pledged to provide two billion doses of its COVID-19 vaccines this year and donate $100 million to COVAX.

Still, on July 16, the New York Times reported that vaccine shortages are driving a COVID-19 crisis in Africa, where only 1 percent of the population has been fully vaccinated.

Vaccine safety

On July 13, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration added a warning label to Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine after it was linked to rare cases of Guillain-Barré Syndrome, a rare autoimmune disorder that can lead to paralysis. There have been 100 preliminary reports of the syndrome among the approximately 12.5 million people who have received the vaccine. The FDA said that the benefits of receiving the vaccine outweigh the risks.

The FDA has also added a warning label to the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines about rare cases of heart inflammation in adolescents and young adults. The news comes after the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices announced that it has identified more than 300 cases of myocarditis and pericarditis that it acknowledged are likely linked to the vaccines. The agency says these cases are rare but higher than expected. It also said the benefits of the shots outweigh the risks.

An earlier CDC report released February 19 revealed that severe reactions to the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines are rare. The report documented only 4.5 cases of anaphylaxis per million doses of vaccine administered during the reporting period, which the CDC notes is comparable with rates for other types of vaccines. U.K. regulators have also published safety data for the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine showing that most side effects are mild and consistent with what is typical of other vaccines. Still, as a precautionary measure, U.K. officials have advised people with a history of serious allergic reactions not to get the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine.

In April, the European Medicines Agency issued statements saying that unusual blood clots should be listed as a very rare but possible side effect of both the AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson vaccines. In a review of 86 reported cases related to the AstraZeneca vaccine, the EMA’s safety committee found a potential link between it and the clots, with most known cases occurring in women under age 60 within two weeks of receiving the first dose. The EMA continues to stress that the odds of developing a clot after vaccination are extremely low, and that the benefits of getting vaccinated outweigh the risks. They also recommend that people seek immediate medical attention if they experience symptoms related to clotting, including persistent pain, shortness of breath, and headaches or blurred vision.

On August 11, the CDC officially recommended that people who are pregnant, breastfeeding, or may become pregnant get a COVID-19 vaccine. A new analysis of data from the vaccine rollout found no increased risk of miscarriage among people who received an mRNA vaccine before 20 weeks of pregnancy. Earlier studies also showed that the vaccine is safe later in pregnancy as well—for both pregnant people and their babies.

CDC director Rochelle Walensky had previously suggested in April that pregnant people receive the COVID-19 vaccine, but the CDC’s official guidelines simply said that pregnant people were eligible for the jab. At the time, Walensky pointed to a recent study published in the New England Journal of Medicine that showed no safety concerns among pregnant people who received the mRNA vaccines made by Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech.

Vaccine prospects

Here are the vaccines that have made it to phase three and beyond:

Name: mRNA-1273

Who: A Massachusetts-based biotech company, in collaboration with the National Institutes of Health.

What: A nucleic-acid vaccine that requires two doses.

Latest news: On August 8, a preliminary Mayo Clinic study of more than 50,000 patients suggested that Moderna’s vaccine is more effective against the Delta variant than Pfizer’s vaccine. The study shows that the efficacy of Moderna’s vaccine dropped from 86 percent in early 2021 to 76 percent in July, when the Delta variant was predominant. Meanwhile, the Pfizer vaccine’s efficacy dropped over the same time period from 76 percent to 42 percent. The study notes that both vaccines remain highly effective at preventing severe cases of disease.

On August 12, a study published in the journal Science showed that Moderna’s vaccine protects against COVID-19 for at least six months and is effective against the Delta variant. The findings confirm earlier studies and announcements made by the company.

Approval status: On December 18, the FDA granted emergency approval to Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccine, a day after an advisory panel decided 20-0, with one abstention, that the benefits of the vaccine outweigh the risks, such as the mild side effects reported in their clinical trial. The vaccine has also been approved in the European Union, Canada, the U.K., Israel , and by the WHO.

On June 1, Moderna announced that it has applied for full FDA approval of its COVID-19 vaccine for use in people age 18 and older. The company also plans to file for emergency use authorization for teens ages 12 to 17. A study of clinical trials among adolescents in this age group shows that its vaccine is safe and 100 percent effective. The study also showed the vaccine is 93 percent effective among participants in this age group two weeks after the first dose.

Distribution: Moderna’s candidate was the second vaccine to receive emergency authorization in the U.S., joining Pfizer’s candidate. On December 11, the Trump administration purchased an additional 100 million doses of Moderna’s vaccine. Two months later, the Biden administration procured an additional 100 million doses, for a total of 300 million by the end of July.

On April 2, Moderna announced that the FDA has authorized it to increase the number of doses in its vials from 10 to 11. Regulators are also permitting the company to use new vials that allow for 15 doses. The FDA also said that Moderna’s vaccine can now be kept at room temperature for up to a day. The vaccine can otherwise be safely stored on ice or in a normal refrigerator for 30 days. These changes are expected to help the company distribute its vaccine more quickly.

The company also says it remains on track to deliver at least 500 million doses globally per year beginning in 2021, thanks in part to a deal it has struck with Swiss manufacturer Lonza that will allow it to manufacture up to a billion doses a year.

On July 16, the U.S. said it will begin shipping 3.5 million doses of Moderna’s vaccine to Argentina as part of a bilateral deal between the countries. The U.S. has also shared doses of its vaccines with Taiwan, Brazil, El Salvador, Pakistan, and other countries.

Efficacy: On August 6, Moderna announced that a final analysis of its phase three clinical trials showed that its vaccine remains 93 percent effective for at least six months after administration of the second dose. The analysis backs up findings published in the New England Journal of Medicine in April.

Moderna also said that a study of the phase two clinical trials of its three booster candidates produced robust antibody responses against the virus, including the Gamma, Beta, and Delta variants of concern. The company has submitted its study data for publication. The company said it expects boosters will likely be needed before the winter season; however, the World Health Organization has called for a moratorium on booster shots through at least September given the global vaccine disparity.

As the New York Times reported in June, however, past studies suggest that people who are immunized with the Moderna and Pfizer vaccines may not need booster shots. A study published in the journal Nature on June 28 showed that the vaccines elicit “robust and prolonged” immune responses—indicating that protection may last for years so long as the virus doesn’t mutate to evade it.

On July 9, Nature reported on a study showing that two quarter-doses of Moderna’s vaccine generates long-lasting neutralizing antibodies and T cells. The results suggest that it might be possible to administer fractional doses to help stretch the world’s vaccine supply, particularly in low- and middle-income countries that are facing shortages.

On February 17, the New England Journal of Medicine published a preliminary report showing that Moderna’s vaccine remains effective in protecting against the virus variant found in the U.K. However, it may be less effective in protecting against the South African variant—although researchers noted that further study is needed.

In December 2020, an FDA analysis of the phase three study of Moderna’s vaccine confirmed that it is 94.1-percent effective in preventing mild cases of COVID-19 and 100-percent effective at preventing severe cases after taking two doses.

Safety: On June 23, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said it plans to add a warning label to the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines about rare cases of heart inflammation in adolescents and young adults. The news comes after the CDC convened an emergency meeting of its advisory committee to discuss “rare but higher-than-expected” cases of myocarditis and pericarditis among young people who have received the vaccines. The committee acknowledged that these cases are likely linked to the vaccines but that the benefits of the shots outweigh the risks.

Clinical trials status: Moderna announced on December 17 that it is launching clinical trials to evaluate the vaccine’s safety in children and people with cancer; it will also establish a “pregnancy registry” to track the vaccine’s safety in people who are pregnant.

The company started the third phase of its clinical trials in July 2020. Preliminary findings from its phase one trials showed that healthy subjects—including elderly patients—produced coronavirus antibodies and a reaction from T cells, another part of the human immune response. Phase three is testing the vaccine in 30,000 U.S. participants. The company also announced plans to test the safety and efficacy of a booster shot that would be delivered a year after the first pair of vaccine doses, according to CNBC. The trial will likely begin in July 2021.

On February 24, Moderna announced that it has shipped doses of a booster vaccine to the U.S. National Institutes of Health for clinical trials. The phase one trial will determine whether the booster can improve immunity against the South Africa variant. Moderna is also investigating using a third dose of its approved vaccine to protect against variants.

Name: NVX-CoV2373

Who: A biotechnology company based in Gaithersburg, Maryland.

What: A protein vaccine that involves a nanoparticle carrier to better aid delivery and uptake by cells.The vaccine is administered in two doses, 21 days apart.

Latest news: On August 5, Novavax said that it will hold off on submitting its vaccine to the FDA for emergency use authorization until the fourth quarter of 2021 rather than the third quarter as the company had previously announced. Reuters reports that Novavax also said that it will file a separate application for booster shots once the emergency use authorization submission is processed; the company said its booster shot given six months after the two-dose regimen elicited a 4.6-fold increase in antibodies. The company has filed for authorization from regulators in India, Indonesia, and the Philippines.

The New York Times also reported that the federal government will not fund further production of the Novavax vaccine until the company resolves regulators’ concerns about its lagging production process.

Approval status: Not approved for use.

Efficacy and safety: On June 14, Novavax announced that its vaccine is safe and 90.4 percent effective in protecting against COVID-19—including the more contagious virus variants that are circulating. The vaccine is also 100 percent effective at preventing moderate and severe disease among 29,960 clinical trial participants age 18 and older in the U.S. and Mexico.

On March 11, Novavax announced that a final analysis of its phase three clinical trials in the U.K. shows that its vaccine is 96.4-percent effective in preventing COVID-19. It also announced the findings of its phase 2b clinical trial in South Africa, which showed the vaccine was only 48.6-percent effective against the strains circulating there. Both trials showed the vaccine is 100-percent effective at preventing severe cases of the disease.

On January 28, Novavax had announced preliminary results of its phase three trials in the U.K., which showed at the time that its vaccine is 89.3-percent effective in preventing COVID-19. On September 2, a study of the company’s phase one trial published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that the vaccine was safe and produced coronavirus antibodies at a higher level than is seen among those who have recovered from COVID-19. It also stimulated T cells, another arm of the human immune response.

Clinical trials status: On September 24, Novavax announced the launch of its phase three trial in the United Kingdom, which will evaluate the vaccine in up to 10,000 people, both with and without underlying conditions. Up to 400 participants will also be vaccinated against the seasonal flu as part of a sub-study that will help determine whether it is safe to give patients both vaccines at the same time. On November 30, Novavax said it had completed enrollment in its phase three trial in the U.K.

On December 28, Novavax announced the launch of a phase three study in the U.S. and Mexico, which will evaluate the safety and efficacy of its vaccine in up to 30,000 adults.

Name: BNT162b2

Who: One of the world’s largest pharmaceutical companies, based in New York, in collaboration with German biotech company BioNTech.

What: A nucleic-acid vaccine that requires two doses taken 21 days apart.

Latest news: On August 3, the New York Times reported that the FDA aims to grant final approval to Pfizer’s vaccine in early September. The agency has said that it believes full approval of the vaccine will inspire greater public confidence in the vaccine and drive up vaccination rates. (Here’s how full FDA approval could pave the way for vaccine mandates.)

Pfizer and BioNTech also plan to seek FDA authorization for a booster shot to help protect against the Delta variant, which is now the dominant strain in the U.S. The companies suggested that the third dose of their vaccine “may be needed within six to 12 months after full vaccination.”

However, on August 4, the World Health Organization called for a moratorium on booster shots through at least September, given the global vaccination disparity. At a news conference, WHO Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus asked the wealthy nations that are considering administering boosters to instead donate the shots to low-income countries that are struggling to access the vaccine supply.

The FDA and CDC have also said that fully vaccinated Americans “do not need a booster shot at this time.” The agencies emphasized that all three of the vaccines that have been approved in the U.S.—Pfizer, Moderna, and Johnson & Johnson—are highly effective, including against the Delta variant. In a July 12 meeting, U.S. officials told Pfizer representatives that more data is needed before they could determine whether booster shots are necessary, which might take several more months.

A study published in Nature has demonstrated that people who have received both doses of the Pfizer or AstraZeneca vaccines remain fully protected against severe disease, hospitalization, and death from the Delta and Beta variants. However, a single dose of either vaccine was not as protective.

The findings corroborate an earlier study published in Nature showing that the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines elicit “robust and prolonged” immune responses. As the New York Times reported, the findings suggest that people who are immunized with these vaccines may not need booster shots as protection may last for years so long as the virus doesn’t mutate to evade it.

Approval status: On December 2, 2020, the U.K. became the first Western country to approve any COVID-19 vaccine when it authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech candidate—making the drug the first mRNA vaccine in history allowed for human use. The FDA granted emergency approval to this vaccine on December 11, a day after an advisory panel decided 17-4 that the benefits of the candidate outweigh the risks for anyone over the age of 16. The vaccine has also been granted emergency approval in Canada, the European Union, and other countries.

On May 12, the CDC approved Pfizer’s vaccine for emergency use in adolescents ages 12 to 15. U.K. regulators have also approved this vaccine for use in the same age group, while the European Union granted conditional authorization.

On May 7, Pfizer started its application for full FDA approval of its vaccine for people ages 16 and up. The company will submit all required information to the regulatory agency over the next few weeks, CNN reports, with a goal of getting full approval in the coming months.

On May 4, Pfizer CEO Albert Bourla said that the company expects to file for emergency use authorization of its COVID-19 vaccine for children ages 2 to 11 in September. Bourla also said that safety data from its phase two trials in pregnant people is expected in late July or early August.

Distribution: Pfizer and BioNTech have signed several contracts with the U.S. government to provide 300 million doses by July 31, 2021.

The European Union said on April 14 that it has begun negotiations with Pfizer-BioNTech for 1.8 billion doses of their vaccines for 2022 and 2023. The move is part of the bloc’s plans to pivot away from the AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson vaccines in favor of the mRNA vaccines.

On April 15, Bourla told CNBC that people will likely need a third dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine within 12 months of being fully vaccinated. He added that it’s possible people will need an annual booster of the COVID-19 vaccine, though variants “will play a key role” in determining when a booster will be needed.

Globally, Pfizer expects to be able to produce up to 50 million vaccine doses in 2020 and 1.3 billion doses by the end of 2021. Questions have been raised over the vaccine’s storage, which requires ultra-cold freezers set at minus 70 degrees Celsius (-94 degrees F). On February 19, however, Pfizer and BioNTech said that their vaccine can remain stable for two weeks at temperatures between minus 25℃ and minus 15℃ (-13℉ to 5℉), a common range in pharmaceutical freezers and refrigerators. The finding would allow for easier distribution of the vaccine in communities where ultra-cold storage requirements present a challenge. The companies say they have submitted the new data to the FDA for review.

Efficacy: On June 10, a study published in the journal Nature showed that two doses of the Pfizer vaccine protects against several virus variants, including the Delta and Eta variants. The news came a few days after the CDC announced that the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines reduce the risk of infection by 91 percent for fully vaccinated people.

On April 1, Pfizer and BioNTech announced that their vaccine is 91.3 percent effective for at least six months after the second dose and 100 percent effective against the more contagious variant circulating in South Africa. The updated analysis of the vaccine’s phase three clinical trials also showed that it offers full protection against severe cases of COVID-19 with no serious safety concerns. A preliminary study also suggests that the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines protect against a more contagious variant that drove a surge in cases in India, B.1.617.2.

The CDC has also released a study of the U.S. vaccine rollout showing that the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines are 90 percent effective in preventing symptomatic COVID-19 in real-world conditions. The study analyzed the efficacy of the two mRNA vaccines among nearly 4,000 health-care workers, first responders, and other frontline workers who were the first to receive the jab in the U.S. It also showed the vaccines are 80-percent effective after one dose. The findings confirm earlier studies from the U.K. and Israel.

On December 10, the New England Journal of Medicine published the results of Pfizer’s phase three study, showing the vaccine was safe and 95-percent effective in protecting against COVID-19 in people 16 and older. Pfizer and BioNTech have also announced that a phase three trial shows that their vaccine is safe and 100 percent efficacious among children between the ages of 12 and 15, and that it elicited robust antibody responses.

On February 17, the New England Journal of Medicine published a preliminary report showing that the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine remains effective in protecting against the virus variants found in the U.K. and Brazil.

On March 11, Pfizer announced that preliminary findings from Israel’s rollout suggest its vaccine is effective at preventing COVID-19 transmission. The company says that its vaccine was 97-percent effective at preventing symptomatic COVID-19 cases and 94-percent effective against asymptomatic infections. Those findings are bolstered by a Mayo Clinic study showing that the mRNA vaccines made by Pfizer and Moderna have been shown to significantly reduce asymptomatic transmission in the U.S.

Safety: On June 23, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said it plans to add a warning label to the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines about rare cases of heart inflammation in adolescents and young adults. The news comes after the CDC convened an emergency meeting of its advisory committee to discuss “rare but higher-than-expected” cases of myocarditis and pericarditis among young people who have received the vaccines. The committee acknowledged that these cases are likely linked to the vaccines but that the benefits of the shots outweigh the risks.

Severe allergic reactions following immunization with the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine have been reported in many countries. White House advisor Anthony Fauci told CNBC in December that some adverse reactions are expected when a vaccine is distributed to a wider population. Regulators in the U.S. and U.K. have also released reports offering reassurances that severe reactions are rare.

Clinical trials status: On November 18, Pfizer and BioNTech announced the conclusion of their phase three trials. The trials launched in July, enrolling a diverse population in areas with significant SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Pfizer has expanded the trial to include 44,000 people across multiple countries.

On February 18, Pfizer and BioNTech announced the launch of a phase two/three clinical trial to study the vaccine’s safety and efficacy among 4,000 pregnant women over the age of 18. The companies have also launched a phase 1/2/3 study in children between the ages of six months and 11 years.

On June 8, Pfizer said that it will expand its clinical trials to a larger group of children under age 12. After a phase one study showed that the vaccine was safe and effective in a group of 144 children, the clinical trials will now enroll up to 4,500 children at more than 90 sites in the U.S., Finland, Poland, and Spain. Pfizer will test a dose of 10 micrograms in children ages 5 to 11, and three micrograms for children from six months to five years old.

The company expects to have data for the older group in September and will likely file for emergency authorization for that group later that month. Data for children ages two to five will likely come soon afterward, while data for the youngest age group is not expected until October or November.

On July 8, Pfizer and Biotech announced that they are developing an updated version of the vaccine that specifically targets the Delta variant. They anticipate clinical trials will begin in August.

Name: JNJ-78436735

Who: One of the world’s largest multinational corporations, based in New Jersey, specializing in healthcare and pharmaceutical products.

What: A single-dose vector vaccine. (Here’s how the Johnson & Johnson vaccine works.)

Latest news: On July 20, the New York Times reported on a preliminary study showing that Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine is less effective against the Delta and Lambda variants than it is against the original virus strain. The paper notes that the results were obtained in a lab experiment and may not reflect the vaccine’s real-world efficacy.

The results are also at odds with an earlier study conducted by Johnson & Johnson showing that its vaccine offers strong protection against Delta. Those studies showed a slight drop in efficacy compared to the original virus, but say it is more effective against Delta than the Beta variant of concern. The studies also showed that the protections last for at least eight months.

Approval status: Approved for use in the U.S., Bahrain, Canada, and the European Union.

Distribution: On March 2, the U.S. announced that Johnson & Johnson has partnered with its competitor Merck to increase the supply of its COVID-19 vaccine. Merck will dedicate two facilities to producing the vaccine, which could double the amount of available doses. Biden said that the additional doses will allow the U.S. to vaccinate all adults by the end of May.

On June 11, the New York Times reported that the FDA has told Johnson & Johnson to throw out 60 million doses made at its plant in Baltimore. The news came a day after CNN reported that the U.S. hasn’t sent any shipments of the vaccine since the first week of May due to a lack of supply caused by earlier issues at the plant. On June 10, Johnson & Johnson also announced that the FDA has approved an extension of the shelf life of its vaccine from three to four and a half months.

Efficacy: On February 24, an FDA analysis confirmed Johnson & Johnson’s earlier report that its vaccine is safe and effective in preventing COVID-19. The report found the vaccine is 72-percent effective in preventing COVID-19 based on U.S. trials, and 85-percent effective in preventing severe disease across all regions. It also shows that the vaccine was 64-percent effective in preventing disease in the company’s South African trials, which is higher than had previously been reported.

On June 9, a study published in the journal Nature showed that Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine is effective in protecting against virus variants, including the Beta and Gamma variants of concern. The study showed that the vaccine elicits neutralizing antibodies and a T-cell response among people who live in areas where the variants are widely circulating, including Brazil and South Africa.

Safety: On July 13, U.S. regulators added a warning to Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine in response to rare reports linking the shot to Guillain-Barré Syndrome, a disorder in which the body’s immune system attacks the nerves. The FDA said there have been about a hundred preliminary reports of the syndrome among the 12.8 million people who have received the Johnson & Johnson vaccine. It added that the benefits of receiving the vaccine still outweigh the risks.

CDC officials told the Washington Post that the cases have mostly been reported about two weeks after vaccination among men, many aged 50 or older, and that these cases will be discussed during an upcoming meeting of the CDC’s advisory committee.

In the spring, the vaccine’s rollout was briefly halted in the U.S. and across Europe as regulators investigated reports of blood clotting among people who have received the shot. The FDA and CDC reviewed 15 cases of blood clots. The cases—which the agencies noted are “extremely rare”—occurred in women between the ages of 18 and 48 within six to 13 days after vaccination. The Europeans Medicines Agency also said that the cases it reviewed occurred in people under 60—mostly women—within three weeks of vaccination.

On April 23, the U.S. FDA and CDC lifted the pause on Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine and said that immunizations can resume immediately. The agencies said that the risk of blood clots is “very low” and that the benefits of getting the vaccine outweigh the risks. It will add information about the increased risk of blood clots to the vaccine’s label. The decision came days after the European Medicines Agency said that blood clots should be listed as a “very rare” side effect of Johnson & Johnson’s COVID-19 vaccine.

Clinical trials status: On September 23, 2020, Johnson & Johnson announced the launch of its phase three “ENSEMBLE” trial to evaluate the safety of the vaccine—and how well it works—among up to 60,000 adults from a variety of countries. The trial will include “significant representation” from older populations and those with underlying conditions that make them more susceptible to COVID-19.

On October 12, 2020, Johnson & Johnson announced that it paused phase three trials for an independent safety review due to an unexplained illness in a participant. The company didn’t provide any details, in part to protect the patient’s privacy, but said that illnesses and accidents are expected in large clinical studies. What’s more, study pauses are routine for clinical trials and aren’t typically reported. Later that month, the company announced it would resume trials, which were fully enrolled with 45,000 participants by December 17.

On April 2, Johnson & Johnson announced that it has begun vaccinating children age 12 to 17 as part of its phase 2a clinical trial. The company said it will initially test the vaccine in adolescents age 16 to 17 before expanding it to younger children.

Name: None

Who: China’s state-run pharmaceutical company, in collaboration with the Wuhan Institute of Biological Products.

What: Two inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.

Latest news: On July 19, preliminary results from a study conducted in Sri Lanka found that Sinopharm’s vaccine was less effective against the Delta variant than the original SARS-CoV-2 strain. As Reuters reported, the study showed that the vaccine elicited a 1.38-fold reduction in antibody levels against the variant.

Distribution: Authorities in China have set a goal to vaccinate 50 million people by Lunar New Year in mid-February, despite the lack of evidence that their available vaccines are safe and effective. Chinese officials have said the vaccine will be free for Chinese citizens, and that they will prioritize immunizations for high-risk groups such as the elderly and people with underlying conditions.

On January 13, Hungary’s government announced that it had reached a deal with Sinopharm to buy the company’s vaccine, following Hungary’s criticisms of the pace of the European Commission’s vaccine rollout.

Approval status: China has approved one of the company’s vaccines for general use and another for limited use. One of the Sinopharm vaccines has also been approved by the World Health Organization as well as in Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, and other countries.

Sinopharm filed for final regulatory approval from China in late November, two months after the New Yorker reported that hundreds of thousands of Chinese civilians have already been vaccinated under the government’s emergency-use approval. China began to inoculate medical workers and other high-risk groups with the Sinopharm trial vaccines in July, making it the first experimental vaccine available to civilians beyond clinical volunteers.

Efficacy and safety: On May 7, the World Health Organization estimated the Sinopharm vaccine’s efficacy to be 79 percent among all age groups, affirming the company’s earlier announcement of the results of its phase three study.

Preliminary findings from two randomized trials, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, have shown the vaccine can trigger an antibody response with no serious adverse effects. The study did not measure T cell-mediated immune responses. These results are significant, though, as they are the first published data from human clinical trials for a COVID-19 vaccine that uses a whole, inactivated virus.

Clinical trials status: Sinopharm launched its first phase three trial in July 2020 among 15,000 volunteers—aged 18 to 60, with no serious underlying conditions—in the UAE. The company selected the UAE because it has a diverse population made up of approximately 200 nationalities, making it an ideal testing ground. Sinopharm will also undertake phase three trials in locations such as Peru and Bahrain.

Name: CoronaVac

Who: A Chinese biopharmaceutical company, in collaboration with Brazilian research center Butantan.

What: An inactivated vaccine.

Latest news: On July 15, Reuters reported that the leaders of a Chilean study have recommended administering a third dose of Sinovac’s vaccine as its efficacy has waned in the face of the Delta variant. The vaccine’s level of protection is lower than others—late-stage trials found that it is 51 percent effective in preventing COVID-19. Still, Nature reports that it is 100 percent effective at preventing severe disease and therefore is key to helping curb the pandemic.

Approval status: Approved for limited use by the WHO as well as in China, Indonesia, Brazil, and other countries.

Efficacy and safety: Reports released in early January place CoronaVac’s efficacy below that of other authorized vaccines. Results from a late-stage clinical trial released on January 13 found that CoronaVac had an efficacy of 50.4 percent, slightly more than the 50-percent minimum recommended by the World Health Organization. The difference comes down to the earlier estimate’s exclusion of trial participants who got “very mild infections” but did not require clinical assistance.

On April 7, a preliminary study of CoronaVac’s vaccine rollout in Brazil showed that the vaccine is about 50 percent effective in protecting against COVID-19 in a region where the highly transmissible P.1 variant is circulating.

Clinical trials status: CoronaVac entered phase three trials in July, with plans to recruit nearly 9,000 healthcare professionals in Brazil, in addition to phase three trials in Indonesia. A planned trial in Bangladesh was delayed, after Bangladesh refused in October to co-finance a late-stage trial.

Name: ChAdOx1 nCoV-19

Who: The U.K. university, in collaboration with the biopharmaceutical company AstraZeneca.

What: A viral vector vaccine that requires two doses.

Latest news: On July 8, a study published in Nature demonstrated that people who have received both doses of the AstraZeneca of Pfizer vaccines remain fully protected from the Delta and Beta variants. However, a single dose of either vaccine was not as protective.

On June 25, preliminary results from a British study showed that mixing doses of the AstraZeneca and Pfizer vaccines provides strong protection against COVID-19. Researchers told the New York Times that the protection is strong regardless of the order in which the vaccines are administered. The findings will be useful for those who are unable to get a second AstraZeneca vaccine due to production delays and safety concerns, although researchers say it’s still best to get two doses of the same vaccine for now.

In Canada, meanwhile, on June 29 regulatory officials advised people with a history of capillary leak syndrome against receiving the AstraZeneca vaccine. Health Canada is also updating the vaccine’s label to add the syndrome as a potential side effect.

Approval status: Approved for use in the United Kingdom, the European Union, Argentina, India, and other countries.

Efficacy: On March 24, AstraZeneca released the primary analysis of its U.S. phase three clinical trials showing that its vaccine is 76 percent effective at preventing COVID-19, slightly lower than the 79 percent efficacy it had announced two days earlier based on a partial analysis of the data. It is also 85 percent effective in people 65 and older and 100 percent effective at preventing severe cases of the disease.

U.S. health officials had taken the unusual step of questioning the decision to release the interim results, describing them as “outdated and potentially misleading.” In a letter obtained by the Washington Post, an independent panel of experts at the National Institutes of Health that oversees U.S. clinical trials said that it had recommended the company release a later analysis instead, showing the vaccine may be 69 to 74 percent effective.

On February 3, AstraZeneca and Oxford released a preprint study of a phase three trial showing that their vaccine is 76-percent effective at preventing COVID-19 after one dose, with no severe cases or hospitalizations reported. The data also suggest that the vaccine may reduce asymptomatic transmission of the virus. Weekly swabs of participants testing for the presence of the virus found a 67-percent reduction in positive swabs after the first dose.

The companies also said that the vaccine’s efficacy increased to 82 percent when the second dose was taken after 12 weeks or longer, rather than the originally recommended four-week interval. The British government has recommended the longer gap in its rollout of the vaccine to prioritize getting the first shot to as many at-risk people as possible.

On February 7, South Africa halted its use of the AstraZeneca-Oxford vaccine after preliminary laboratory studies showed it offered only minimal protection against the virus variant that is dominant in that country. The finding was later confirmed by a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine showing that the vaccine does not protect against mild to moderate cases of COVID-19 caused by the South African variant. Early data suggested that the vaccine will still effectively protect against the variant that is prevalent throughout the U.K.

Safety: On June 9, a study published in the journal Nature Medicine found that people who have received the AstraZeneca vaccine have a slightly increased risk of a bleeding disorder. The analysis of 2.53 million people who received the vaccine found an incidence of 1.13 cases per 100,000 vaccines. Researchers said the benefits of getting the vaccine outweigh the risks. The study echoes and earlier safety review conducted by the European Medicines Agency.

Distribution: Project members say their candidate can be stored at temperatures seen in common refrigeration. Oxford and AstraZeneca expect to produce up to three billion doses of the vaccine in 2021.

On December 30, the U.K. announced changes to its vaccine delivery plan: With COVID-19 infections spreading rapidly, the country said it would prioritize delivering the first dose of either vaccine to as many at-risk people as possible, based on data provided to and released by health regulators. It will do so by delaying administration of the second dose of the AstraZeneca-Oxford drug. A similar rule was issued for the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, but regulators didn’t provide data to back the new regimen. Overall, the U.K. still recommends that recipients receive two doses of either vaccine for maximum benefit.

On February 15, the WHO listed the AstraZeneca-Oxford vaccine for emergency use, which will allow the agency to begin rolling out the vaccine in low-income countries through the COVAX Facility. Reuters reports that COVAX plans to deliver nearly two billion doses to more than 90 low- and middle-income countries by the end of the year.

On April 26, the Associated Press reported that the U.S. plans to share its AstraZeneca vaccine stockpile with the rest of the world—up to 60 million doses. The U.S. has not yet authorized the company’s vaccine for use.

The European Union also said on April 26 that it is suing AstraZeneca over the delays in shipping hundreds of millions of doses of its vaccine. According to the New York Times, AstraZeneca has said it will only be able to deliver a third of the 300 million doses it had promised Europe by the end of June. The lawsuit will hinge on whether AstraZeneca can prove it has made its “best efforts” to deliver the doses on time, according to the terms of the contract.

Clinical trials status: On December 11, AstraZeneca and Russia’s Gamaleya Institute announced plans to work together to study the possibility of combining Oxford’s vaccine with Gamaleya’s Sputnik V vaccine. Since both use the same adenovirus, researchers will investigate whether a combination of the two will improve efficacy.

The AstraZeneca-Oxford vaccine’s phase three trial aims to recruit up to 50,000 volunteers in Brazil, the U.K., the United States, and South Africa. On September 8, AstraZeneca paused the trials for a safety review due to an adverse reaction in one participant in the U.K., which the company described as a “routine action.” After an investigation by independent regulators, the trials resumed in the U.K., Brazil, South Africa, and India in September and resumed in the U.S. a month later.

Name: Abdala

Who: A government-run research institute in Cuba.

What: A protein subunit vaccine that’s administered in three doses.

Latest news: On June 22, Cuba announced that the Abdala vaccine is 92.28 percent effective against COVID-19. Data has not yet been released, but Reuters reports that Cuban regulators are expected to grant emergency use authorization to both the Abdala and Soberana-02 vaccines. However, the country has already begun administering the two vaccines among health workers as part of an “intervention study.”

Clinical trials: In March Cuba launched phase three clinical trials for the Abdala vaccine among 48,000 volunteers.

Name: Soberana-02

Who: A government-run research institute in Cuba.

What: A conjugate vaccine that uses part of the virus spike protein.

Latest news: On June 22, the New York Times reported that the Soberana-02 vaccine was 62 percent effective at preventing COVID-19 after two of its three required doses. Results for all three doses is expected within weeks.

Clinical trials: On March 4, Cuba became the first country in Latin America to announce the launch of a phase three clinical trial for one of its COVID-19 vaccines, the Miami Herald reported. The Cuban government hasn’t released any data from early-stage trials but said the phase three trial will be conducted in Havana among 44,000 volunteers.

Name: CVnCoV

Who: A German biopharmaceutical company in partnership with Bayer, a German multinational pharmaceutical company.

What: An mRNA vaccine that’s administered in two doses taken 28 days apart.

Latest news: On June 16, CureVac reported disappointing results from a study of its clinical trials showing its vaccine is 47 percent effective in preventing COVID-19, falling short of the company’s own criteria for success. CureVac attributed its results to the virus variants that are now circulating. It sequenced 124 cases of COVID-19 among clinical trial participants and found only one case was caused by the original SARS-CoV-2 virus and more than half were caused by variants of concern.

The New York Times reports that CureVac still intends to apply for approval from the European Medicines Agency. The company has a deal to provide 405 million doses to the European Union if its vaccine is authorized.

Approval status: Not approved for use.

Efficacy and safety: On January 11, CureVac announced that preliminary results show its vaccine prompted robust antibody and T-cell responses in rhesus macaques.

Clinical trials status: On December 14, CureVac announced it had begun enrolling participants in a phase 2b/3 study to assess its vaccine’s safety and efficacy in more than 35,000 participants in Europe and Latin America. One week later, the company launched a separate phase three trial in healthcare workers in Mainz, Germany.

Name: None

Who: A global biopharmaceutical company in partnership with a global healthcare company.

What: An adjuvant-supported recombinant-protein vaccine.

Latest news: On May 27, Sanofi and GSK announced that they’ve started to enroll participants in a phase three clinical study of their COVID-19 vaccine candidate. The study will test the safety and efficacy of the vaccine in 35,000 volunteers ages 18 and older in the U.S., Asia, Africa, and Latin America. The study’s broad geographic range will allow the companies to evaluate the vaccine’s efficacy against the virus variants that are circulating around the world.

Approval status: Not approved for use.

Efficacy and safety: On May 17, the companies announced that a study of their phase two clinical trials shows the vaccine generated a high level of neutralizing antibodies with no safety concerns.

Name: None

Who: An Indian vaccine and pharmaceutical company in partnership with the Baylor College of Medicine.

What: A protein-based subunit vaccine that requires two doses administered 28 days apart.

Latest news: On April 26, the companies announced that they have received approval to launch a phase three clinical trial of their vaccine candidate. The trial will evaluate the efficacy and safety of the vaccine among more than 1,200 volunteers ages 18 to 80 at 15 sites across India.

Approval status: Not approved for use.

Distribution: If the vaccine is approved for use, it will be distributed through the COVAX Facility, a global effort to ensure the equitable distribution of COVID-19 vaccines.

Name: VLA2001

Who: A vaccine developer based in France.

What: An inactivated virus, adjuvant-supported vaccine, with two doses administered three weeks apart.

Latest news: On April 21, Valneva announced the launch of phase three clinical trials to study the safety and efficacy of its COVID-19 vaccine. The trial will compare the efficacy of the vaccine to that of AstraZeneca’s conditionally approved vaccine. Approximately 4,000 volunteers will receive two doses of either vaccine to determine the immune response of each. Valneva says it hopes to file for regulatory approval in the fall of 2021.

Approval status: Not approved for use.

Safety and efficacy: On April 6, Valneva announced that a study of its phase 1 and 2 clinical trials show that its vaccine prompted a strong immune response with no safety concerns.

Name: None

Who: A China-based pharmaceuticals company.

What: An inactivated vaccine that requires two doses administered 28 days apart.

Latest news: On May 14, China approved the Kangtai shot for emergency use, just weeks after the vaccine launched its phase three clinical trials.

Approval status: Authorized for emergency use in China.

Clinical trials: Kangtai’s phase three clinical trials are underway, testing the vaccine’s safety and efficacy among 28,000 adults age 18 and older.

Name: CoVLP

Who: A Canadian biotechnology company, in partnership with British multinational pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline.

What: A plant-derived recombinant vaccine with an adjuvant that requires two doses administered 21 days apart.

Latest news: On March 16, Medicago and GlaxoSmithKline announced that their vaccine had entered phase three clinical trials to study its safety and efficacy in up to 30,000 volunteers in 10 countries, including Canada and the U.S. In November 2020, the companies said that their phase one clinical trials showed the vaccine produced antibody and T-cell responses with no severe adverse events reported.

Name: COVAXIN

Who: An Indian biotechnology company, in collaboration with the Indian Council of Medical Research and the National Institute of Virology.

What: An inactivated vaccine, which requires two doses that are administered 28 days apart.

Latest news: On March 3, Bharat Biotech announced that an interim analysis of its phase three trial showed its vaccine is 81-percent effective in protecting against COVID-19 after the second dose. A separate preliminary study also indicated that the vaccine produces antibodies that can neutralize the virus variant that originated in the U.K.

Approval status: Authorized for emergency use in India.

Distribution: India has the second-highest caseload in the world—only behind the U.S.—with more than 11 million people infected. As a result, the country is embarking on an ambitious plan to vaccinate 300 million frontline workers and vulnerable people by August 2021.

On January 12, Bharat Biotech announced that it had signed an agreement with Precisa Medicamentos, a Brazilian pharmaceutical company, to sell COVAXIN in Brazil.

Efficacy and safety: On January 21, The Lancet published interim findings from COVAXIN’s phase one study that showed the vaccine elicited an immune response in participants. The study identified only one serious adverse event, and it was unrelated to the vaccine.

Clinical trials status: On November 16, Bharat Biotech announced it has begun phase three trials involving 26,000 participants at more than 25 centers across India.

Name: Sputnik V

Who: A Russian research institution, in partnership with the state-run Russian Direct Investment Fund.

What: A viral vector vaccine that uses two strains of adenovirus and requires a second injection after 21 days to boost the immune response.

Latest news: On March 4, the European Union announced that it is starting a rolling review of the Sputnik V vaccine. The announcement came after a handful of European countries said they would consider approving the vaccine without E.U. approval. Hungary has already authorized the vaccine.

Approval status: In August, Russia cleared the Sputnik V vaccine for widespread use and claimed it as the first registered COVID-19 vaccine on the market—before the vaccine’s phase three trials had begun and despite the lack of published evidence at the time. It has since been approved in Belarus, Argentina, Venezuela, and other countries.

Efficacy and safety: On February 2, the medical journal The Lancet published the results of a phase three trial in Moscow that found the Sputnik V vaccine is safe and 91.6-percent effective in preventing COVID-19. The study, which involved more than 22,000 participants, also showed the vaccine is 100-percent effective in preventing moderate or severe cases of the disease, as no such cases were confirmed at least 21 days after receiving the first dose.

Distribution: Global demand for Sputnik V has soared in the weeks since the vaccine’s efficacy data was published. The vaccine makers have reached deals with more than 40 countries in Latin America, Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa. On February 19, the African Union announced that Russia has offered them 300 million doses of the Sputnik V vaccine, which they will make available starting in May.

Clinical trials status: On December 11, the Gamaleya Institute and biopharmaceutical company AstraZeneca announced they will work together to study the possibility of combining Sputnik V with the candidate that AstraZeneca has developed with the University of Oxford. Since both candidates use the same adenovirus, researchers will investigate whether combining them will improve efficacy of the AstraZeneca vaccine, which is 70.4-percent effective in preventing COVID-19.

Name: CoviVac

Who: A Russian research center.

What: An inactivated vaccine given in two doses, 14 days apart.

Approval status: On February 20, Russia approved the CoviVac vaccine for use even though late-stage clinical trials to test its safety and efficacy have not yet begun. Reuters reports that early-stage trials with 200 participants showed the vaccine has no side effects.

Distribution: The Chumakov Center plans to produce half a million doses per month.

Name: Bacillus Calmette-Guerin BRACE trial

Who: The largest child health research institute in Australia, in collaboration with the University of Melbourne.

What: For nearly a hundred years, the Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine has been used to prevent tuberculosis by exposing patients to a small dose of live bacteria. Evidence has emerged over the years that this vaccine may boost the immune system and help the body fight off other diseases as well.

Latest news: On November 10, a U.S. study published in the Journal of Clinical Investigation found that among 6,201 healthcare workers in Los Angeles, those who had previously received the BCG vaccine reported symptoms of COVID-19 less often than those who hadn’t, a finding that study authors say strengthens the case for further research. In October, the U.K. launched a study of the BCG vaccine that is part of the Australian-led trials. The study is seeking to recruit 1,000 frontline health-care workers to test the vaccine’s effectiveness against COVID-19.

Clinical trials status: In April, researchers from the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute began a series of randomized controlled trials that will test whether BCG might work on the coronavirus as well. They aim to recruit 10,000 healthcare workers in the study. In an April 2020 scientific brief, the World Health Organization found that there is no current evidence that the BCG vaccine protects people against infection with the coronavirus.

Approval status: Not approved for use.

Name: Ad5-nCoV

Who: A Chinese biopharmaceutical company.

What: A viral vector vaccine.

Latest news: A Russian pharmaceutical company Petrovax announced that more than 90 percent of participants in Russian trials of Ad5-nCoV had high levels of antibodies, but few additional details are currently available. Indonesia has ordered 20 million doses of CanSino’s vaccine; Mexico signed an agreement to buy 35 million doses.

Approval status: Though the company was still technically in phase two of its trial, on June 25, CanSino became the first company to receive limited approval to use its vaccine in people. The Chinese government has approved the vaccine for military use only, for a period of one year.

Efficacy and safety: Preliminary results from phase two trials, published in The Lancet, have shown that the vaccine produces “significant immune responses in the majority of recipients after a single immunisation.” There were no serious adverse reactions documented.

Clinical trials status: On December 21, CanSino announced that it has recruited more than 20,000 participants for its phase three trials in Pakistan, Russia, Mexico, and Chile. On August 15, Russian biopharmaceutical company Petrovax announced it had launched the first phase three clinical trial of Ad5-nCoV.

Name: EpiVacCorona

Who: A Russian biotechnology institute.

What: A protein vaccine, namely it uses small fragments of viral antigens called peptides to produce an immune response.

Latest news: On January 13, Russian state news agency TASS reported that of the more than 2,000 volunteers who had received both doses of EpiVacCorona’s two-dose regimen, none reported adverse reactions from the vaccine. In November, Russia launched mass trials of its EpiVacCorona vaccine; the trials will inoculate 150 people over the age of 60 and 3,000 volunteers over the age of 18.

Approval status: On October 14, Russia granted regulatory approval to EpiVacCorona even though the vaccine candidate has not published any results and has not entered phase three of its clinical trials. It is the second vaccine candidate that Russia has approved for use despite a lack of published evidence about its safety and efficacy.

Name: ZyCoV-D

Who: An Indian pharmaceutical company.

What: A DNA-based vaccine that is delivered by a skin patch.

Latest news: On January 3, Zydus Cadila announced it had received approval from Indian regulators to launch a phase three trial testing the safety and efficacy of its vaccine in about 30,000 volunteers.

Approval status: Not approved for use.

Safety and efficacy: In December, Zydus Cadila said that a combined phase one/two study of its vaccine showed it was safe and prompted an immunogenic response, but the company did not share any data.

Name: ZF2001

Who: A Chinese biopharmaceutical company, in partnership with the Institute of Microbiology at the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

What: A subunit vaccine that uses pieces of protein from a pathogen to trigger an immune response.

Latest news: In November, Chinese health officials announced the launch of phase three trials for the Anhui Zhifei vaccine. The trials—which will recruit 29,000 volunteers aged 18 or older—are expected to be conducted in China, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Ecuador.

Approval status: Not approved for use.

Name: QazCovid-in

Who: A research institute in Kazakhstan.

What: An inactivated vaccine.

Latest news: On January 14, Kazakh health officials granted a nine-month temporary registration to the QazCovid-In vaccine, despite a lack of data from its ongoing phase three trials. Prime Minister Askar Mamin has previously said he expects mass vaccination to begin in March 2021.

Approval status: Granted temporary registration in Kazakhstan.

Clinical trials status: In December, the institute announced that the Kazakh Ministry of Health approved the launch of phase three trials, which will assess the vaccine’s safety and efficacy in 3,000 volunteers.

Name: Unknown

Who: A Chinese research institute.

What: An inactivated vaccine that requires two doses taken 14 days apart.

Latest news: In December, researchers launched phase three clinical trials to test the efficacy and safety of the vaccine in 34,020 participants in Malaysia and Brazil.

Safety and efficacy: Preliminary results of the vaccine’s phase one trial showed that it prompted an immune response with no serious adverse incidents.

Editor's note: This story was originally published on July 31. It is regularly updated as developments occur.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Although NASA has enjoyed a string of high-profile successes on the red planet, sometimes Mars throws scientists a curveball. The Perseverance rover came up empty during its first attempt to collect a sample of Martian rock last week, and NASA thinks the rock likely crumbled into rubble and dust rather than remaining in one piece.

Now the rover is trekking southward to its next sample target, where the team plans to try drilling again in early September.

During the first attempt, the multi-step sampling process initially seemed to progress smoothly. The rover bored into the red planet, closed the sample tube with an airtight seal, and safely deposited the tube into a module in the rover's belly on August 6. "The system itself worked perfectly," says Jennifer Trosper, project manager for the Perseverance mission.

But as the team teased through the data, they realized the tube was empty. During tests conducted on Earth, some of the cores were smaller than others, but "we've always gotten some sample in the tube," Trosper says. The rocks near the next sample site may be more similar to some of those they tested on Earth, hopefully improving the odds of success.

The failed sample attempt joins several past missions that have struggled to dig into the red rocks of Mars as planned. “This is kind of par for the course” when it comes to Mars missions, Trosper says. A self-hammering heat probe on Mars's InSight lander, for example, only managed to sink an inch or so deep into the surface before popping back out.

"Once more, Mars shows us that it is not Earth," Trosper says.

The mystery of the missing core

While Mars is now a frigid desert, signs of past water abound, from winding stream channels to sprawling river deltas. Perseverance touched down on Mars in February 2021 to search for clues to ancient life in a 28-mile-wide crater that was probably once filled with a freshwater lake.

A key part of this search is collecting the first pristine samples from Mars's surface. Equipped with 43 ultraclean sample tubes, the Perseverance rover should collect dozens of samples across the crater floor and up through an ancient river delta. The rover would then cache the samples in a yet-undetermined place so that a future mission can scoop them up and return them to Earth.

The sampling process is a "choreographed and coordinated" series of events that requires a total of 11 days, explains Vivian Sun of NASA's JPL, who is co-leading the mission's first science campaign. The scientists begin by abrading a patch of the surface, which clears away any dust or coatings and allows them to study the makeup of the underlying rock.

The final stage of Perseverance’s first sample attempt began the evening of August 5, after the team issued commands for the automated process to start. They awoke the following morning at 2 a.m. PT to check Perseverance's progress, discovering it had successfully drilled into the surface. An image showed exactly what they expected: a hole surrounded by a ring of sand known as tailings. "It was beautiful," Trosper says.

Around 8:30 a.m., the team received images of a successfully sealed tube inside the rover. But then they looked at the rest of the data.

Before the tube was sealed, an arm inside the rover pushed it upward into a sensor to measure the volume of material—revealing nothing inside. The team then downloaded images looking down into the tube to confirm that it was empty.

"We started to scratch our heads," Trosper says.

Over the next two days, the team set to work figuring out what went wrong. Snapshots peering down the sample hole revealed a suspicious pile of dust at the bottom. Measurements of the hole's depth and images of the surrounding area further suggested that the rover hadn't simply dropped the small cylinder rock. The drill, it seems, instead ground the unexpectedly crumbly rock to bits.

"The hardware performed as commanded, but the rock did not cooperate this time," writes Louise Jandura, NASA's chief engineer for Perseverance's sampling and caching, in a mission blog post.

Mars's uncooperative rocks

This isn't the first time that Martian rocks haven't acted the way scientists expected. NASA's Phoenix lander, which touched down on Mars in 2008, initially struggled to scoop the planet’s rusty red regolith into a device that heats the rocks to sniff out their components. The material was more “sticky” than expected, and the rocks didn't easily fall from the scoop. Scientists still debate why, Trosper says.

Another issue involved the self-hammering heat probe, or “mole,” on NASA's InSight lander, which is currently studying the interior of Mars. Each time the mole attempted to dig itself in, it would pop back out again. NASA finally gave up in January 2021 after several hammering attempts, citing a lack of friction that prevented the probe from penetrating more than an inch or so underground.

During the months of preparation before Perseverance launched, the team took more than a hundred practice samples on Earth to try and ensure the process would go as planned. But when designing missions to other worlds such as Mars, Trosper says scientists often talk about the “unknown unknowns”—situations when something totally unexpected happens. The ground-up sample is just that.

Such surprises provide an opportunity to discover something new. "One of the beauties of the work that we do,” Trosper says, “is making some of those ‘unknown unknowns’ known."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As the United States battles a fourth surge of COVID-19, scientists are learning much about the Delta variant that wasn’t known when it was first reported in India in March: it is one of the most infectious respiratory viruses known, it causes more severe COVID-19 than other variants, and it is more likely to evade antibodies.

Evidence of all these traits is clear. The Delta variant has caused a sharp rise in COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths across the U.S. and the rest of the world. Driven by relaxed social distancing and mask guidelines, poor vaccine uptake in parts of the U.S., and lack of availability elsewhere, Delta has rapidly become the dominant variant in the U.S., causing more than 93 percent of new infections, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It has also spread to more than 135 countries, according to the World Health Organization.

The secret to Delta’s success is the ease with which it spreads. The CDC estimates that Delta can be as infectious as chicken pox and is only slightly less contagious than measles, which is considered one of the most transmissible viruses. Now the Delta variant is spreading like wildfire through the South, particularly in Louisiana, which has one of the lowest vaccination rates in the country; only 37 percent of the population is fully vaccinated compared to 50 percent nationally. In the U.S., daily cases are now averaging 100,000, a nine-fold jump from mid-June.

“It's surprising the extent of how infectious this particular variant is, and how well it can then replicate in the upper respiratory tract. Just the increased infectivity of this Delta variant has sort of increased our concern relative to what was there for the Alpha variant, which was increased relative to the original virus,” says Mehul Suthar, a virologist at Emory University.

Because the Delta variant is so much more contagious than previous variants, CDC issued new guidelines on July 27, 2021, which recommend that even after vaccination, people should “wear a mask indoors in public if you are in an area of substantial or high transmission.”

A vastly more transmissible virus

To track how easily an infectious disease such as COVID-19 spreads, epidemiologists use a metric called the basic reproductive number or R0 (pronounced “R naught”). R0 is the average number of susceptible people that each infected person is expected to infect. It is difficult to be certain about the R0 for ancient pandemics, but for the 1918 influenza pandemic, the average infected person is thought to have passed the disease to between two and three people, giving it an R0 of between 2.0 and 3.0. The first SARS coronavirus epidemic of 2002, has an R0 of three; for the second coronavirus epidemic—Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) first identified in 2012—R0 was between 0.69 to 1.3.

Now the CDC estimates that people infected with Delta pass the virus to between five and 9.5 people. This is higher than the original virus identified in Wuhan, China, which had an R0 between 2.3 and 2.7, and the Alpha variant which had an R0 between four and five. Delta can be as infectious as chicken pox, which has an R0 between 9 and 10.

If R0 is larger than one, the number of infected people will keep growing exponentially until all susceptible people have either died or recovered and herd immunity is reached. If R0 is less than one the outbreak will likely fizzle out on its own.

For the original SARS-CoV-2, herd immunity could be reached when around 67 percent of the population was immune—either through natural infection or vaccination. “For Delta, those thresholds we estimate being well over 80 percent, maybe approaching 90 percent,” Ricardo Franco, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Alabama at Birmingham said at a press briefing organized by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.

A higher viral load

Delta is not only more transmissible than previous SARS-CoV-2 variants, it can also cause more severe disease. People infected with the Delta variant harbor about 1,000 times the number of viral particles (which experts call the “viral load”) in their nasal swab compared to those infected with another strain, “which is an enormous increase,” says Eric Topol, the founder and director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, who was not involved in this study.

One reason for this is that the Delta variant replicates more quickly in the nose. A study, not yet peer reviewed has shown that the Delta variant took an average of four days to reach detectable levels after exposure to a sick person, compared to about six days for the original Wuhan virus.

Even after vaccination, Delta infections produced a 10-fold higher viral load than non-Delta infections. In fact several recent studies, none peer reviewed yet, show that vaccinated people carry the same viral load as the unvaccinated. “We are seeing infections and seeing the large number of people being infected by a single case, which is quite worrying. It means that the virus is highly transmissible and is able to avoid … vaccine-induced immunity,” said Ravindra Gupta, a clinical microbiologist at the University of Cambridge, who led the study that is not yet peer reviewed.

Delta is also better at destroying cells because of a mutation at position 681 of its spike protein, which is fast becoming common in other variants around the globe and is thought to be an evolutionary game changer. This P681R mutation makes it easier for Delta and the related Kappa variants to invade the host cell by fusing infected cells into structures called syncytium, which is a way of accelerating infection. Syncytia are also formed by other viruses such as HIV. “We found in cell culture experiments that Delta variant shows bigger syncytia when compared to SARS-CoV-2,” explained Kei Sato, a virologist at The University of Tokyo, Japan.

The Delta variant has also undergone multiple mutations in its spike protein that seem to improve the virus’s ability to bind to the ACE2 receptor and evade the immune response.

Breakthrough infections and boosters

The good news is that a complete dose of the currently authorized COVID-19 vaccines remains effective. “All the vaccines work pretty well," said Jeff Kwong, an infectious diseases epidemiologist at the University of Toronto. "And the vaccines were more protective against the severe outcomes compared to symptomatic infection,” Kwong has shown in a study, not yet peer reviewed, the effectiveness of Pfizer, Moderna, and AstraZeneca vaccines against symptomatic infection, hospitalization, or death between December 2020 and May 2021.

Many studies have shown that Moderna and Pfizer vaccines still protect against Delta, though not as well as against previous variants. Unvaccinated people make up more than 90 percent of confirmed new cases among the states that track case data along with vaccination status.

“[Vaccines] do reduce the risk of serious outcome such as hospitalization quite substantively,” says Aziz Sheikh, a primary care specialist at The University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK who showed that Delta caused twice as many hospitalizations than the Alpha variant, which caused more severe illness than the original SARS-CoV-2. “Overall, they are working.”

The CDC estimates that COVID-19 vaccination reduces the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection by eight-fold and the risk of getting ill, being hospitalized, or dying by 25-fold.

But inadequate testing nationwide makes it impossible to know the true extent of the spread of Delta and other variants. When there is high transmission of Delta in the community, even fully vaccinated people are vulnerable to so-called “vaccine breakthrough infections,” which the CDC defines as when genetic material or protein from SARS-CoV-2 is detectable in the nasal swab more than 14 days after a person has received the recommended dose of an FDA-authorized COVID-19 vaccine.

Two doses of the AstraZeneca and Pfizer vaccines are estimated to be 60 and 88 percent effective, respectively, against symptomatic disease caused by Delta. The majority of vaccines administered in the U. S. (Moderna and Pfizer) require two shots for maximum protection. These vaccines are much less effective against Delta after just a single jab, says Olivier Schwartz, head of the Virus and Immunity Unit at Institut Pasteur, Paris, who led a study that showed that a single dose of either AstraZeneca and Pfizer vaccines or previous infection barely inhibit Delta variant.

Prompted by the data on the reduced efficacy against new variants such as Delta, Pfizer is seeking authorization of a booster dose of its vaccine. Moderna is also testing an updated mRNA vaccine booster dose. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is expected to finalize a COVID-19 vaccine booster plan soon.

The single shot J&J vaccine has been shown to be effective against the Delta variant. But a study, not yet peer reviewed, has shown that although all vaccines triggered the development of antibodies that were somewhat less effective against Delta, the reduction was much steeper for J&J than for mRNA vaccines. This study is consistent with similar ones in monkeys and people where two doses of the J&J vaccine show greater efficacy compared with one dose.

To compensate for the lower efficacy of the J&J shot against Delta, people in San Francisco who received this vaccine can now request a “supplemental dose” of an mRNA vaccine. Germany will begin offering mRNA vaccine booster shots in September to a range of people considered vulnerable. However, the demand for boosters is magnifying the inequities in COVID-19 vaccine availability between rich and poor countries. “WHO is calling for a moratorium on boosters until at least the end of September to enable at least 10 percent of the population of every country to be vaccinated,” said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of WHO in a press briefing.

Some preliminary data from Israel suggests that efficacy of the Pfizer vaccine might decline within six months. But this is not surprising since vaccine designers knew that making the antibody response long-lasting was going to be a challenge. Antibodies against the first SARS and MERS viruses declined after one to two years. For coronaviruses that cause the common cold, protection ranges from three to six months, and almost always less than a year.

A study in the U.S. has shown that, following the second dose of the Moderna vaccine, neutralizing antibodies remain high in the blood for six months. “Those antibodies that are there, for the most part, neutralize many of these variants [including Delta]. However, these antibody responses do wane over time,” explains Emory's Suthar, who led the U.S. study.

Vaccines have prevented millions of infections

Vaccination may have saved approximately 279,000 lives in the U.S. and, by the end of June 2021, prevented up to 1.25 million hospitalizations, according to The Commonwealth Fund’s computer models. Similarly in England the vaccines may have prevented about 30,300 deaths, 46,300 hospitalizations, and 8.15 million infections. The aggressive vaccination campaign in Israel is estimated to have caused a 77 percent drop in cases and a 68 percent decline in hospitalizations from the peak of the pandemic in January, 2021.

Although COVID-19 vaccines in the U.S. are free and effective, only 49.9 percent of the population—just over 165 million people—are fully vaccinated as of August 4, 2021. Vaccination rates vary widely nationwide, and many counties in southern states, including Louisiana, Florida, Arkansas, Mississippi, and Alabama, have low vaccination rates that are now fueling raging outbreaks of the Delta variant.

While more than 347 million COVID-19 shots have been administered in the U.S. since distribution began on December 14, 2020, there are still about 93 million Americans age 12 and older who are eligible for a shot but have not yet received one. There are also 48 million children under the age of 12 who are unvaccinated because they are still not eligible. That makes it difficult to predict how long this current surge will last.

No vaccine is 100 percent effective

With more than half the population incompletely vaccinated, the Delta variant can continue to infect and evolve, leading to more vaccine breakthrough infections than expected and possibly yielding new infectious variants.

Evidence is emerging that breakthrough Delta cases may be as transmissible as Delta infection in unvaccinated individuals. “The vaccines are protective, but obviously a lot of vaccinated people are also getting exposed, some from the unvaccinated and [some] from each other. And so, it's testing the vaccine capabilities,” says Topol.

But most breakthrough cases, which occur in less than one percent of fully vaccinated people, cause mild or no symptoms. Of the more than 164 million people fully vaccinated nationwide there were only 7,525 patients with COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections who were either hospitalized or died in the U.S. through August 2, 2021.

Breakthrough infections are more likely among health care workers who are in frequent contact with infected patients, older age vaccinated people, and those with weakened immunity, such as people with cancer and prior organ transplant. Breakthrough infections are also more likely to occur in situations of close contact, such as in large public gatherings, restaurants, cramped working spaces, and outdoor or indoor parties.

While vaccines can effectively slow down the contagious pandemic by increasing the herd immunity, preventive measures such as social distancing and masking are proven strategies along with vaccination in curbing the spread of the virus. “Even if people have been vaccinated, they can still get infected and can still spread the virus in the population. So that means variants have the chance to get more mutations or to evolve. It is important for people to stop giving the virus [that] chance,” says Sato.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After months of encouraging trendlines, July’s dramatic spike in global COVID-19 infections has dimmed the proverbial light at the end of the pandemic tunnel.

In May, coronavirus cases were declining across the U.S., parts of Europe, and the Middle East as vaccination rates rose, spurring an easing of social and travel restrictions and a wave of business reopenings. But in the U.S., at least, any celebration was short-lived. By July, vaccination rates flatlined and highly transmissible coronavirus variants swept the nation, forcing health officials to reimpose masking recommendations and call for increased inoculations.

The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic on March 11, 2020. After 17 grueling and chaotic months, weary people are wondering: When will the pandemic finally end?

“Even among the scientific community, you would get really different answers,” says Rachael Piltch-Loeb, a researcher and fellow with the Emergency Preparedness Research, Evaluation & Practice Program at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. “There is no one definition of what the end of a pandemic means.”

A pandemic is by definition a global crisis. Lifting some U.S. public health measures and interventions “gave people a sense that the panic was waning,” Piltch-Loeb says. That euphoria blinded many to the worldwide reality, which remains bleak.

“Until this [virus] is controlled or more limited globally, it’s not going away,” Piltch-Loeb says. That means declaring the pandemic’s “end” may be a distant goal, requiring different conditions depending on who’s asked.

Where do diseases go?

When the worldwide spread of a disease is brought under control in a localized area, it’s no longer a pandemic but an epidemic, according to the WHO. If COVID-19 persists globally at what the WHO judges to be “expected or normal levels,” the organization will then re-designate the disease “endemic.”

At that stage, SARS-CoV-2 will become a circulating virus that’s “less consequential as we build immunity,” says Saad Omer, an epidemiologist and director of the Yale Institute for Global Health. (Read more about how we’ll live with COVID-19 as an endemic disease.)

Only two diseases in recorded history that affect humans or other animals have ever been eradicated: smallpox, a life-threatening disease for people that covers bodies in painful blisters, and rinderpest, a viral malady that infected and killed cattle. In both instances, intensive global vaccination campaigns brought new infections to a halt. The last confirmed case of rinderpest was detected in Kenya in 2001, while the last known smallpox case occurred in the U.K. in 1978.

Joshua Epstein, professor of epidemiology in the New York University School of Global Public Health and founding director of its Agent-Based Modeling Laboratory, argues that eradication is so rare that the word should be wiped from our disease vocabulary. Diseases “retreat to their animal reservoirs, or they mutate at low levels,” he says. “But they don’t typically literally disappear from the global biome.”

There is no one definition of what the end of a pandemic means.

Most causes of past pandemics are still with us today. More than 3,000 people caught the bacteria that cause both bubonic and pneumonic plague between 2010 and 2015, according to the WHO. And the virus behind the 1918 flu pandemic that ravaged the globe, killing at least 50 million people, ultimately morphed into less lethal variants, with its descendants becoming strains of the seasonal flu.

As with the 1918 flu, it’s likely the SARS-CoV-2 virus will continue to mutate, and the human immune system would eventually adapt to fend it off without shots—but not before many people fell ill and died. “Developing immunity the hard way is not a solution that we should be aspiring to,” Omer says.

Finding ways to slow the spread of a disease and manage its effects is by far the safer path, experts say. Today, for instance, pest control and advanced hygiene keep the plague at bay, while any new cases can be treated with antibiotics.

For other diseases, such as the flu, vaccines can also make a difference. The available COVID-19 vaccines are highly safe and effective, which means getting enough people vaccinated can end this pandemic faster and with lower mortality than natural infections alone.

Why we need vaccines for all

WHO Director Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus last week reinstated a goal of vaccinating at least 10 percent of every nation’s population by September, with the loftier goal of reaching 40 percent global inoculation by year’s end and 70 percent by mid-2022.

To date, though, just 28 percent of the world’s population has received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. And vaccine distribution remains wildly lopsided. The European Union has nearly three-fourths of its eligible population at least partially inoculated; the U.S. has vaccinated 68 percent of people 12 and older.

But other nations that have lost many people to COVID-19—including Indonesia, India, and many of the countries in Africa—are working at a much slower pace. That’s in part because Covax, the United-Nations-backed program to vaccinate the world, has struggled to acquire and deliver vaccines for the world’s poorest countries. This week, the WHO issued a plea for wealthy countries to donate vaccine doses to poorer nations before offering booster shots to their own populations.

Even in countries with sufficient supply, the pace of vaccinations is influenced by hesitancy and misinformation. In the U.S., the daily rate of new vaccinations has plateaued, slowing to an average of 615,000 injections a day, or an 82 percent decline from the peak of vaccine uptake on April 13. U.S. hospitals are filling up with patients as caseloads increase in unvaccinated areas.

With more opportunities to spread and mutate, the virus has developed new variants that are not only more contagious, but more evasive. Delta is the most contagious one detected so far. The variant was first detected in India, where it helped drive one of the world’s worst surges in April. More recently, Delta contributed to a dramatic outbreak in Indonesia; antibody data suggest that more than half the population in the capital city of Jakarta have been infected. Initial research also shows the Lambda variant may be resistant to some vaccines.

The complexity of fighting a rapidly mutating virus “means that sometimes we take two steps forward and one step back,” says Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota.

Who gets to say it’s over?

There is another option, scientists and historians say: People will decide the pandemic is over, long before any governing body declares it so.

It’s happened in the past: The 1918 flu hit in the throes of World War I, and as the fighting ended, there was a “feeling of wanting to put that whole decade to bed, and to embrace a new future,” says Naomi Rogers, professor of the history of medicine and of history at Yale University. The public entered the “Roaring Twenties” despite the flu virus still circulating throughout the U.S. population.

If society attempts to declare an end to the pandemic before science does, we’d be accepting its severe outcomes—including death. That’s often been the case with past pandemics. The flu is no longer considered a pandemic and is now an endemic disease; between 12,000 and 61,000 people in the U.S. still die from the flu each year, based on CDC estimates.

“If we can bring the death count down to a certain level and resume our lives normally, one could say the pandemic has ‘ended’,” says Jagpreet Chhatwal, a decision scientist at the Massachusetts General Hospital Institute for Technology Assessment in Boston. Again, vaccines make a difference. COVID-19 deaths in the U.S. have been tamped down in highly-vaccinated areas.

Nationally, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will likely provide guidance on when the pandemic has reached endemic status in the U.S., says Piltch-Loeb. That in turn will offer a path back to some version of normal life, regardless of global declarations.

“We want to go back to what it was like before COVID,” says Andrew Azman, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. “It’s not going to take the WHO saying the pandemic is over for people to do that.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As the U.S. grapples with its troubled vaccine rollout, an alarming increase in coronavirus cases across the nation has resurfaced a long-simmering question: Do people who’ve already had COVID-19 need to be vaccinated?

Natural immunity is a powerful force against certain diseases, such as chickenpox and measles. Surviving a natural measles infection can yield immunity that is comparable—or in some cases, superior—to vaccination, says Ruth Karron, a pediatrician and professor at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore.

But first, of course, the patient has to survive.

It’s also not yet crystal clear whether immunity from contracting COVID-19 is as powerful as the protection of a vaccine. What is evident is that the available vaccines mount crucial defenses against severe disease and death—even against more contagious variants such as Delta. And research shows that even a single dose of an mRNA vaccine from Moderna or Pfizer-BioNTech boosts immunity for people who’ve had the disease.

“I would recommend to anyone who hasn’t been vaccinated to go ahead and get vaccinated as soon as they can,” says Allison Greaney, a researcher at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, adding that the vaccines “protect us so well against a very dangerous virus.”

More robust antibodies

At Fred Hutchinson, graduate student Greaney led a research team that published a recent study suggesting vaccines give people an important edge over natural immunity. The team looked at the antibodies of people who had recovered from COVID-19, as well as people who’d received two doses of the Moderna mRNA vaccine as part of the company’s phase one trial.

The researchers found that both groups generated antibodies that targeted the receptor binding domain, or RBD. As its name suggests, this part of the SARS-COV-2 virus helps it stick to and ultimately gain entry to human cells, causing an infection. If antibodies attach to the RBD instead, they can neutralize the virus.

The research revealed that the antibodies of recovered COVID-19 patients stuck mostly to an area of the RBD that includes the site E484—a portion of the virus that has mutated in some variants. By contrast, the antibodies in vaccinated people bound more broadly across the domain, allowing them to target areas that are still present in some variants, including Beta, Gamma, and Delta.

SARS-COV-2 takes “great pains” to mask its RBD, using molecular trickery to make the region hard for antibodies to find, because it’s the most vulnerable part of the virus, says Amy Hartman, an associate professor of infectious disease and microbiology at the University of Pittsburgh. But mRNA vaccines are built to target the RBD and send potent antibodies to it. And the new findings suggest that immunity from mRNA vaccines “seems to be more robust than natural immunity in many cases,” Greaney says.

Researchers already knew that COVID-19 vaccines “reliably induce antibody levels” that are as high or even higher than those of people who have recovered from severe cases of coronavirus, says Karron, who was not part of the new study. This Fred Hutchinson team’s work shows that vaccination “gives us both more antibodies and better antibodies,” she adds. “It’s a quantity and quality issue.”

So, why the debate?

Other research, however, makes the case that natural immunity to COVID-19 might be robust. A team of researchers evaluated 254 people up to eight months after they had recovered from COVID-19 and found they had “durable, broad-based immune responses.” That was true even for those who had suffered only mild disease, according to their study, which was published last month.

Scientists know that other diseases can confer lasting natural immunity. After a single chickenpox infection, a person will likely have life-long immunity against the itchy and sometimes-deadly disease. To get the same long-lasting immunity from a vaccine, that person would need two shots, given years apart.

But before chickenpox vaccines were developed, about 10,000 U.S. children and adults were hospitalized each year with the disease, with symptoms including lung and blood infections.

For SARS-CoV-2, “I can’t make the case that [vaccination or natural immunity] is necessarily better than the other based on any knowledge that I actually possess about this particular virus,” says Charlotte Cunningham-Rundles, the David S. Gottesman Professor of Immunology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

But she hastens to add: “I don't think anyone’s collected enough data to say that somebody who’s had this virus on their own does not need to get vaccinated.”

Karron also notes that one of the “great unsolved mysteries” of SARS-CoV-2 is why some people have asymptomatic or mild disease, while others are afflicted with severe infections. In the same vein, scientists are still struggling to understand when and why certain people will develop stronger immune responses than others.

For instance, says Hartman, studies have shown that some recovered patients can mount effective defenses against COVID-19, but antibody levels dropped rapidly in others who were infected. Scientists are still gathering data and racing to answer this key question and others, such as how long immunity lasts from vaccines or from natural infection.

With vaccination, most people are all but guaranteed to have a strong immune response—and that includes people who’ve already contracted COVID-19. Multiple studies have shown that even a single dose of an mRNA vaccine boosts antibody levels in recovered patients, giving them the same peak response that two shots afford people who haven’t had the disease.

Today, more than 97 percent of people hospitalized for COVID-19 in the U.S. are unvaccinated. And while a small percentage of vaccinated people have been infected with the virus, their cases are overwhelmingly mild. On Monday, U.S. Senator Lindsey Graham, who was vaccinated in December, announced that he had tested positive for COVID-19 after experiencing only mild symptoms. “I am very glad I was vaccinated,” the South Carolina Republican said in a statement, “because without vaccination, I am certain I would not feel as well as I do now. My symptoms would be far worse.”

The CDC reports 0.0018 percent of COVID-19 deaths from December 14, 2020, to July 19 were among the vaccinated. And that, experts say, is proof the vaccines work.

“For many pathogens, we’re a bit humble,” Karron says. For some diseases, such as HIV or malaria, “you don’t want to get infected at all,” she says. “But for a lot of pathogens—and especially for things like respiratory pathogens, like COVID-19—our goals are a little more modest. Our goal is really to prevent severe disease and death.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For months, scientists have been calling for mask mandates to control the spread of COVID-19, especially with the rise of the more contagious Delta variant. But some members of a pandemic-weary public have been pushing back on this idea.

This week, U.S. health officials met intense outcry when the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shifted course and changed its recommendations for wearing masks. The CDC is now urging people who live in high-transmission areas to wear masks indoors—even if they are fully vaccinated. Similarly, public ire is rising after an increasing number of companies and local governments unveiled plans for sweeping vaccine mandates.

Some politicians say the decisions to vaccinate and wear masks should be left up to individuals. And the new guidance from the CDC is just that: guidance. States, schools, and private companies must now decide whether to require face coverings in certain circumstances. In the meantime, masking up—or risking infection—remains a choice for many Americans.

People have had to weigh risks throughout the pandemic, and they’ve often come to drastically different conclusions. As the Delta and Lambda variants rage against a backdrop of social activities resuming, borders reopening, and schools offering in-person learning, people will continue to be presented with risks, and they will have to make decisions about what to do and what to avoid.

But in a world riddled with both obvious and subtle threats, danger can easily be misjudged, ignored, or disagreed upon. “It’s not just that different people see risk differently, but that the same person will react very differently to one danger than to another,” says Paul Slovic, a psychologist who studies risk, and founder of the nonprofit Decision Science Research Institute, based in Oregon.

Deciding which actions are risky is a constant cognitive challenge, says Valerie Reyna, co-director of the Center for Behavioral Economics and Decision Research at Cornell University. “It’s uncertain, it hasn’t happened yet, and it’s based on our best estimate, which changes over time as conditions change. That’s really hard,” she says.

Here, experts explain why humans struggle to assess risk, how the brain responds to risk, and how our need to weigh risks has changed during the ongoing pandemic.

Responding with intuition

Some researchers believe people have two ways of assessing risk and making decisions: a knee-jerk, emotional process—often called experiential or intuitive thinking—and a slower, more analytic mode. “Most of the time, we respond [with] our experiential system,” says Slovic. He’s quick to add that people can use both, “but the human brain is lazy. If we think we can respond to complex situations the easy way—with our feelings—then we go that way.”

That’s not always a bad thing. The analytic mode of reasoning is clunkier and more time consuming, often exemplified by “reason, mathematics, and cost-benefit analysis,” says Slovic. That kind of thinking is “important and powerful, but hard to do.” So, people evolved to assess risk quickly: After all, you don’t want to deliberate too long whether to run from a prowling lion or try and fight it off.

4:24

“If you’ve ever tried to compute the square root of 285, then you have an idea of how it feels to deliberate,” explains Ralf Schmälzle, a communication neuroscientist at Michigan State University. Deliberation “consumes a lot of working memory resources,” while intuition lets people arrive at an answer instantaneously.

And it mostly works: By using intuition, “we manage, we survive, we make it to the next year or through the next two decades,” Slovic says. “In a complex world that is dangerous, we do OK.” But, he adds, “there are times when we do terribly.”

In 2013, Schmälzle studied people’s risk perceptions of another viral threat: the H1N1 pandemic, colloquially known as the swine flu. Along with colleagues at the University of Konstanz in Germany, he asked about 130 people a variety of risk-related questions and divided participants into two groups: those who saw H1N1 as a risk, and those who didn’t.

The participants then watched a fact-based documentary about the swine flu as Schmälzle scanned their brain activity, measuring it with magnetic resonance imaging. The team found that the anterior cingulate cortex—the part of the brain often associated with processing threats—fired synchronously in the participants who already believed H1N1 posed a risk.

“People are noticing some kind of intuitive alarm signal” driven by emotion, he says.

When it comes to COVID-19, “if you lack this sort of intuitive aspect to the risk perception, then you will not see a need to wear a mask or get vaccinated,” says Slovic.

Beyond gut instinct

The theory that people use this so-called dual-systems risk analysis is “an excellent theory supported by a lot of data,” says Cornell University’s Reyna. However, it leaves out other major drivers of decision-making, she notes.

One is called optimistic bias, says Dickinson College social psychologist Marie Helweg-Larsen. This type of bias makes an individual feel like they are somehow exempted from the potential consequences. “We recognize that things can happen to people,” she says, but “we think that we are special. We think that we’re less likely to experience the negative consequences.”

For example, smokers know that cigarettes can be harmful to their health, but some may think their risk of lung cancer is less than that of other smokers, Helweg-Larsen says. “They think if they eat more vegetables, if they puff less on the cigarette, if they smoke healthier cigarettes,” that they can avoid the consequences of smoking, says Helweg-Larsen. “But eating more vegetables doesn’t lead you to not get lung cancer.”

If you are a person who has said that we should trust the science, try to hold on to that idea now.

The same optimistic bias may have played into how people gauge their COVID-19 risks: People who refuse to wear masks likely understand there’s a chance they could catch the coronavirus and even die from it—but they also think their personal risk is less than others’, she says.

“It’s easy to think that people are delusional,” Helweg-Larsen says, but it’s more akin to wearing rose-colored glasses. “It’s what we in psychology call ‘motivated cognition,’ meaning that we draw the conclusions that we wish to draw because it brings us outcomes that we would like.”

Optimism can be helpful, because many things humans do carry some risk. If people thought they would die in an accident every time they got into a car, no one would ever drive. “It would be really hard to navigate our daily lives if we were afraid of possible-but-small risks,” she says.

Consequences that excite people—either in terms of hope or fear—can also motivate people to take or avoid risks, Slovic says. A $100 million jackpot might compel someone to risk wasting money on a ticket even though the chance of winning is miniscule. Similarly, news of a deadly plane crash can make people more afraid to fly, even though it’s statically safer than driving.

A sense of control—or lack thereof—affects people’s ability to assess risk as well, Helweg-Larsen says. “We overestimate the extent to which we can control our outcomes,” she says. In the example of being afraid to fly, someone might overestimate the risk of a crash because they’re not flying the plane.

“It’s not that people think they could fly the plane. But it feels uncertain because they are not in control,” she says. “But it’s all an illusion, of course, because lots of accidents are not caused by the driver in your car.”

During the pandemic, “a lot of people are feeling anxious about entering into the world and relying on other people’s willingness to do the right thing, which has been a problem throughout the pandemic and is still the case now,” Helweg-Larsen says. “We want to control outcomes—and that’s why it feels even scarier.”

What's more, people can be influenced by direct experience with a particular danger—including a COVID-19 infection. A new study from the University of Alabama shows that people who got COVID-19 and recovered may be less likely to support mitigation efforts such as mask wearing and social distancing. By contrast, those with a friend or family member who contracted the disease were more in favor of mitigation measures.

Study co-author Wanyun Shao, an assistant professor of geography at the University of Alabama, suspects “that hearing ‘horror stories’ from others can evoke concern, while directly experiencing COVID can lower the concern as if the suspense is over.”

Freedom of choice

Researchers say there are ways we can better assess risks as the pandemic drags on. The most important, they agreed, is to continue to follow the science from credible sources. “If you are a person who has said that we should trust the science, try to hold on to that idea now,” says Helweg-Larsen.

It’s also important to recognize that judgments based on intuition often happen in a fraction of a second—but not every situation requires an immediate reaction. Instead, “it’s wise not to react instantly, but to pause and to reflect on the information you’re hearing,” Slovic says.

But with the end of the pandemic hanging in the balance, some public health officials are making the case that society as a whole might not be able to rely on people’s ability to assess risk and make the safest, smartest choices.

In recent weeks, local governments and many companies—including Facebook, Google, Netflix, Morgan Stanley, the Washington Post, and some 600 universities—have announced vaccine mandates. In the past, such mandates have proved pivotal in stamping out pandemics. Between 1919 and 1928, 10 U.S. states introduced vaccine mandates for smallpox, while four states prohibited mandates—and a February 2021 study includes data showing that cases of smallpox were 20 times higher in states that banned mandates than in states that enacted them.

“The problem with people attempting to do a cost-benefit analysis for getting vaccinated is that it sounds logical but people get it wrong,” says Helweg-Larson. “It is overwhelmingly better for most people to get vaccinated. The personal [and societal] benefits outweigh the costs.”

But psychologically, Helweg-Larson says, giving people the freedom of choice is best. “We are willing to limit and restrict people’s choices when our behavior harms other people,” she says. “That’s why we encourage quitting smoking and limit and restrict where you can smoke—but we do not outlaw smoking.”

In the case of COVID-19, she says, the choice could be get vaccinated or “put up with the inconvenience of regular testing and masking.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@National Geographic magazine. A version of this story appears in the March 2021 issue ofmagazine.

It’s 8:30 on a Saturday night in August. A gibbous moon hangs low in the sky, its glow no competition for the neon sign proclaiming GREYHOUND RACING and DERBY LANE.

About 300 people are scattered in the grandstands here in St. Petersburg, Florida, that once held thousands, murmuring as loudspeakers play big band and rockabilly. They fall silent when Frederick Davis leads the parade of dogs.

“TNT Sherlock,” says the announcer, calling for the first of the eight sleek animals as Davis halts them in front of the stands. Each dog wears a number attached to a snug vest known as a blanket. “Tailspin,” the announcer calls, “Charlotte York …”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Next, Davis, 41, and the eight handlers he supervises put the dogs in the starting box. A mechanical rabbit named Hare-son Hare zooms past, squeaking and shooting blue sparks. The doors fly open, and the greyhounds burst onto the track in a blur of acceleration. Their paws toss sand in the air as they gallop around the oval for 30 seconds, hitting speeds of up to 45 miles an hour.

Derby Lane, which opened in 1925, was once hailed as the Churchill Downs of greyhound racing. Back when the dogs were running last year, you could still get a hint of the glamour and excitement of the track’s glory days in the 20th century. Back then, the stands would be packed with fans in suits and hats. Babe Ruth and entertainer Sophie Tucker were visitors. Joe DiMaggio once left Marilyn Monroe in an idling car while he ran inside to place his bets.

Derby Lane was America’s oldest continuously operating greyhound racetrack, but in December 2020 it headed for its final stretch. Two years earlier, Florida had more greyhound tracks than any other state—11 out of 17 nationwide. By the end of 2020, it was down to three, with about 2,000 dogs still racing. Now those tracks are closed too.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

In 2018 Florida’s voters had the chance to approve a constitutional amendment—Amendment 13—to ban betting on greyhounds as of December 31, 2020. The racing industry bet on Floridians rejecting the amendment, but it passed by a wide margin, owing mostly to the growing national concern over the mistreatment of animals in the entertainment field, such as circuses.

Derby Lane’s last race was scheduled for December 27. Davis, a slender man with dreadlocks and a quick smile, was one of scores of employees whose future was uncertain. He’d been at the track for 14 years and considered it his ideal job.

“I love dogs,” Davis said, “and I love being outside.”

He was not the only Derby Lane employee wondering what would happen next.

“It’s a shame to have to shut down after 95 years,” said CEO Richard Winning, 64. His family has owned Derby Lane since it opened in 1925. With the Florida tracks closed, he warned, tracks elsewhere undoubtedly would follow. “In 20 years, will anyone even remember what greyhound racing was?”

This is the one thing on which he agrees with Carey Theil, whose Massachusetts-based advocacy group Grey2K USA spearheaded the drive for Amendment 13: Shut down Florida’s tracks, and there goes the industry.

“Florida really was the industry,” Theil says.

The gray-bearded Winning is a born storyteller. He started at the track 45 years ago, collecting half-dollars from the turnstiles. He remembers when the regulars included rakish gamblers named “the Flicker” and “Champagne Tony,” the track restaurant served a 37-ounce prime rib, and a live band played between races.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Winning says greyhounds are the only dog breed in the Bible. That’s sort of true. The King James Version of Proverbs 30:29-31 cites them as “comely in going.” (Scholars say the original Hebrew refers to Afghan hounds or salukis.) The king’s translators knew about greyhounds because of a then popular sport called coursing, in which two greyhounds race to catch a rabbit. Queen Elizabeth I loved it—hence greyhound racing’s nickname, the “sport of queens.”

Dog racing as we know it today originated with an American inventor named Owen P. Smith, who was moved by the grim deaths of the rabbits to come up with an alternative. Smith’s idea was to replace the live rabbit with a mechanical one. In 1910 he secured a patent for what he called the Inanimate Hare Conveyor.

“Nobody in the history of any sport brought about a change comparable to that worked by the inventor of the device, and yet no inventor in sports history is so little known,” Sports Illustrated commented in 1973.

Smith and two partners also designed the first modern greyhound track, the Blue Star Amusement Company, which opened in 1919 outside Oakland, California. It failed, as did several others, because it didn’t allow betting. Gambling, while popular, was illegal.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. 1 / 6 1 / 6 <p>In 1950, thousands of fans would gather at Derby Lane to watch the races from the grandstands.</p> In 1950, thousands of fans would gather at Derby Lane to watch the races from the grandstands. Photograph courtesy of Derby Lane Archives

The first successful track, the Miami Kennel Club, was one Smith and his partners opened in 1922 in a swampy Florida locale known as Humbuggus. It was so close to the Everglades that the owners employed a snake catcher to snag stray reptiles. The key to its success was the use of electric lights, according to Gwyneth Anne Thayer, author of Going to the Dogs, a book on greyhound racing and its place in popular culture. Lights meant that races could be run at night, when working people could attend. Amid Florida’s 1920s land boom, thousands of new residents sought evening entertainment. (The track later was converted to horse racing and renamed Hialeah Park.)

In 1925, on the other side of the state, Derby Lane opened under a cloud. The partners who built it ran out of money, so lumber magnate T.L. Weaver, Winning’s great-grandfather, took possession. He grew beans in the infield, track historian Louise Weaver says. Between races, he once had monkeys ride the dogs, their uniforms sewn to the greyhounds’ blankets so they couldn’t escape and the dogs couldn’t buck them off.

Although betting was illegal, the tracks “did something sneaky,” Winning said. “They sold shares in the dogs.” Winners would get a “dividend.” Losers would not. Other tracks ran “on the fix”—meaning they’d keep operating until raided and open again once the coast was clear.

In 1931, with the Great Depression bankrupting local governments, Florida legislators passed a bill to legalize and tax betting on the races. Governor Doyle Carlton, a devout Baptist, opposed it. Years later, he said gamblers offered him $100,000 to sign the bill. Instead, he vetoed it. State senators overrode his veto, making Florida the first state to legalize betting on dog races. Dog tracks then popped up in Tampa (1932), Orlando and Jacksonville (1935), Pensacola (1946), and Key West (1953).

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A newly adopted greyhound explores her new home. She was placed through GST's Sun State Greyhound Adoption, which is working to find homes for the hundreds of dogs needing homes once the track closes in December.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Greyhound racing became part of Florida’s sun-and-fun image. Mickey Mantle filmed a cigarette commercial at Derby Lane. Boxing champs and movie stars hung out at the tracks. The 1959 movie A Hole in the Head shows Frank Sinatra betting on Miami dog races.

Florida can be a sunny place full of shady people. The money involved in dog racing attracted plenty of them. Winning recalls Tampa mobster Santo Trafficante, Jr.’s minions placing bets at Derby Lane. Some mafiosi were more than customers. Charles “Lucky” Luciano and Meyer Lansky held an interest in South Florida dog tracks, says Scott Deitche, author of seven books on the Mafia.

Mob involvement sparked rumors about fixed races. Bettors said dogs were overfed to slow them down, or their toes cinched up with rubber bands to hamper their ability to run, or they were drugged to make them faster or slower.

Doping remained a problem into dog racing’s last years. In 2017 state officials revoked a Derby Lane trainer’s license because five of his greyhounds tested positive for cocaine, a stimulant. Months later, a trainer at another Florida track was suspended after a dozen dogs tested positive. In the two years that followed, state officials say, 11 more trainers’ dogs tested positive.

Doping has been just one of racing opponents’ concerns. Grey2K has spent nearly 20 years compiling reports on the welfare of racing greyhounds. It contends that even standard industry practices constitute mistreatment. It says dogs are forced to race under conditions that can cause serious injuries, such as broken legs and backs, fractured skulls and spines, and even electrocution by the lure. Another concern is what becomes of dogs that aren’t racing. In 1952 the Greyhound Racing Record said 30 percent of greyhounds bred for racing would compete, leaving open the fate of the other 70 percent. Dogs that do race stop being competitive around four years old. Grey2K has collected a raft of stories about greyhounds being euthanized or sold to laboratories. To address those concerns, in 1987 the industry formed the American Greyhound Council to set up adoption agencies and study what’s best for the dogs. Two of the worst scandals occurred in the 2000s, however.

In 2002 a former Pensacola track guard was arrested after authorities discovered that he’d killed 1,000 to 3,000 greyhounds and buried them on his property in Alabama. He said he’d been paid $10 each for shooting them. A prosecutor called the guard’s property a “Dachau for dogs,” according to a story in the New York Times. The guard died before he could be tried. In 2010 a trainer at a track in the Florida town of Ebro left dozens of dogs to die after the racing season ended. He pleaded guilty to cruelty, drawing a five-year sentence.

The scandals cut into greyhound racing’s popularity at a time when the public’s concern for animal welfare was rising. Meanwhile, new competing gambling operations—the Seminole and Miccosukee Tribes’ casinos and the Florida Lottery—lured customers from dog tracks.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Greyhounds in a daily matinee race at Derby Lane chase the mechanical lure around the oval track, a pursuit that’s over in just 30 seconds. Between races, a tractor emerges to smooth the sand down flat again to minimize injuries—a point of contention between the racing industry and critics who urged voters to ban the sport.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Farmer holds award plaques for “America’s Top Sprinter” in 2008 and “America’s Top Distance Dog” in 2015. He keeps his cache of awards and mementoes in an overflowing Tupperware container.

The fans who remained skewed older. In 2001 Steven Soderbergh filmed a scene for Ocean’s Eleven at Derby Lane that featured George Clooney and Brad Pitt recruiting a man for their robbery scheme. Their target, Carl Reiner, then 79, fit in perfectly with the graying greyhound crowd.

In the track’s final days, its typical fan was Jim Wickert, 77, a retired golf course owner who since 2003 had shown up at Derby Lane twice a week in his tan Orvis fedora. He said he enjoyed the challenge of handicapping the dogs’ chances.

“I like trying to figure them out,” he said. “I don’t bet big, but it’s still exciting when you do figure things out and they run the way you think they should.”

He was unsure what he’d do once the track closed. Nothing else seemed as exciting.

Some people got into racing because they love greyhounds. Trainer and kennel owner John Farmer, a Klamath Tribe member from Oregon, said he fell in love with the breed when he was 11 and his mother let him watch races at Multnomah Greyhound Park. Now 55, he carries mementos of his winning dogs in an overflowing Tupperware container.

Greyhounds are affectionate animals, not particularly high-strung, said longtime veterinarian Donald Beck. In his time at Derby Lane, Beck said he was never bitten—but he had been scratched by excited dogs jumping on him.

When Winning recalls racing champions, one stands out: Keefer, the dog that won Derby Lane’s 1986 Distance Classic. That race drew 12,779 people—the largest crowd in track history. By 2020 Saturday races drew maybe a thousand.

The money brought in by live greyhound racing in its final decade dropped from $117 million a year to less than $40 million. At Derby Lane, it fell from $12 million to $4.3 million.

The industry tried to adapt, winning legislative approval in 1996 for poker rooms and for simulcasting, which lets bettors wager on races elsewhere. The poker rooms remained packed. After dog racing ended, simulcast races drew some fans. But they couldn’t save the dog tracks.

For a decade, Grey2K tried to persuade Florida legislators to reform greyhound racing, to no avail. Finally, the group appealed to the state’s Constitution Revision Commission, which meets every two decades, and persuaded commissioners to support a proposal to end racing.

The organization and its allies spent three million dollars advocating for Amendment 13, Theil says, mostly for TV ads showing mistreated racing dogs. Two groups opposing the amendment spent just $534,000 in response. One of the groups’ ads accused Grey2K of exaggerating the danger.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

“The vast majority of the dogs are well trained, well treated, and well loved,” said Jack Cory, of the Florida Greyhound Association. He called Grey2K “pathological liars.”

Yet the industry drew little support beyond its fan base. Nearly 70 percent of the voters said yes to the amendment.

Besides the track employees losing jobs, the shutdown affected trainers and kennel owners. Farmer, for example, said he would relocate to West Virginia, one of the three remaining states (along with Iowa and Arkansas) that still have consistent racing seasons.

Grey2K USA is working to have racing banned in those states and in Australia, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and Vietnam.

Greyhound adoption agencies set about finding homes for the Florida dogs that were still racing as of December 2020. One of those organizations was GST’s Sun State Greyhound Adoption, run by Sharon Dippel. She and her husband, Brian, have eight adopted dogs themselves. They go through a couple of 44-pound bags of dog food every 10 days or so.

Dippel said plenty of people lined up to adopt dogs. It helped that Florida’s tracks didn’t shut down simultaneously. Some closed shortly after the 2018 vote, others in early 2020 because of COVID-19.

As pets, greyhounds still like to run when they get outdoors, even without a mechanical device to chase, Dippel said. But when they get back indoors?

“They’re a 45-mile-per-hour couch potato.”

ADOPTING A GREYHOUND: There are about 300 greyhound adoption agencies in the U.S. There are about 300 greyhound adoption agencies in the U.S. The Greyhound Project maintains a searchable directory. If you adopt a greyhound racer, remember it has been trained to run. You may have to teach the dog some basics. Also, it likely will be unfamiliar with other dog breeds or pets, such as cats, and will need time to get used to them.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Craig Pittman is the author of five books on Florida, his native state, and cohost of the Erika Larsen documents cultures that maintain close ties with nature. is the author of five books on Florida, his native state, and cohost of the “Welcome to Florida” podcast.documents cultures that maintain close ties with nature.

This story was updated on February 9, 2021.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The weeks after the car crash are a blur for Kamin Bode. When she thinks back to that harrowing day in August 2015, she remembers pacing outside the intensive care unit where her six-year-old son, Zachary, was in a coma.

His babysitter, who had been driving the car, died soon after the accident. Her blood test showed evidence of recent drug use, according to the Florida Highway Patrol.

Bode says she kept flashing back to four years earlier when an accident with a drunk driver had put her in a coma for three weeks. This isn’t happening to my family again, she thought. Everything would be OK—it had to be.

But the days slipped by with little change for Zachary. He turned seven in the ICU surrounded by the beeps and whooshes of machines. For Bode, the difficult thing was to stay optimistic: “Once you get into victim mode, it’s hard to get out,” she says.

As a police officer, Bode had been trained to remain calm in tough situations. During her 15 years as a cop in Michigan, two of her partners were shot in the line of duty. One died. Eager for a fresh start, she moved south with Zachary in the summer of 2015. She was just six weeks into a new job as an officer with the Ocala, Florida, police department when her world imploded.

Now she had no idea if, or when, life would return to normal. About two weeks after the accident, Zachary opened his eyes, but he still didn’t seem to be aware of his surroundings. He couldn’t speak or move his limbs. Bode’s coworkers raised money to help pay the medical bills; one, Dan Pope, offered to mow her lawn while she was at the hospital.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Zachary Bode has been unable to speak or move his limbs since his car accident in 2015. His family turned to dolphin therapy to help aid his recovery. Right: Weeks before Zachary’s accident, Kamin Bode celebrated her new job at the Ocala, Florida, police department with him.

Finally that fall, Bode brought her son home, though he was still unable to speak or move and required help with all daily activities. She threw herself into a daily regimen: feeding, bathing, medicating, and shuttling Zachary to his many appointments. Life brought joys—Bode and Pope fell in love and later were married—but Zachary showed no real improvement the rest of that year or in the next few that followed.

Perhaps, Bode and Pope decided, the help Zachary needed didn’t lie with traditional medicine. To help his tight muscles relax, they took him to an acupuncturist. They even went to Mexico so Zachary could receive controversial infusions of fetal neuronal stem cells. They paid for many of the treatments with their savings, and some with donations, but his condition remained largely unchanged.

Then, in spring 2019, when Zachary was 10, Bode heard about the dolphins. Zachary’s acupuncturist said that her daughter (who also had sustained a brain injury) tried a dolphin therapy program in Freeport, Bahamas, and had “tremendous results.”

Dolphin-assisted therapy was first promoted in the early 1970s by educational anthropologist Betsy Smith after she noticed that aggressive wild dolphins appeared surprisingly gentle and curious around people with physical and mental disabilities, including her brother. The dolphins approached them—though no one was feeding them or providing other incentives, she says.

Smith, now retired from Florida International University, says the interactions seemed to bring people joy and motivate them to do what therapists asked of them. She began offering free sessions and called for rigorous scientific research to study the potential long-term benefits of the approach.

Fifty years on, and no such research has found significant therapeutic effects. Nonetheless, there are now programs around the world offering sessions to treat everything from autism and depression to helping stroke victims. In recent years, paid certification programs and continuing education for people in the industry have sprung up too. Smith is no longer a proponent, and many other critics, including neuroscientist Lori Marino in Utah and wildlife biologist Toni Frohoff in California, worry that dolphin-assisted therapy at best provides a novel, fun experience for patients, and at worst jeopardizes the health and safety of the animals and the people seeking succor from them.

These programs are “taking vulnerable children and vulnerable animals and profiting from them,” Smith says.

Dolphins "have an amazing capacity to feel emotions based on their neurobiology."

Facilities in the United States, the Caribbean, Turkey, Egypt, Indonesia, China, and elsewhere offer various types of sessions, which may include swimming with dolphins, feeding them, watching them from a dock or boat, and touching them. Dolphin trainers and various kinds of therapists manage the sessions, often holding the patient in the water while the dolphin approaches or facilitating interactions. Some programs claim that children on the autism spectrum who were nonverbal uttered their first words after dolphin-assisted therapy, though none of the half dozen facilities I contacted found a family willing to attest to such an outcome. A standard program, which may involve spending an hour a day with dolphins over four or five days, costs about $6,000.

Dolphins’ high intelligence and friendly mien have fueled the idea that they can help humans—and enjoy doing so. But some dolphin-assisted therapy proponents, even some facility operators, acknowledge that no hard science validates dolphin therapy. Still, they posit that the sessions seems to help some people anyway. “There’s only anecdotal evidence and no way to measure what we do,” says Kat Perry, who owns and runs Integrative Intentions, which offers dolphin-assisted therapy sessions out of the Bahamas.

“Dolphins act in myriad ways to humans,” says Frohoff, a behavioral and wildlife biologist who has visited more than a dozen dolphin-assisted therapy facilities and founded TerraMar Research, a California-based animal protection nonprofit. “They have an amazing capacity to feel emotions based on their neurobiology, ranging from great joy to fear and suffering that is rivaling, if not exceeding, our own emotions,” she says. “I have personally witnessed dolphins coming to the aid of at least one person who was having a hard time swimming in the ocean.”

But there’s no evidence that dolphins are gentler toward people with disabilities or medical conditions—a central premise of these therapy programs, Frohoff says. “It’s projecting what you want to see.”

Trained, captive dolphins aren’t domesticated animals, and close interactions between them and humans can—and have—resulted in sickness or injury for both. Reports in peer-reviewed papers indicate that dolphins have bitten people, rammed into them, or slapped them with their flukes. Even professional dolphin trainers have been charged, butted, bitten, or held down at the bottom of a tank.

If people get hurt during therapy sessions with dolphins, there’s no comprehensive record of it because of the lack of regulation and record-keeping. “Injury information is not collected and is not stored in our database” for any programs that involve dolphins swimming with humans, says R. Andre Bell, a spokesperson for the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, the agency responsible for monitoring captive animal facilities in the U.S.

Willing to try anything

How spending time with dolphins might help heal her son was unclear to Bode. “I don’t necessarily believe everything I hear, and my husband is a fireman and army ranger, so we take everything with a grain of salt,” she says. Still, she was willing to try anything—as long as it wouldn’t make Zachary worse.

One claim proponents of dolphin therapy make is that ultrasound pulses from the animals’ echolocation clicks may alter human tissue, cells, and brain waves. Another is that in ways we don’t understand, dolphins intrinsically communicate with people who have had trouble communicating with others. (No evidence backs either claim.)

Bode looked into Integrative Intentions, the dolphin therapy program Zachary’s acupuncturist recommended. No one from the New Mexico-based company promised Bode specific results, but Integrative Intentions says on its website that the program has “the potential to be a truly life altering experience.”

The facility rents time with a dozen mostly captive-bred dolphins owned by a company in the Bahamas that also uses them for swim-with-dolphins tourism. They’re kept in an enclosure in Sanctuary Bay. Integrative Intentions had an opening in July 2019. It would cost $4,500 for five days of treatment—not including the family’s airfare, lodging, or food. The sessions weren’t covered by insurance, but organizers worked with Bode to set up an extended payment plan.

She says she didn’t expect a miracle—she just hoped that engaging with dolphins would help her son “emotionally heal.” The program also offered daily sessions of craniosacral therapy both in and out of the water, which as Bode understood it, would involve therapists lightly placing their hands on her son to induce flow of his cerebral spinal fluid and relax his body. The dolphins, she says she was told, would complement that work.

“There’s no guarantee,” says Perry, who owns Integrative Intentions. “We assist bodies in returning to homeostasis” by helping them self-correct. “We are not healers. We are just facilitators.”

“I was a bit stand-offish the first day, I’m not gonna lie,” says Bode, when she, Zachary, and Pope arrived in Freeport. “I was in police mode and watching and was like, I don’t know.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Bode watched Zachary’s first dolphin encounter from a nearby dock and was stunned to see how the bottlenose dolphins interacted with her son. “They connect with you somehow. They will look you straight in the eye,” she says.

Zachary was floating in the water with the help of a therapist when one of the 400-pound cetaceans approached. Several more soon followed. She worried that they might chew on his feed tube or medication pump, but those concerns quickly gave way to awe about the dolphins’ delicate, deliberate movements around Zachary, she says.

“The therapists are really working on moving that cerebral spinal fluid and working on craniosacral release and stuff—the dolphins almost were just helping them,” Bode says. “I think the most amazing part was a dolphin touched him on his head and looked at his feed tube and pump and touched him on the belly—and he does have gastrointestinal issues.” The dolphin also touched his left hip, where he’d been injured. “How would they know that?! It was crazy!”

On the second day, Bode joined Zachary in the water. With her there, he relaxed and uttered a rumble from deep in his throat. That means he’s feeling calm or content, she says.

Four dolphins interacted with Bode and Zachary. “You can feel their intentions while you’re in the water,” she says. “I don’t know how to explain it without sounding like a weirdo…you just know they won’t hurt you. They look at you in the eyes. It’s like a staring contest.”

After five days in the Bahamas in 2019, Bode says she saw changes in Zachary, changes that lasted. “He doesn’t get as frustrated as before. When I look at him, there is something different in his eyes,” she said months after the trip, adding that Zachary’s chiropractor and occupational therapist noticed it too. “He still gets frustrated, but it takes a bit longer.” He seems happier, she says. “He is always laughing and smiling.”

Another mother, Jennifer Lansink, also noticed differences in her daughter, Teal, following repeated summer sessions with Integrative Intentions. Teal was born very prematurely and suffers from developmental delays and extremely tight muscles that keep her from walking unassisted, Lansink says. But she giggled and appeared happy when a dolphin first rubbed up against her feet. And on the way home after their second visit, when Teal was three, she stood unassisted for the first time. “To see your daughter stand up who has never done that…” Lansink explained later, her voice catching.

Lansink says Teal has progressed in other ways. “She doesn’t form sensical words, but she is significantly more verbal, expressing her opinions and frustrations with more and longer sounds.” Dolphin and craniosacral therapy aren’t wholly responsible for these improvements, she says—Teal also has had occupational and physical therapy at home—but she believes the dolphin sessions were essential.

‘People want to believe this stuff works’

Before the coronavirus pandemic disrupted life, miniature horses trotted onto planes as emotional support animals; llamas wandered through nursing homes; therapy dogs toured children’s cancer wards. During lockdowns, therapy dogs even moved to Zoom—purportedly offering virtual entertainment and an emotional salve.

“People want to believe this stuff works,” says psychologist Hal Herzog, a professor emeritus at Western Carolina University, in Cullowhee, North Carolina, who studies human-animal relationships. Small wonder, then, that some people hold dolphins in similar regard—especially given the myth, bolstered by Flipper, the 1960s Hollywood character portrayed by multiple bottlenose dolphins, that they’re ever chipper and eager to spend time with humans. The physical shape of the animals’ jaw buttresses this idea; they always seem to be smiling.

She was willing to try anything, as long as it wouldn’t make Zachary worse.

But as Herzog points out, there’s a difference between animal-assisted interventions and animal-assisted therapy. “Intervention is someone going to the hospital, and a therapy dog visits, and then that person feels better afterward,” he says. But therapy seeks “a long-term effect treating the disorder. And I think that’s where things get sketchy.”

The evidence for animal-assisted therapy just isn’t there, he says.

Neuroscientist Lori Marino, an expert in animal behavior and intelligence and the president of the Whale Sanctuary Project—a Utah-based nonprofit working to establish a seaside sanctuary for whales and dolphins from marine parks—has published multiple journal articles reviewing the existing studies of dolphin-assisted therapy. She says there’s no clear evidence of medical benefits and that research detailing alleged benefits is flawed. It doesn’t account for environmental factors that could cause changes in patients’ behavior—the relaxing effects of water, for example, the other therapies patients may be receiving, or simply the influence of being in a novel situation, she says.

“To me, the idea that [families] are being told it is therapy, that is just fundamentally immoral,” Marino says. “I know that there are claims that there are permanent changes, or some kind of actual change in cognition and in social relationships and so forth, but there’s no evidence of that at all.”

In one of her published studies critical of the practice, she adds there’s also a risk that the price tag “may cause patients and their families to make a choice between [dolphin therapy] and more effective, empirically based treatment options.”

What’s most important, Marino says, is “you need to know that this is risky.”

Because dolphins aren’t domesticated, they don’t lose their wild traits, and their behavior is difficult to predict or control, says Toni Frohoff, who is also affiliated with the Whale Sanctuary Project. “Even Asian elephants who have been in servitude for generations to humans are not considered domesticated,” she says. “Domestication is a very deliberate and selective process of breeding, and there are currently no domestic dolphins in existence.”

Why not use safer, domesticated animals instead? says Naomi Rose, a marine mammal scientist at the Animal Welfare Institute, in Washington, D.C. “Anything the child thinks is unusual might work. That’s why goats and sheep might work,” she says.

Dolphins at work

Frohoff says that even when it appears that dolphins seem to enjoy being with people, their participation hinges on fear of punishment. If dolphins resist performing or interacting with people, Frohoff says, they’re typically sequestered alone. It’s not necessarily punitive—their caretakers could be worried that the animals are sick—but to these highly intelligent creatures, isolation could be perceived as punishment, she says.

Living in tanks or small enclosures can lead to repetitive behaviors, such as constant swimming in small circles, indicating mental distress. Stress can also weaken immune systems. That’s especially problematic for animals such as dolphins that regularly interact with humans and are vulnerable to many of the same upper respiratory infections.

In some therapy programs, it appears that dolphins are taught to engage with humans in ways that contradict their natural behaviors. Such mixed signals heighten the chances of potential miscommunications and violence.

For example, a promotional video for Sealanya Seapark and Dolphinpark, a facility in Turkey, shows an open-mouthed dolphin and a boy on the autism spectrum stroking its teeth and tongue in an apparent anatomy lesson.

Generally, when a dolphin opens its mouth like that, it would be to signal anger and aggression—akin to a man balling up his fist, says Rose, who reviewed the video for National Geographic. If the animal had spontaneously opened its mouth, the trainer probably would’ve moved the child away to minimize the risk of injury, she says. But, instead, in the video, a trainer at knee-level prompts the dolphin to open its mouth and hold it open—transforming a behavior that normally means back off into a “friendly” trick. (Sealanya did not respond to a request for comment.)

These programs are "taking vulnerable children and vulnerable animals and profiting from them."

Most dolphin therapy programs rely on captive dolphins, but a small number bring clients to swim with the animals in the wild. Yet dolphins in the wild acculturated to spending time with humans also face dangers. If they swim close to boats expecting to be given snacks and don’t get them, they may become aggressive, biting or ramming people in the water, causing retaliatory attacks. Moreover, feeding dolphins heightens the chances that calves will learn to expect it rather than learn how to hunt.

In the U.S., under the Marine Mammal Protection Act, harassing, harming, killing, or feeding wild dolphins is prohibited and can lead to fines or jail time.

A source of hope and belief

Deena Hoagland, the owner of Island Dolphin Care, a facility based in Key Largo, Florida, readily admits that no scientific studies give credence to dolphin-assisted therapy. Yet she points to her own son, Joe—the reason she founded Island Dolphin Care—as an example of what exposure to dolphins can do.

As a young child, Joe suffered a massive stroke that severely limited his capabilities. She was told he’d never sit up or walk on his own. But after years of interacting with dolphins in programs she devised, she says, he improved beyond all expectations. “I will never give false hope, but I always say never say never, because I was told never,” she says.

“My son’s hand was a fist, and he couldn’t isolate his fingers, so I told him if he could open his hand and rotate his wrist, I would put a fish in it, and he would get to feed the dolphin.” That was “so motivating to him,” she says.

Joe is now in his 30s, married, and working as an animal trainer at Island Dolphin Care, closed because of the pandemic. “We are committed to keeping our dolphins and staff safe from the virus while also not contributing to its spread,” Hoagland says.

After Bode and Pope returned from their 2019 Bahamas trip, the family immediately started saving money for future dolphin sessions for Zachary, but the pandemic derailed their plans to return in 2020. Integrative Intentions offered sessions this summer, but Bode said the risk, at least for their family, is just too great.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I’ve had a relationship with water since before I was born.

As a young child at a barrier island off the coast of southern New Jersey, my father threw me into the cold open waters of the Atlantic, an exercise for me to find my bearings inside the waves. Watching intently, cautiously, he repeated the words that Papa, my grandfather, spoke to him: The ocean is like anything in life; Learn it’s rhythm and you’ll not only flow with it, you won’t have to work so hard to enjoy it.

My father is a sixth-generation descendant of Barbudan people. I am a seventh.

The skill of navigation, the art of catching fish, understanding the meaning of the temperature and color of the water, and so much more has been passed down to me and others through our people. And being connected to this independent, self-governing Black community, having been immersed in this culture, has been central to my identity as an African of the Americas.

It’s not surprising if you’ve not heard of Barbuda: this small, 62 square-mile island in the eastern Caribbean is the less known half of a twin island State that, along with Antigua, gained independence from England in 1981

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Barbudans have kept mostly to themselves, concerned less with growing tourism than with working to preserve their land and maintain a tight-knit, ecologically-sound community of about 1,500 people.

My grandparents were born and raised in the very same village as my great-great-great-great-great grandparents. Like my father before me, I learned about my connection to the earth and her seas at the Codrington Lagoon, the wetlands that serve as the center of community life and entrepôt for our fisheries.

Barbudans are descended from West Africa and Africans of the British Isles, with many—like my family—tracing lineage back nine generations. We are fishers, navigators, farmers and artisans with a way of life that has remained largely unchanged for more than three centuries.

Long before the British set foot on Barbudan shores, the land was known by the Caribs, Siboney and Arawak Nations as Wa’Omoni. The presence of First Nations peoples can still be found in Barbuda today through genetics and a drawing on the interior wall of “Indian Cave” on the northeast end of the island. The British Crown claimed the island in 1685, after which Scottish brothers Christopher and John Codrington were granted an initial lease to the island by King Charles of Great Britain. This lease would later be extended by Queen Anne once she was private owner of the island. Christopher managed his sister’s plantation, Betty’s Hope, 63 kilometers away on Antigua, and had a plantation in Barbados, but was not able to create a similar plantation on Barbuda because the terrain was not conducive.

The Codringtons looked to the British Isles to import skilled laborers and indentured servants. Those who arrived on Barbuda via the main Port on Antigua were skilled as hoopers, coopers, ship wrights, metal workers, and sail makers. A number of freed Blacks who lived in Europe were drawn to the offer because in addition to wages commensurate to their level of skill, a plot of land for a domicile, a plot of land for provisions—known as “grung” even today—and supplementary rations were also offered. These laborers—plus a handful of indentured whites—were the first Barbudans. The white indentured servants departed once their debts were paid, but the Black laborers from the British Isles and later West Africa, remained, and their ancestry is connected to Barbudans today.

Barbudans are an extension of the land. It’s difficult to fully express through the written word, or even in photographs. The land in many respects is us. In a letter from June 1, 1834, Christopher Codrington described Barbudans as “one united family so attached to Barbuda that force alone or extreme drought…can alone take them from that island!”

Threats to communal well-being

Throughout the world, communal well-being has long been a feature of free Black communities, especially those that grew from resistance to the international slave trade. Jessica Gordon Nembhard, author of Collective Courage: A History of African American Cooperative Economic Thought and Practice, notes that every human population in every era of human history has used and uses mutual aid, economic solidarity and cooperation to survive and thrive. She found that African Americans, like other subaltern peoples, used multiple forms of economic cooperation and collective ownership to resist enslavement and free themselves, to feed their families, to maintain land ownership, to secure affordable housing and non-predatory lending, to create decent jobs, and to keep resources recirculating in their communities.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. 1 / 5 1 / 5 Historical scrapbook of images of Barbuda. Historical scrapbook Historical scrapbook of images of Barbuda. National Archives, London

Yet from the Gullah Geechee of the coastal American south, to the Maroons in the mountains of Jamaica, and the Garifuna of Latin and Central America, remote Black communities with their own distinct identities, language, and culture have been under relentless siege by the threat of commercial development. Unless there is international attention to quickly unify and support the rights of the Barbudan people, this independent, culturally distinct community will be destroyed.

Born in 1890, my great-grandfather James “Boatie” Harris, a Barbudan fisher and ship caulker, could navigate the dark, using only the lights from the village and the reflections from Antigua to determine the course for a boat. The fish that Boatie caught would feed his family and those in the village. Barbudan fishers decide how often they fish the lagoon and sea, know what type of fish to remove from the water, what time of year, and what size they have to be—all decisions that secure the sustainability of the fishing stock.

But fishing “the Barbudan way” is threatened by the potential shift in accordance with profitability, absent the best interests of the people. The link between people, land, resources, lifestyle and culture is based on living within the resources of the community.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

To live on the island, Barbudans call on traditional knowledge to use and to protect the resources they have access to. They use their skills as fishers, hunters and farmers for food security. There is a freedom for kids to chase donkey and splash in the lagoon, and a tradition for families to camp and cook on the coastal shore during summer months. Once one person starts a fire to cook, everyone has fire to cook. This way of life has kept not only families intact but the ecology secure.

According to Cynthia Hewitt, sociologist in the political-economy tradition of world-systems theory, and director of International Comparative Labor Studies at Morehouse College: “There is an assumption that development means greater material good, and with that, greater money. But with that development is really a shift in the community well-being.”

Shift in centuries-old methods

Hewitt speaks of a shift, and for Barbuda, the introduction of development for and by non-Barbudans moves the people from cooperative owners to dependent workers. What’s more, as land and other natural resources are developed to lure tourists, the makeup of Barbudan society changes, and a delicate ecology is disrupted. These shifts can erase centuries-old methods of living with the land in the name of development.

For more than 200 years, Barbudans operated with a system of communal land ownership. In 1976, the Barbuda Local Government Act formalized the administration of communal ownership of the island with the creation of the locally-elected Barbuda Council. In 2007, the then Central Government administration in Antigua passed the Barbuda Land Act, which states that every adult Barbudan holds the land in common, with the Barbuda Council serving as administrators. It also explicitly specifies that when it comes to leasing land for major developments, consent must be obtained from a majority of the Barbudan people through an in-person vote.

A decade after the landmark legislation, Hurricane Irma tore across the island with 185 mile-per hour winds, eroding shores, and bringing level-1, 2 and 3 damage to what the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency reported was 99 percent of the infrastructure. Then, when yet another massive storm was predicted to make landfall days later, the Antigua-Barbuda central government (akin to a federal oversight body) ordered the island evacuated. When Barbudans were finally allowed to return, nearly everything had been destroyed.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

A core group of Barbudans vowed to rebuild, wanting to preserve their cultural space. But it was hard to know where to start. Islanders were initially buoyed by an Antigua-Barbuda government that arranged for the swift delivery of construction equipment; but instead of repairing homes and schools and basic infrastructure (like the hospital and post office), we watched in shock as bulldozers started clearing even more trees and land to make space for a new, international airport.

While the chairman of the locally-elected Barbuda Council signed off on this deal, many say he failed to follow the mandated three-part process to obtain approval from the Barbudan people. Then, six weeks after the storm, while Barbudans were still picking through the wreckage of their homes by hand, an even larger, 650-acre development plan was approved by the Antigua-Barbuda government without involving the local Council, or the Barbudan people, in what many view as “a “land grab.”Prior to the 2017 storm, the government approved a 99-year lease to the Peace Love and Happiness (PLH) partnership, a company co-owned by billionaire businessman John Paul DeJoria, founder of Patrón tequila, for the construction of a resort and commercial village on 425 acres.

As if these actions weren’t disturbing enough, the following spring, in 2018, the central government did something that brought attention to human rights advocates worldwide: they voted to repeal the Barbuda Land Act, stripping Barbudans of our communal land rights, a central feature of our people for centuries.

Juliana Nnoko-Mewanu, a senior researcher on women and land for Human Rights Watch, authored a 2018 article on Barbuda, citing how research consistently shows that “taking away land used by communities—without due process and without adequate compensation and rehabilitation—results in serious risks to people’s rights to food, water, housing, health, and education.

“Barbuda may be small,” Nnoko-Mewanu concluded, “but the rights of its people are as important as anyone else’s.”

While some Barbudans undertook the physically grueling work of clearing broken concrete and debris from damaged homes and government buildings, others started shouldering the emotionally and financially burdensome process of fighting in court. While they have received some assistance from international groups concerned about irreparable environmental destruction, expenses outweigh the community’s ability to pay and they are relying on grassroots fundraising—all while many are still displaced and living in tents or staying with relatives on Antigua.

Hoping and praying

Renetta “Brownie” Nedd, 95, has a three-bedroom, Caribbean Sea blue home with wooden hurricane shutters that cover the four front windows and door that face the large water well known in the village as “Park Well.”

“Irma wasn’t easy. It wasn’t easy. People crying mercy. Thank God He did have mercy and He is still having mercy because if He did not have mercy we would not be here today,” Nedd said when retelling her experience after the storm. She took shelter with one of her sons while Irma battered the island. The next morning, she walked to check on her home, and did not recognize the house that she and her husband James “Hercules” Nedd updated from wood to concrete in the 1960s. She spoke of the community, and the way that homes were built and fixed on the island. “When people building a house, they have young fellas they get together. I help you, you help me, and that’s how they used to work. So I think they still have a little of that in them.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A horse walks among damaged government buildings on the nearly destroyed island of Barbuda on December 8, 2017. Barbuda, which covers only 62 square miles, was nearly leveled when Hurricane Irma made landfall with 185mph winds on Sept. 6, 2017. Only two days later, fearing Barbuda would be hit again by Hurricane Jose, the prime minister ordered an evacuation of all residents. Most had to seek shelter in Barbuda's much larger sister island Antigua. Photograph by Spencer Platt, Getty Images

Fifteen weeks after the storm, on Christmas morning, the village united to clear and prepare Nedd’s home for a new roof. The effort was led by Sean Charles and Mike Harris, two Barbudan retired U.S. veterans, who returned home to unite Barbudans and to prepare buildings for repairs.

As the two-year anniversary of Irma approached, Nedd said, “I have life. Where there is life, there is hope. And I’m hoping if God’s will, I may be able to get back in there. I’m hoping. I’m praying.”

She left the island in July 2019 to visit a daughter in St. Thomas. By the time she returned in December 2020, the roof was completed. Community volunteers also installed a bathroom and flooring for the house. She has since moved back in. Electricity is back on and kitchen repairs are underway.

Battle against development

Currently at least five separate lawsuits address the questions of Barbudan sovereignty, deforestation, and damage to wetlands, protected since 2005 under the RAMSAR Convention. The lawsuits question the legitimacy of recent changes to laws in order to benefit developers such as DeJoria’s PLH, Robert DeNiro’s Paradise Found, and Discovery Land Company, an Arizona-based developer. Yet while the court battles wind on, PLH has added additional development partners and expanded plans to include two mammoth private residences on about 114 acres directly inside the Codrington Lagoon National Park, the heart of Barbudan life and a hub for industry and recreation. Damage to the wetland ecosystem also continues.

In multiple public statements, PLH claims its projects are as much about “giving back to the environment” as it is about opening the island to commerce.

Yet conservation scientists unaffiliated with the island have vehemently objected to the idea that destroying protected wetlands to build a private golf course and waterfront homes is ecologically sound.

"The proposed development would deal a mortal blow to Barbuda's fisheries,” the president of the Global Coral Reef Alliance, Thomas J. Goreau, a marine biologist and biochemist wrote to fellow scientists in May 2020. “The impacts on Barbuda would be...severe [and] destroy the most important mangroves, seagrass, coral reefs, and fisheries of an entire island of fisherfolk."

Money over matter

Prime Minister Gaston Browne has repeatedly said that he wants Barbuda to “make a net positive contribution to the treasury.” Instead of acknowledging the concern for the continuance of Barbudan identity and traditions, he speaks of members of the current Barbuda Council as preventing growth, and has bluntly acknowledged his willingness to “go to Parliament to change the law to facilitate the [PLH] project.”

In 2018, he oversaw the repeal of the Barbuda Land Act of 2007 through the Crown Lands Regulation Amendment Bill of 2018, which allows for the private ownership of land by foreigners, and the enactment of The Barbuda Amendment Bill of 2018, which gives the central government the authority to approve major development on Barbuda without consultation and consent of the Barbudan people. The bill also removes the ancestral identity of Barbudans, referring to the “inhabitants” as tenants. Historically, Barbudans are defined as direct descendants of the original Barbudans that came from West Africa and the British Isles, and in order to serve on the Barbuda Council, or hold the land in common, a person had to be Barbudan. No one could purchase Barbudan identity, nor ancestral rights to the land, but the changes to the law in 2018 roll out a red carpet for privatization that removes agency from the people.

To be sure, when it comes to paying for storm repairs and upgrading the island’s infrastructure there are no easy answers. There are Barbudans who have gone to work for developers, viewing the immediate benefits of employment—the means to put food on the table—more urgently than the ideological aim of ensuring our ethnic group’s survival.

But allowing the continuation of a development plan that strips the voice of the Barbudan people all but ensures an historic, culturally unique Black ethnic group will be erased.

A legacy worth fighting for and preserving

According to Teckla Negga Melchoir, a Barbudan anthropologist and journalist, and founder of Global Forward Thinking.org, “Estimates of 100 million First Nations persons have been exterminated in the Americas since the European began 'discovering' the rest of the world. Barbudans are thought of as 'just 1,500 people on island.' Since the forced evacuation after Hurricane Irma, the local population has been decreased by at least 300. Many of whom were denied a right to return home as they were denied the right to make a living because of the illegal and draconian 'laws' passed by the current administration in Antigua, laws that facilitate foreigners who have no connection to the land, no blood in the soil and no concern for the environment, culture or people. These foreigners like those centuries ago happened upon Paradise and decided that it was up for sale and that it could be improved.”

She continues, “You ask me about development? Development for whom? Every Barbudan born in Barbuda, usually at home, has their umbilical cord buried in the yard of their house. That navel string feeds the land, roots us to the land and the land feeds us. It doesn’t matter where in the world we Barbudans go, and there are hundreds upon hundreds of us, we are emotionally, psychologically and intellectually tethered to Barbuda. ”

Prominent Black thinkers often lament how gentrification causes the loss of historic Black spaces and indigenous cultures, the destruction of Black property, the lack of generational wealth.

Barbuda’s soil survived the impact of Hurricane Irma because of the strength of the coral reefs and wetlands. Her people likewise survived the storm, but the powerful forces of economic “progress” may wipe out a homeland, a culture—an identity—once and for all.

The fate of Barbuda should rest in the hands of the Barbudan people, but now the global community is needed to recognize the distinct island culture and a people whose human rights are being violated. Without wide support in this era that the United Nations General Assembly has called “The International Decade for People of African Descent,” Barbudans who offer important direction to a collective future, are in danger of becoming just an interesting memory if we don’t recognize and respond to the urgency of now.

Barbuda is not just land. It is a Black diasporic identity. It is 1,500 lives that represent a freedom tradition, a legacy worth fighting for and preserving.

Mikki K. Harris is a documentary storyteller and multimedia journalist, and a professor at Morehouse College. She also is co-founder of the Atlanta Drone Lab and a Public Voices Fellow with The OpEd Project. Follow her on Instagram @mikkimedia.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Global vaccines shortages are pushing scientists to revolutionize manufacturing practices and shift from growing viruses in giant vats to cultivating them in long, thin tubes.

By some estimates, only around 1 percent of people in low-income countries have received one COVID-19 shot and each year only 5 billion doses of vaccines of every type are produced worldwide, according experts convened by the London-based think tank Chatham House. They noted that scaling up shots for COVID-19 is proving difficult. That is a grave concern, because the pandemic has underscored the need for technology that can dramatically boost global vaccine manufacturing capacity.

There are different kinds of COVID-19 vaccines that have proven to work. Some consist of genetic material called mRNA that contains the instructions to build just part of the virus (the spike protein). Others use inactivated coronavirus to provide the immune system with a preview of the pathogen. Another variety of vaccine uses a harmless version of a cold virus as a vehicle to deliver the immunizing bits of coronavirus material. Each technology requires a different manufacturing process. “There's no one standardized method of making a vaccine,” says Tarit Mukhopadhyay, head of vaccine process development at Merck. However, the latter two vaccine technologies require producing the inoculating viruses in large batches.

But viruses can’t be grown on their own. They need host cells in which to grow and multiply. In many cases, companies use cells as tiny factories to churn out the vaccine product: such as viral particles they will inactivate or viral proteins used in the jab. But growing enough cells, in the giant steel tanks can take weeks compared to just couple of days required to process the virus and make the actual vaccine. “The problem is that about 80 percent of the time you're just sitting on your hands. You're not actually making a virus because you're just growing up host cells,” explains Richard Braatz, a chemical engineering professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Also, once the batches are done, time is lost to cleaning and prepping the tanks for the next round. When vats aren't properly cleaned and reset, millions of doses can go to waste, as recently happened with 60 million doses of Johnson & Johnson vaccine. For reasons such as this, groups of scientists are looking to move away from making vaccines in batches toward a continuous way of manufacturing them.

One team of scientists believes they’ve found a solution by manufacturing vaccines in a 300-meter-long tube rather than a vat. The tube is narrow—just 1.5 millimeters in diameter—but they say their prototype demonstrates that true continuous vaccine manufacturing is possible.

Oil refinery inspires vaccine manufacturing

The idea was developed in part by Felipe Tapia, a bioprocess engineer at the Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems in Magdeburg, Germany. As a university student in Chile, Tapia used to pass an oil refinery every day. The oil industry typically pumps its product through tubes to remove impurities, and this design inspired Tapia to think differently about vaccine production when he moved to Germany in 2012.

Over the last decade he and his Max Planck colleagues have adapted that tubular approach to vaccines as a way to replace large batch bioreactors.

The tubular design is suited to manufacture vaccines based on viral components, such as those used for the AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccines; it cannot be used to make mRNA-based vaccines such as the ones offered by Pfizer and Moderna.

There are quality-control advantages to continuous vaccine manufacturing, explains Keith Roper, who heads the department of biomedical engineering at the Utah State University. A giant vat of cells can only make good vaccine product for a defined period before it begins to peter out and make subpar product.

But continuous vaccine manufacturing is fueled by a constant supply of cells, growth ingredients, and viral material. He likens batch-based vaccine manufacturing to plugging into a battery, which loses power over time, whereas continuous manufacturing is akin to hooking into the power outlet. “If you plug your electronic device into an outlet, our distributed national power grid is a continuous source of electricity, whether you plug it in at 8 a.m. or 5 p.m., whether you plug it in yesterday or tomorrow, you expect that that source of electricity will be steady and continuous and operate within a pretty well-defined range,” Roper says.

In the batch bioreactor vats, which sometimes measure 2,000 liters in volume, the viruses grown to be either live-attenuated, killed-vaccine or viral vector vaccines eventually kill off the cells in the vats that are allowing them to multiply. But the tubular continuous design aims to avert that massive die-off. Instead, fresh cells are continuously grown in a small tank and fed into the opening of the tube along with fresh cell culture media. Another tube feeds into the primary tube and allows small quantities of virus to be added to the cells, which they infect. A peristaltic pump keeps the fluid moving forward to flow through the 300-meter tube where the virus replicates over the course of 48 hours until it is harvested.

Eventually, a liquid containing virus and cell debris exits the primary tube via a harvest pipe. The virus is separated from the other components and processed into a vaccine. “It’s a simple idea but it was not very easy at the beginning to be convinced that actually it would work,” Tapia says.

One concern was that the pump used to move materials through the tube would malfunction or somehow harm the cells as they churned out vaccine materials. “We thought it would be too much pressure for the cells,” he explains. But it worked. Tapia and his colleagues demonstrated a proof of concept of this design for making influenza vaccine in a 2019 PLoS One study. They've launched a company, called ContiVir, to get the technology off the ground and are talking to pharmaceutical companies interested in this new form of manufacturing.

“It's a good idea,” says Rahul Singhvi, cofounder and CEO of National Resilience, who has been working on elements of continuous vaccine manufacturing for decades. If companies could get a completely continuous process to work for commercially-sold vaccines it would be a game-changer, he says. “End-to-end continuous manufacturing is the holy grail.”

Getting to real-world implementation

Scientists have been trying to come up with a way to continuously manufacture viral products since 1965. “Continuous manufacturing is certainly not a new concept,” Roper says. But implementing it has not been easy, he adds: “I think it's safe to say that there are no end-to-end continuous vaccine manufacturing processes currently.”

Merck is collaborating with Braatz at MIT and others to try to incorporate some elements of continuous manufacturing into their vaccine production. One feature they are testing is a filter that attaches to the side of their production tanks to continuously extract vaccine material, rather than harvesting it in bulk. The feature is still in development. Other vaccine manufacturers, such as the Japanese pharmaceutical giant Takeda, also have explored shifting toward continuous vaccine manufacturing.

Tapia emphasizes that the continuous system such as the tubular reactor he helped develop has the advantage of being small, obviating the need for giant tanks that are housed in massive manufacturing facilities, which are difficult to build, staff, and maintain—especially given the rapid scale-up of production needed. Space is a major constraint that currently holds back traditional vaccine manufacturers from increasing production. "The problem comes when you have a pandemic, and you need to increase your manufacturing capacity by a factor of 10 or more," Tapia says.

Singhvi agrees that building large facilities to house the traditional vat-based process is a limiting factor in global vaccine production capacity. But creating these facilities is costly, and not possible with the limited financial and personnel resources in many places. Moreover, it’s not very feasible to invest the large resources in creating these giant manufacturing sites and just abandoning them for years until the next pandemic. “You can't put a tarp on something,” Singhvi says, because the buildings require maintenance.

Smaller, more affordable vaccine production machinery could mean more countries could have local vaccine production plants, he says: “It gives countries more agency to control their own destiny.” Resilience co-founder Singhvi hopes that his company can make production more efficient by setting up continuous manufacturing factories around the world which pharmaceutical companies turn to when they want to outsource their vaccine production.

Engineers and developers say that efficient manufacturing would eventually benefit all vaccines. The world witnessed a flurry of innovation in creating COVID-19 vaccines, and now there’s a push to carry that innovation into the manufacturing process. “I think we're really at a turning point,” Mukhopadhyay says, “both in terms of vaccine discovery, but also vaccine manufacturing itself.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For hundreds of millions of years, a top-shaped rubble pile called Bennu has orbited the sun in relative isolation. The asteroid, about a third of a mile wide at its equator, poses no immediate threat to our planet. But hundreds of years from now, there is a small chance that Bennu could slam into Earth.

In a new study published in the scientific journal Icarus, scientists used data from NASA’s OSIRIS-REx spacecraft to make a precise calculation of Bennu’s orbit and its future proximity to our home planet. The researchers then analyzed the impact hazard between now and the year 2300. The study finds a 1-in-1,750 chance of a future collision over the next three centuries—a slightly higher probability than previously estimated.

Nearly all of the riskiest encounters with Bennu will occur in the late 2100s and early 2200s, with the single likeliest impact coming on the afternoon of September 24, 2182. On that Tuesday, Bennu has about a 1-in-2,700 chance of hitting Earth.

The team—led by Davide Farnocchia, a navigation engineer at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory—reached its revised estimate by pinpointing Bennu’s distance from Earth to within about seven feet at dozens of times between 2019 and 2020. That level of precision is like measuring the distance between the Empire State Building and the Eiffel Tower to within a few thousandths of an inch.

“Bennu is by far the best characterized asteroid in the solar system,” says University of Arizona planetary scientist Dante Lauretta, OSIRIS-REx’s principal investigator and the study’s senior author. “We know where it’s going to be over 100 years into the future, within meters. No other object in the solar system has that level of fidelity to its orbital solution—even Earth!”

University of Arizona planetary scientist Amy Mainzer, an expert on near-Earth asteroids who wasn’t involved with the study, lauded the team’s “absolutely white-glove” calculations. “If you want to be able to predict where [an asteroid] is going to go in the future, that prediction is entirely determined by how well you can measure where it is today,” she says. “This team has made an extremely precise measurement.”

Despite the slightly higher chance of impact, the risks from Bennu shouldn’t keep anyone awake at night. There’s more than a 99.9 percent chance that Bennu will not hit Earth in the next three centuries, and an impact from Bennu wouldn’t cause a mass extinction like the dino-killing Chicxulub impact 66 million years ago. That asteroid was probably about six miles across; Bennu is less than a third of a mile wide, on average.

Even so, a collision with Bennu would be regionally devastating. An impact would pack the energy of more than 1.1 billion tons of TNT, roughly two million times the energy of last year’s devastating port explosion in Beirut, Lebanon.

Pinpointing an asteroid

Ever since Bennu’s discovery in September 1999, astronomers have carefully tracked the asteroid’s orbit with ground-based telescopes, including Puerto Rico’s iconic but now lost Arecibo Observatory. These data have let astronomers predict Bennu’s future location reasonably well over the next century.

Bennu is classified as a “potentially hazardous asteroid,” meaning the object is more than 460 feet (140 meters) wide and could theoretically come within 4.65 million miles of Earth. A 2014 study found that the asteroid had roughly a 0.037 percent chance of colliding with Earth between 2175 and 2199.

But until now, simulations have run into issues beyond September 2135. Previous predictions had found that Bennu will pass within 75,000 to 330,000 miles of Earth in 2135, possibly taking the asteroid closer to Earth than the moon. Bennu has practically no chance of hitting Earth then, but depending on precisely when and where Bennu makes its close approach, our planet’s gravity could tweak the asteroid’s orbit enough to put it on a future collision course.

Computer simulations have identified the small regions of space that Bennu would have to pass through to set up a future impact. The key question is whether Bennu’s actual trajectory in 2135 will pass through any of these “keyholes,” which range from several hundred feet to a few miles wide. Answering that question requires scientists to chart Bennu’s current trajectory—and everything that could affect its future path—with unprecedented precision.

OSIRIS-REx arrived at Bennu in late 2018 as NASA’s first—and humankind’s third—attempt to sample the surface of an asteroid. The spacecraft, which snatched a dusty, pebbly sample in October 2020, is currently on its way back to Earth to drop off the precious material. But before it grabbed its sample, OSIRIS-REx spent nearly two years orbiting and studying rubble-strewn Bennu.

Because the spacecraft spent so long tagging along with the asteroid, Farnocchia and his colleagues were able to use data from OSIRIS-REx to precisely chart the asteroid’s location. Their approach had the flavor of a high-school trigonometry problem: If you know the distance from OSIRIS-REx to Bennu, and the distance from OSIRIS-REx to Earth, then you can figure out the distance between Earth and Bennu.

The team focused on periods when researchers knew OSIRIS-REx’s position relative to Bennu to within a meter (3.3 feet), based on images the spacecraft was taking of the asteroid’s surface. They then measured the timing of radio signals exchanged between OSIRIS-REx and Earth to within 15 billionths of a second.

Combining these data meant that Farnocchia’s team could calculate the distance between Earth and Bennu to within several feet, at distances ranging from 52 million to more than 201 million miles.

The team also used OSIRIS-REx data to constrain a key non-gravitational force acting on Bennu that’s known as the Yarkovsky effect. As sunlight heats up Bennu’s surface, the asteroid’s surface re-emits energy as it cools. Because Bennu rotates, the net result is a subtle thrust acting on the asteroid.

Farnocchia’s team is now able to provide a precise estimate of how the Yarkovsky effect tweaks Bennu’s orbit over time. In a NASA press briefing on August 11, Farnocchia noted that this force is equal to the weight of three grapes on Earth—and that’s enough to cause Bennu to drift by about 934 feet a year.

A swirling solar system

The new study finds that in 2135, Bennu will come within about 123,000 miles of Earth’s surface, give or take 6,000 miles, a much more precise range than previous estimates. Even though this finding rules out many previously identified keyholes, some keyholes—and future collision courses—still fall within the orbit’s margin of error. From there, the team was able to revise their estimates for Bennu’s collision risk.

The lingering uncertainty over the space rock’s future trajectory doesn’t stem from the asteroid itself, or even from OSIRIS-REx’s data. It comes from the rest of the solar system.

When Farnocchia and his colleagues ran their simulations, they had to account for many factors, including how sunlight heats up Bennu and how hundreds of other objects in the solar system, even as far away as Pluto, gravitationally tug at the asteroid. The trouble is, researchers had to estimate the masses for most of the objects within a key group: the 343 largest bodies in the asteroid belt.

“It’s amazing to me that other asteroids have any influence at all,” says Lauretta. Once other sources of error get small enough, “these effects show up, and you’re like, Wow.”

Future missions should help refine those estimates. NASA’s upcoming Near-Earth Object (NEO) Surveyor mission, scheduled to launch in 2026, is an infrared space telescope designed to look for asteroids’ heat signatures, which can be used to estimate their sizes. The telescope is expected to discover hundreds of thousands more asteroids, as well as provide better data on the asteroids that have already been found.

“You want to know as much as you can about as many of the objects out there [as you can], so that you have a reasonable idea of what’s likely to happen,” says Mainzer, the NEO Surveyor’s principal investigator.

Mainzer and Lauretta add that sending more spacecraft to more asteroids would help—and OSIRIS-REx itself is poised to get in on the action. In September 2023, the spacecraft will fly by Earth, drop a capsule full of Bennu samples into the Utah desert, and continue its journey through the solar system. So far, Lauretta’s team has found only one viable follow-on target for OSIRIS-REx: the near-Earth asteroid Apophis, which will make a close approach to Earth in April 2029.

Earth is safe from Apophis for at least the next century. But setting aside its risks to our planet, visiting worlds like Apophis will give scientists whole new vistas and terrains to explore—and a broader sense of the solar system’s history.

Humankind also has more than a century to continue monitoring Bennu’s risk to Earth—and to modify that risk, if necessary. Already, space agencies are testing the procedures and technologies needed to neutralize an asteroid’s threat. In 2022, NASA’s DART spacecraft will slam into a roughly 560-foot-wide moonlet orbiting a near-Earth asteroid, with the goal of altering the moonlet’s orbit.

If humankind is threatened by an asteroid impact in the future, bigger versions of these “kinetic impactors” could be used to nudge the asteroid into a safe orbit—so long as we have at least several years’ notice before a predicted collision. For objects like Bennu, which was discovered nearly 200 years before any potential impacts, Mainzer says that humankind has “lots and lots and lots of options.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@One of the year’s most dazzling meteor showers—the Perseids—is set to reach its peak on August 12. In many places, the skies that night could be ideal for catching hundreds of falling stars.

When viewing conditions are good, Perseid-watchers can expect to see as many as 30 to 100 meteors blazing overhead each hour.

“The most important thing for observing meteor showers—besides getting the day and time right—is ensuring that you have the absolute darkest sky that you can,” says Edward Murphy, an astronomer at the University of Virginia. “There are really two things that play into that. One is light pollution, and one is what the moon is doing.”

In any year, the celestial spectacle can be affected by the glow of bright lights from urban areas, as well as by air pollution, which can create haze that blocks fainter meteors from view. This year, observers in the United States and Europe might additionally be stymied by wildfires and their resulting smoke and smog.

But one of the biggest hindrances in other years—the moon—is being cooperative in 2021: The waxing crescent will set several hours before this year’s Perseids really begin. That means sky-watchers far from city lights and under clear skies should have the best possible dark-sky conditions.

How to see the Perseids at peak

Meteor showers occur because Earth periodically crosses through fields of debris shed by passing comets and asteroids. Zooming through space at more than 100,000 miles an hour, those debris particles collide with the planet’s atmosphere and burn up, creating what people colloquially refer to as shooting stars.

2:31

Visible every August for at least the past 2,000 years, the Perseids are produced by debris from comet Swift-Tuttle , a 16-mile-wide hunk of ice and rock that orbits the sun once every 133 years. Its debris stream contains fluffy, pebble-size chunks that are a bit larger than the particles in an average comet or asteroid debris stream, Murphy says. For that reason, they tend to produce brighter meteors called fireballs as they burn up overhead.

As a result, the Perseids are visible from anywhere in the Northern Hemisphere—even under the most light-polluted nighttime skies—as well as from parts of the Southern Hemisphere, assuming clouds, smoke, and hazes stay away.

“Unlike a lot of other, more minor meteor showers, it’s more accessible even to people who live in cities,” says John Barentine, director of conservation for the International Dark-Sky Association (IDA). “The brightest of the Perseids are sufficiently bright that they would be seen regardless of how much light pollution was in a place.”

Bagging this shower’s best displays does mean staying up quite late—which isn’t necessarily onerous during the Northern Hemisphere’s warm summer months.

“I think that’s probably the biggest mistake that people make when they go out to see a meteor shower: They go out as soon as it gets dark,” Murphy says. “The problem is, they’re a few hours too early.”

This year, what’s considered the Perseids’ official peak—when Earth passes through the densest part of the rubble stream—is predicted to occur during the day on August 12. That’s not exactly convenient for spotting anything stellar other than the sun. But like all meteor showers, the Perseids tend to really get going in Act II—after local midnight (or 1 a.m. in most of the United States because of daylight savings time), when the night side of Earth is facing into the debris stream.

“Think of it like an automobile that has a windshield on the side facing forward,” Murphy says. “You get more bugs on the front windshield than you do on the back window.”

Meteors are typically even more numerous closer to 3 a.m., although you could spot quite a few starting around 10 p.m., when the constellation Perseus starts rising in the northeast. For the best show, Murphy recommends trying to go out about 3 a.m. August 12 when meteors are typically most numerous.

You’ll want to find a dark spot with a clear view of the sky, he says, and look toward the constellation Perseus in the northeast. Locating the Greek mythological hero is best accomplished by first spotting the constellation Cassiopeia, an extremely recognizable “W” or “M” formed by five bright stars. The middle two stars are aimed toward the slayer of monsters. Any meteors that appear to come from that direction are Perseids; the rest are interlopers.

Fading, falling stars

In general, Murphy says the Perseids can produce roughly a hundred visible meteors an hour—a number that’s calculated for the entire sky and is highly dependent on viewing conditions. Most people won’t be under pristine skies, though, and they can expect to see somewhere between 30 and 50 flaming fireballs crossing the sky during that time period.

But what about somewhere like the middle of Manhattan?

“Let’s say you went out to Central Park in New York City,” Barentine says. “You might see on the order of, if it’s a good year, maybe 10 to 20 per hour. You’re only going to see the brightest members of the Perseids, because the faint ones will all be below the threshold of the sky level.”

In 2016, scientists estimated that nearly 40 percent of the U.S. population was living under severely light-polluted skies, where city lights, glare, and sky glow prevent a clear view of the heavens.

Environmental pollutants can also bleach the nighttime sky. Barentine and his colleagues recently reported that eliminating urban air pollution can reduce nighttime sky brightness by as much as 40 percent—a hypothesis they were able to test when a cold front swept across Austria in 2019 and blew away much of the haze over Vienna for a couple of days. The resulting change in sky brightness closely matched their models.

Places like public lands, Forest Service land, park service, state parks—those are all good opportunities.

Barentine hasn’t yet studied the effects of fire-borne hazes on sky glow, but he anticipates that the effects will be similar or worse than with standard urban air pollution.

“The little particles of smoke have optical properties that are a bit different than the kinds of particles we looked at,” Barentine says. “They tend to be, in many cases, smaller. And the smaller the particles get, the more effective they are at scattering light when they encounter it.”

In other words, smaller particles are better at both reflecting light from the ground and blotting out cosmic lights.

In addition to this year’s moonless sky, there is another piece of good news for those eager to spy the Perseids: Satellite megaconstellations launched by companies such as SpaceX and OneWeb are unlikely to muck up your viewing experience. The bright streaks from those satellites tend to be the least visible around midnight and the early morning hours, although you might still see a few of them marching faintly through the sky.

If you’re keen on watching the Perseids, several online maps might help you find your way to a good dark sky. Light Pollution Map overlays local sky brightness readings atop a global map. Dark Site Finder shows publicly accessible, high-quality observing areas. And Dark Sky Map crowdsources information about good viewing areas and distributes it on a mobile platform. As well, the IDA website shows recognized International Dark Sky Places.

Barentine warns that if you do head out toward a dark spot on one of these maps, don’t inadvertently pull over on private property.

“Just be mindful of that, so that you don't inadvertently find yourself on the other end of an upset landowner,” he says. “Places like public lands, Forest Service land, park service, state parks—those are all good opportunities, even if they’re not especially dark.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

As the light warmed toward dusk, five people dressed in shades of green milled nervously around a baby elephant. All the science, all the theory leading up to this moment, checked out. But now, it was a question of practice: Would this three-foot-tall infant like the newly concocted baby formula? Would her body react well to it?

The five people, keepers at Reteti Elephant Sanctuary, northern Kenya’s only elephant orphanage, grasped one another’s hands. They were half-praying that she would be healthy, half-promising that they’d make sure of it. As baby Sera’s sips turned to glugs, and one downed bottle turned into two, the tension started to loosen. And in the days that followed, the feeble two-week-old gained weight and the strength to play with the other elephant calves at the orphanage.

The keepers celebrated their breakthrough and marveled at both its simplicity and sustainability. The core ingredient of the new formula was something that was in abundant supply: goat milk.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Young Meibae reaches out to keeper Naomi Leshongoro.

The team had been mulling over how to improve their milk recipe for a long time, says Katie Rowe, co-founder of Reteti, in the community-owned Namunyak Conservancy. The orphanage had used human baby formula since its establishment in 2016, but costs were high, cans had to be imported, and nutrients weren’t always natural. “I was looking at the ingredients and analyzing each micronutrient and macronutrient and seeing that what was being used in these tins was not fantastic,” Rowe says. “There were better options out there.”

The pandemic provided the push they needed to find that better option. Sourcing baby formula had become more difficult as lockdowns impeded travel from remote Reteti to cities that stocked the right products, and the collapse of the tourism industry meant that cost efficiency became more important than ever.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Samburu women walk to a wedding near the Reteti sanctuary. The sanctuary is in Namunyak, a community-owned conservancy.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The goat milk–based formula has proven easier to source and cheaper by half, but it’s also healthy for the calves and allows the orphanage to contribute to the local economy.

“The elephants are thriving. You can see nutritionally how much better it is for them; you can see it in their recovery after a very traumatic rescue; you can see it in their adjustment time to the rest of the orphaned herd,” Rowe says. It’s also brought about a shift in the relationship between the community and the calves. “When you are sharing your milk, when you are sharing your resources—it is bound to open up compassion for these animals too,” she says. (Read about how warriors who used to fear elephants now work at Reteti helping protect them.)

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A Samburu woman pours fresh goat milk into a container, which Reteti staff will come collect. During the pandemic, when livestock markets closed and tourism to wildlife conservancies dropped, selling milk to Reteti helped families continue to send children to school, pay medical bills, and buy food, pastoralist Stamen Lemajong says.

Healthy calves

Elephant calves drink milk until they’re at least two years old. For Reteti’s orphans, the immune-boosting nutrients from milk are particularly vital. Sera, like many orphaned calves, was abandoned after falling into a well. That means she was standing in water for hours or even days before she was found, making her susceptible to illnesses such as pneumonia. On top of that, the trauma of being separated from her herd was another challenge to her immune system.

Years of calculating in notebooks, spreadsheets, and the orphanage chalkboard the protein, fat, and carbohydrate levels of different milks showed time and again that goat milk could be a good base for the young elephants’ diet. That is, combined with several other ingredients, many of which Reteti had already been using: moringa leaves, probiotics, nutritional supplements, desiccated coconut, whey protein, spirulina, honey, molasses, oats, and multivitamins.

Since its debut in February 2020 with tiny Sera, the new formula has been a resounding success. Eight young calves that arrived in Reteti in the subsequent months have been reared on it and are thriving too.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

New income

The new formula has also been a success for the Samburu community, which sells goat milk to the orphanage.

“This has given us very big benefits,” says pastoralist Stamen Lemajong. Each morning, Lemajong’s family and others travel along acacia-lined paths to sell more than 150 liters of milk to the sanctuary every day. That’s enough for the seven youngest calves who rely on it, but the sanctuary is still working on sourcing enough milk to transition all 23 orphans onto the new formula.

“We use the income for everything—to take the kids to school, paying hospital bills,” Lemajong says. “And in times of hardship last year it has been a huge help. Then we could even buy food with it.”

The pandemic has been hard for pastoralists, he says. Family members lost jobs, and the closure of livestock markets made it difficult for anyone in the community to sell animals—the main, and often only, source of income.

“Luckily it was at that time that we started selling to the elephant sanctuary,” he says. “If it weren’t for the milk we were sending, I don’t know what we would have done.” (Learn more about how wildlife conservation in northern Kenya survived the pandemic.)

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Mike Learka cools the goat's milk off after pasteurizing it for the elephants at Reteti.

Protecting the land

But even as the impacts of COVID-19 start to diminish, the region faces another hardship: drought. Meager rains threaten livestock, endanger wildlife, and increase the chances of clashes between the two. Even Sera’s plight is likely to become more common. “The more we get dry season, the more these communities keep on digging wells, says Reteti keeper Dorothy Lowakutuk. “More elephants are falling in.”

While drought can’t be eliminated, its effects can be mitigated through measures like protecting the soil. Right now, about 70 percent of Namunyak Conservancy’s land is severely degraded, says Titus Letaapo, who oversees the sanctuary’s goat milk market project.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Reteti’s embrace of goat milk and concern about land degradation might seem like a point of tension: After all, overgrazing by goats degrades land. But, Letaapo’s team of eco-rangers teaches pastoralists best practices, like grass-protecting rotational grazing, as well as methods to increase milk yields. One goal with the latter is for people to be able to expand their incomes without necessarily having to expand their herds.

“The community benefitted a lot through the sanctuary,” says milk seller Lemajong. Although, he says, the first time he went to the orphanage he found it jarring.

“Seeing elephants being kept…like domestic goats and cows was a big surprise,” he laughs. But it serves as yet another reminder of the ways in which their fates, and everyone else’s in this part of northern Kenya, are intertwined.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The remains of a massive cypress tree sits inside a small plaza in Mexico City, surrounded by fencing and illuminated by four spotlights at night. An old sign explains its significance: “This is the tree where Hernán Cortés wept after being defeated by the Aztec defenders.”

We Mexicans call it El Árbol de la Noche Triste, or The Tree of the Sad Night, and learn about it since grade school from government-issued history textbooks. The story goes something like this: In March 1519, a couple of hundred Spaniards, led by a stubborn but resourceful man with some legal training named Hernán Cortés, appeared on the Gulf of Mexico coast. They established contact with the mighty Aztecs of central Mexico and, after exchanging messages and gifts, made their way to the Valley of Mexico and the Aztec stronghold of Tenochtitlan (downtown Mexico City).

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: This collage map, made by photographer Eunice Adorno, features archival photographs of important ancient routes and monuments in Tenochtitlan, as well moments from the city's history. The base of the map is a blue plastic widely used by modern merchants in Mexico City, and represents the water on which Tenochtitlan was established some 700 years ago. Collage by Eunice Adorno

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Remarkably, the Aztec tlatoani (emperor) Moctezuma initially welcomed the strangers. The Europeans were thus able to wander freely, according to our textbooks, marveling at the lavish buildings and floating gardens of a city built on top of an island in the middle of five interconnected lakes. From the top of Tenochtitlan’s grandest temple, the Templo Mayor, the visitors gazed out at dozens of city-states spreading all around the surrounding lakeshores. Some of these city-states had once been rivals of the Aztecs, but Tenochtitlan had become the dominant power by the 1500s.

Read more about the complex Aztec alliance.

Yet the newcomers outlasted their welcome. Prompted by mistrust and lack of understanding, on May 22, 1520 the Spanish launched an unprovoked attack on a group of unarmed Aztecs during a ceremony at the Templo Mayor. The formidable Aztec warriors fought back, driving the intruders from their island city and inflicting heavy casualties along the way. More than half of the Spanish contingent may have perished during the chaotic retreat. At some distance from Tenochtitlan, Cortés and his followers finally paused in a cypress grove to catch their breath, where the defeated Spanish leader sat at the base of a tree—perhaps the famous Árbol—and wept, as our textbooks and history classes would have it.

This Aztec victory proved temporary, however. The following year, Cortés returned with an army of Spanish soldiers and tens of thousands of Indigenous allies. After a long siege that cut the fresh water supply to the island, and following a multi-pronged attack that included ships assembled on the lakeshores and equipped with artillery pieces, Tenochtitlan finally surrendered to the Spanish and their allies on August 13, 1521, exactly 500 years ago today.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A painting in the British Embassy collection in Mexico City depicts Cortés' retreat from Tenochtitlan in May 1520. According to tradition, on the evening of his defeat, Cortés sat beneath a cypress tree and wept. Photograph of painting by Ann Ronan Pictures, via Hulton Archive/Getty

This summer, I visited the Tree of the Sad Night and found city workers preparing for the fateful anniversary. At the plaza, I ran into a working crew anchoring a gleaming new sign that identified the famous tree as the Árbol de la Noche Victoriosa or “Tree of the Victorious Night.” It was a stark change in point of view.

Below this novel Spanish designation, the sign offered an even more contrasting rendition in Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs that is still spoken by more than a million Indigenous people in central and southern Mexico: “Quautli in Yohualli Paquiliztli, nican ochoca” or “Tree of the Happy Night, here he cried.”

Finding the right words

The usual textbook portrayal of a band of brave Europeans toppling the most powerful Indigenous empire in the Americas may have some cinematic qualities but has always been suspect, particularly to professional historians like myself. Scholars very seldom speak with one voice, but there is broad consensus that understanding the events of 500 years ago as a binary clash between “Spaniards” and “Natives” is simply wrong.

Discover how artificial intelligence is helping to preserve Aztec culture.

Instead, the war that unfolded in 1519-1521 involved multiple and fiercely independent Mesoamerican city-states such as Cempoala, Tlaxcala, and Texcoco, organized in ever-shifting coalitions, one of which included a handful of Spaniards. Cortés and his conquistadors may have represented at the most one or two percent of the total forces on the field.

Insights such as this one are making present-day politicians and the public at large cast about for new ways to understand and refer to what happened that summer of 1521. Was it the Conquest of Mexico? A Mesoamerican war? An encounter of two worlds? A genocide?

The COVID-19 pandemic has hit Mexico hard, forcing the closure of museums and exhibits that in other circumstances would have been natural venues for the quincentennial. Still, federal and city authorities have organized commemorative events, especially on the zocalo, or main plaza, of Mexico City where a 45-foot model of the Templo Mayor complete with state-of-the art illumination will be unveiled, just a couple of hundred yards away from the ruins of the original.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A dancer dressed in feathers stands in front of the 16th-century Metropolitan Cathedral on the zocalo, or main square, of Mexico City. Dancers commemorate the founding of Tenochtitlan each year.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

In the meantime, ordinary Mexicans have chosen to remember the anniversary in their own ways. Whether at the Árbol, the Templo Mayor, or elsewhere in Mexico City, I ran into men and women decked out in pre-Columbian paraphernalia, dancing and performing limpias, spiritual cleanses. Some of these performers were there merely to make a living, asking for donations after their dances and charging fees for the limpias. But many of them were also committed to a greater or lesser extent to keeping Mesoamerican—and particularly Aztec—traditions alive. Some of them study Nahuatl, read history, and try to make sense of those long-ago events.

Learn about excavations at the Templo Mayor.

One morning, at the Templo Mayor, men and women were gathering in front of the ruins after having spent the night outdoors, in defiance of a stubborn rain, to honor Cuitláhuac, Moctezuma’s younger brother and a reputed warrior who had ruled Tenochtitlan briefly after Moctezuma’s death. As the rain continued through the morning, they set up a canopy and underneath it laid out candles, copal, food offerings, and flowers. A few Xoloitzcuintli—hairless dogs descended from pre-Columbian breeds that were nearly wiped out by the Europeans—sniffed around the area. To one side, there were banners with Cuitláhuac’s image and yet more flowers. The dancing started around noon, driven by relentless drumming and attracting spectators. During a brief pause, an elderly man walked toward the onlookers and announced, “He never lost a battle to the Spanish.”

Spaniards in the story

Cortés died in Spain in 1547, but his mortal remains were returned to Mexico as he had stipulated in his last will and testament. After various moves, they came to rest at a hospital in downtown Mexico City, merely three blocks from the Templo Mayor. Some historical traditions affirm that it was around these grounds where Cortés and Moctezuma met for the first time.

Cortés himself had founded the Hospital de Jesús as early as 1524 and, remarkably, it remains in operation. This year, however, the building is off limits in spite of its historical significance. “Only patients can come inside because of the pandemic,” a receptionist tersely replied when I asked if I could go inside to see a bust of Cortés that lays discreetly in an interior courtyard.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Visitors rest on a monument to Cortés in the Cortés Pass in Amecameca, some 35 miles east of Mexico City. His troops crossed the pass, 11,800 feet above sea level, to reach Tenochtitlan.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

It is possibly the only public bust of the conquistador in all of Mexico. Ever since Mexico achieved its independence from Spain in the early 19th century, Cortés has become notable for his absence, although he still manages to cast a long historical shadow. Very few streets or places are named after him. About 40 years ago, a statue of Cortés was erected in the neighborhood of Coyoacán, but the local residents complained and threw painting on it. The statue did not last long.

More recently, other Spanish conquistadors have come under similar scrutiny. Just a few blocks away from the Árbol, there is a street called “Puente de Alvarado” or “Alvarado’s Bridge,” named after Spanish conquistador Pedro de Alvarado who, according to the early chronicles, was the one who ordered the unprovoked 1520 attack on the Aztecs celebrating at Tenochtitlan. Yet, earlier this year, Mexico City Mayor Claudia Sheinbaum indignantly asked, “How is it possible that we have a street named Puente de Alvarado when Alvarado was the principal perpetrator of the massacre at the Templo Mayor?” The thoroughfare is now called “Calzada México-Tenochtitlan.”

Still, 16th-century Spaniards were masters at writing themselves into the story, especially Cortés himself, a born self-promoter. His Second Letter to the Spanish King—published widely in Europe and quoted by historians—is a monument to selective storytelling, exaggeration, and shameless lying. When he wrote his letter at the end of October 1520, Cortés and his followers were still licking their wounds four months after their hasty retreat from Tenochtitlan and the “Sad Night” (now “Victorious” or “Happy”). Nonetheless, the Spanish leader had little trouble boasting about having already won a magnificent kingdom, “so Your Majesty can justly title yourself its new emperor.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Aztec emperor Moctezuma is depicted surrendering to Cortés in this 1807 engraving. Via Prisma/Universal Images Group/Getty

A global turning point

In the decades and centuries that followed that pivotal summer 500 years ago, Spain did come to rule what is now Mexico, Central America, and parts of the United States; and, in the fullness of time, much of the western hemisphere. The most powerful European empire of the early modern era was able to exploit this large region in very tangible ways that ranged from the extraction of minerals and plant products to the outright enslavement of Indigenous peoples. Between 1500 and 1800, around 80 percent of all the silver produced in the world came out of New World mines. Related to this prodigious extractive activity, some 2.5 to 5 million Native Americans were enslaved in the American continent between the arrival of Columbus and the beginning of the 20th century, according to my estimates.

Beyond such terrible consequences for the Americas, the European takeover of America had dramatic repercussions for the rest of the world. Resources extracted from the continent gave Europeans just enough of an edge to lead the industrial revolution and gain ascendancy until quite recently. In the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries, parts of China, Japan, and India enjoyed levels of technological and institutional development comparable to those of Europe. Yet the naked exploitation of the Americas—that began in earnest with the takeover of Mexico—enabled some parts of the Old World to grow its population and wealth and pull ahead from the rest of the world.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The Spanish conquest also turned Mexico into a major bridge between East and West. Barely nine months after downfall of Tenochtitlan, Cortés himself established a beachhead on the Pacific coast. “I have started building ships and brigantines to explore all the secrets of that coast,” he wrote to the Spanish monarch in 1522, “and this will undoubtedly reveal marvelous things.” In 1527-1528, Cortés launched an expedition from Mexico to Asia. By the 1560s, annual Spanish galleons connected Asia with the Americas, finally giving rise to the global world that we now know.

National narrative

When I got together with my family and friends in Mexico City, few seemed particularly interested talking about the quincentennial. COVID-19 has caused Mexico’s worst economic contraction since the 1930s, so the conversation naturally veered toward lost jobs, insecurity in the streets, or plans for moving out of the city to greener pastures.

Nonetheless, some of them were intrigued by the sheer proliferation of anniversaries during this fateful pandemic year. While the destruction of the magnificent city-state of the Aztecs in 1521 may not seem worth remembering, Mexicans are also celebrating the end of Mexico’s wars of independence from Spain in September 1821. Five hundred years of la conquista thus coincides with 200 years of la consumación de la independencia; the first a tragedy commemorated in August and the second a party reserved for September.

As if this were not enough, the Mexican president along with Mexico City authorities added a third major anniversary to this calendar year: 700 years since the founding of the Aztec Empire in May of 1321 (even though the date remains controversial, as early sources are vague and sometimes refer to 1325 rather than 1321).

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Still, there is an obvious logic to this stacking up of three major commemorations in succession. In the shorthand narrative of the nation, Mexico began to take shape around seven hundred years ago, when Indigenous migrants arrived in the Valley of Mexico and spotted an eagle devouring a serpent on an island in the middle of a lake—a scene memorialized today on the Mexican flag. Five hundred years ago, however, the nation was temporarily hijacked by Spain; and 200 years ago, it was finally—and triumphantly—restored.

New traditions and meanings

Meanwhile, out in the streets of Mexico, men and women continue to grapple with such historical milestones in their own ways, creating new traditions and meanings. This process is perhaps most evident at the small plaza of the “Tree of the Victorious Night.” Even though a fireworks accident in 1980 reduced the cypress to a burnt stump, it continues to attract visitors and invite reinterpretation.

On a recent day of plaza festivities in late June, a community organizer named Amalia Rosas offered a workshop on pre-contact foods. In an era when Mexicans suffer from some of the highest rates of obesity and diabetes in the world, Rosas exhorted attendees to give up processed meals and return to beans, squash, corn, and other healthful foods of our pre-Columbian ancestors.

A new mural was also unveiled in the plaza, depicting Spaniards fleeing the island-city of Tenochtitlan and making Indigenous porters carry heavy loads while the conquistadors themselves try to fend off attacks from Aztec warriors. “Cuitláhuac unleashed the offensive”—the accompanying text explains—as they [the Spanish] fled loaded with gold.”

Yet other Mexicans remain skeptical. During one of my visits, I watched an elderly couple milling about the tree stump. While the man took pictures of the stump with charred limbs sticking up, the woman read the new sign characterizing the site as a place of victory and happiness. Then she wistfully commented, to no one in particular: “History has been manipulated so much.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A woolly mammoth’s tusk is a story written in ivory. It sprouts from beneath the mammoth’s gums, cells dividing continually, even daily.

“The tip of the tusk is the young mammoth,” says Matthew Wooller, an ecologist at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. “The base of the tusk is the old mammoth. Everything between is the mammoth’s lifetime.” The tusk is a record of its owner’s travels, diet, and even its death. The concept is simple, says Wooller. What’s tricky is accessing a tusk’s chemical composition and interpreting it.

In a new study Wooller led a group of researchers doing just that. Examining the tusk of a woolly mammoth that lived about 17,000 years ago, they uncovered details about its activities from birth to death. They also retraced its footsteps across Ice Age Alaska over 28 years, marking the first time scientists have been able to reconstruct a mammoth’s life history in such fine detail.

The research, published today in Science, relied on cutting-edge tools and techniques to provide clues about how woolly mammoths lived, including their possible interactions with humans. The work may also inform studies about why these iconic animals ultimately went extinct and about how today’s big mammals might react to a steadily warming world. (Find out how scientists think they could resurrect a woolly mammoth.)

The researchers came as close as possible to reconstructing a mammoth’s life, short of “going back in time and putting a GPS collar on a woolly mammoth,” says Vanderbilt University paleontologist Larisa DeSantis, who wasn’t involved in the study.

“Just reading the paper, I felt like Jane Goodall observing these animals.”

Carving into a mammoth tusk

I met Wooller in the summer of 2018, at the university office where he leads the Alaska Isotopic Research Laboratory. Isotopes are atoms of an element that, because of missing or extra neutrons, have atomic weights slightly different from one another. In recent years scientists have used isotopes to reconstruct ancient human diets, solve cold case murders, and identify drug smuggling routes.

“It’s a real boom industry,” Wooller says.

As he later points out in an email, his name bears a striking resemblance to the subject of his latest research. (“We call it the Wooller mammoth,” jokes Florida State paleontologist Gregory Erickson, a co-author on the paper.) But that’s where the similarities end; Wooller’s face and head are clean-shaven, his glasses trim, his accent crisply British.

From his office, he leads the way down the hall to his lab. Gas cylinders and bits of bone and horn fringe the lab’s walls. In the center of the room, resting on a black counter, sits the mammoth tusk—five-and-a-half-feet long, thicker than my arm, with a slow corkscrew curve from one end to the other. It’s split lengthwise down the middle like a long, spiraling hotdog bun.

Tusks grow in distinct internal layers that look like a stack of ice-cream sugar cones, Wooller explains, but the divisions between layers become irregular on the outside of the tusk. To capture the entire chemical record of the tusk, the team needed samples from its center. Maneuvering the curved, 50-pound tusk through a bandsaw was the project’s first challenge. “We broke a couple blades,” he says.

After splitting the tusk, the team took wedge-shaped cuts from its center, each five centimeters long, so they could feed the pieces into a machine that occupies one side of the lab. Called a Laser Ablation Multi-Collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer, the machine uses a laser to vaporize—or ablate—tiny bits of material. It then analyzes the resulting atomic mass of the chemicals.

The machine can take many isotopic readings per inch, providing a level of detail unavailable by other methods. Slowly, its laser scrawling a pointillism track across the ivory, it teased out the chemical clues held in the tusk fragments. (Also find out how scientists extracted million-year-old DNA from mammoth teeth.)

"Like a chemical GPS"

Strontium isotopes make up the heart of the study. Animals acquire strontium through the plants they eat, which absorb it from the underlying rock. Different geological regions have different strontium isotopic signatures. While the climate of Alaska has changed dramatically since the Pleistocene epoch, its geological arrangement hasn’t. As the mammoth ate its way across the landscape, the strontium being sequestered in its tusks became a record of its travels. The tusk is “like a chemical GPS,” Wooller says—one with 340,000 entries.

“It’s super-high-resolution data, using the laser to look at, like, daily strontium isotopes across the mammoth tusk,” says study co-leader Clément Bataille, a geochemist at the University of Ottawa.

To tie the strontium data points to actual locations on the map, Wooller’s team used modern Alaskan voles. The University of Alaska’s Museum of the North has an extensive collection of the small, herbivorous rodents. They tend not to travel very far, which means that the strontium in their teeth is a good representation of the geological region where they live. “They’re like citizen scientists,” Wooller says of the voles. “They’re sampling the local conditions.”

Bataille and Juliette Funck, then a Ph.D. student at Wooller’s lab, used the vole data to create a strontium map of Alaska. Bataille then built a model that correlated the data points from the tusk to that map. The model took into account certain physical realities—a mammoth can’t fly or scale cliffs, Wooller noted, “so we can rule out certain parts of the landscape.” Tracing its footprints from the location of its death, Bataille followed the mammoth’s path back to the beginning.

Just reading the paper, I felt like Jane Goodall observing these animals.

While Wooller and his colleagues worked to track the mammoth’s movements, Beth Shapiro and Katie Moon at the University of California, Santa Cruz, extracted fragments of ancient DNA from the mammoth fossil to learn its sex. They also pinpointed the century of its birth using radiocarbon dating.

At Florida State, Erickson analyzed tiny striations in the tusk’s dentine, caused by seasonal changes and even the daily cycle of activity and sleep to mark out the years, months, and days of the mammoth’s life. Joined together, these details transformed the chemicals contained in the tusk into an Ice Age biography of unprecedented richness, a story of family, migration, and an untimely death.

Following in Kik’s footsteps

Kik, as the team nicknamed this mammoth, was a male born 17,100 years ago in what is now northeastern Alaska. At the time of his birth, the last glacial maximum of the Pleistocene was just beginning to wane. Between Alaska and Russia stretched a vast plain that was too dry for glaciers to form. Scientists debate exactly what this region looked like, but the plentiful fossils of bison, mammoths, caribou, horses, musk oxen, and lions suggest something like a cold-weather Serengeti. The landscape was clothed in a mix of grasses, rushes, and sagebrush that scientists now call the “mammoth steppe.”

Kik spent the first years of his life in a small part of Alaska’s interior, south of the Brooks Range, the mountain chain that cuts across the state’s upper third. He was weaned at two years old, a dietary shift recorded by carbon and oxygen isotopes. In the years that followed, his movements increased. He seems to have spent winters in the lowlands and summers in the foothills—perhaps to avoid biting insects, Wooller says.

He ranged back and forth, in a migratory pattern that mirrors the movements of modern African elephants, Wooller says. Scientists had long thought might be the case. “We use elephants as a bit of a mental image of what mammoths might be doing on the landscape,” he says. But until now, there was no proof.

It’s likely Kik’s experiences mirrored modern elephants in another way: “When it was a young mammoth, it was probably part of a herd,” Wooller says. The mammoth must have spent his early years with his mother, and probably with a larger group of other female and juvenile mammoths. In effect, tracking young Kik means tracking his herd too. (Also read about the similarities between mammoth tusks and elephant ivory—and why that’s a problem for combating smugglers.)

When Kik was 16, his movements abruptly changed. When male African and Asian elephants reach sexual maturity, they leave the herd and go wandering, either on their own or in small groups with other male elephants. It appears that Kik did the same. He began ranging farther, through the passes at the western edge of the Brooks Range and onto Alaska’s North Slope, a route that migrating caribou herds still follow today.

“They were once upon a time migrating alongside mammoths,” Wooller says. “I think that’s sort of a neat image.”

4:42

The final isotope the team studied tells how Kik’s story ends. In the summer of his 27th year, the nitrogen isotopes in his tusk began to change. Different foods produce different nitrogen isotope signatures, and that summer, Kik’s nitrogen isotopes began to resemble those of a carnivore. For a plant-eating mammoth, it could mean only one thing: Kik’s body was eating itself. He was starving.

Sometimes old elephants starve after their teeth are too worn down to use, says study co-author Daniel Mann, a Quaternary scientist at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. But Kik was still relatively young, and since the tusk was found next to pieces of the mammoth’s skull, the scientists could examine the teeth and see they were in good condition. “I would suspect that it had some kind of injury,” Mann says of the mammoth.

In the fall of his final year, Kik traveled from today’s Alaska’s Seward Peninsula to the northeastern flank of the Brooks Range. There he stayed, wandering through the winter in a region of sand dunes west of the Colville River. Then, in late winter or early spring, he arrived in the area where he would remain for most of the next 17,000 years, what is now the edge of a shallow canyon carved by one of the Colville’s tributaries, the Kikiakrorak River—Kik for short.

Ancient clues to future calamity

“It’s pretty wild to have that kind of data set for an individual animal,” says Yukon government paleontologist Grant Zazula, who was not involved in the study. “This is really going to open up a huge door of new projects in places like Alaska and Yukon, where we have a real wealth of fossils available for study.”

Eventually, isotopic studies could help answer one of the biggest lingering questions about woolly mammoths: why they went extinct. Many scientists think that human hunters were what drove woolly mammoths and scores of other large mammals to extinction in the late Pleistocene and early Holocene. Proponents of this “overkill” hypothesis argue that even a small number of people could have killed off the slow-breeding mammals. Other scientists argue that a changing climate played a bigger role in the extinctions.

While Kik’s story doesn’t settle the debate, Wooller says, it does point to how both human predation and climate change could have contributed.

The earliest unequivocal evidence of humans in the region is from around 14,000 years ago, thousands of years after Kik died. While archaeologists fiercely debate when the first people arrived in North America, mammoths didn’t go extinct on mainland Alaska until around 13,000 years ago, so it’s likely that mammoths and humans overlapped there for more than a thousand years.

Bison and elk seem to have been hunters’ preferred targets, says study co-author Joshua Reuther, an archaeologist at the Museum of the North. The fact that Kik followed a regular migration route suggests that woolly mammoths might have made an attractive target too. “Herd animals, they’re much more reliable than solitary animals like moose,” he says.

In the millennia after Kik’s life, the mammoth steppe slowly filled with trees, Wooller says, shrinking the mammoths’ preferred habitat, constricting their movements across the landscape, and perhaps pushing them even more into the path of this new and dangerous predator. It is a hint too, he says, of the pressures that modern animals may face as climate change causes sudden shifts in ecosystems. Already, scientists say, the changing climate in Alaska has caused shifts in the movements of caribou, the mammoth’s ancient migrational companions.

“We’re living in a world in which humans and climate change are both having impacts on animals,” DeSantis says. “If that was the deadly combination that led to the large animal extinctions that happened in the Pleistocene, we really need to be cautious.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stand up, lie down, turn around, and stretch their legs. Pregnant pigs should live in large enough spaces to do those things, Californians have declared.

So have the people of Massachusetts. Whole Foods concurs, as do McDonald’s, Walmart, and more than 50 other companies that sell pork.

But the majority of the country’s six million breeding sows spend a significant portion of their four-month pregnancies—if not all—in gestation crates: seven-by-two-foot metal cages they can’t turn or stretch in. By keeping pigs isolated in small spaces, pork producers can keep more pigs in a single building and prevent sows from potentially injuring each other, they say.

Nine states have banned the use of gestation crates. In 2018, California voters passed a ballot initiative that took it a step further. As of January 2022, California prohibits the sale of meat produced anywhere in the U.S. from pigs whose mothers were kept in gestation crates and from calves who have been confined in veal crates. The initiative—nearly identical to one Massachusetts passed in 2016—also bans the sale of eggs laid by caged hens.

Veal and egg producers are on track to comply, the AP reports, but most pork producers are not. Only 4 percent of the country’s 66,000 pork producers currently meet the new laws’ minimum space requirements of 24 square feet.

Though the law was passed at the state level, it’s having national consequences. It’s been hailed by animal welfare advocates as a groundbreaking improvement—and it’s been attacked by much of the meat industry as an overreach that’ll make meat more expensive for everyone. For example: An Iowa pig farm would have to overhaul its pig housing if it wants to sell pork in California, even if some of the pigs it raises still end up in other states.

Pork is a $23 billion industry in the United States. Trade groups have challenged the law in federal court, but so far, the courts have sided with California voters. With less than five months before the law goes into effect, opponents are running out of options.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Maximized for efficiency

Most pigs in the U.S. live in “concentrated animal feeding operations” (CAFOs). Often referred to as “factory farms,” these large-scale industrial facilities are designed to maximize production at minimal cost.

Gestation crates and farrowing crates—for newborn piglets, who are kept separated from the mother, suckling through slats—are standard. After three weeks, piglets are removed and sows are impregnated again. Sows can produce up to three litters per year, according to the American Meat Science Association. The process is typically repeated until a sow is three or four years old, and then she is slaughtered for meat.



Jim Monroe, spokesperson for the National Pork Producers Council (NPPC), a trade group that opposes California’s law, says the conventional hog farming setup is “informed by veterinarians based on animal behavior and what’s needed to protect pigs and keep food safe.” Monroe contends that “no one is more committed to excellent animal care than American hog farmers.”



Josh Balk, vice president of farmed animal welfare at the Humane Society of the United States—which drafted Proposition 12—says crates cause physical and psychological distress. It’s “absolute common sense that an animal should be able to turn around,” Balk says, citing studies that have shown that crated sows can suffer from weakened bones, overgrown hooves, urinary tract infections, and repeated bar biting—behavior often indicating psychological distress.

While the federal Animal Welfare Act regulates the treatment of animals used in research and for exhibition at places like zoos, there are no federal laws that regulate treatment of animals farmed for food, says Delcianna Winders, director of Vermont Law School’s Animal Law Program. Where regulations do exist, they’ve been imposed at the state level, often following public outrage, such as bans on caging egg-laying hens, currently in place in nine states.

California’s and Massachusetts’ laws will be the strictest in the country. “It’s really telling about how woefully inadequate our legal protections are,” Winders says. “Something that gives [pregnant pigs and calves] enough space to turn around is the most celebrated protection for these animals.”

Galina Hale, a professor of economics at the University of California, Santa Cruz, and expert at sustainability nonprofit Food System Innovations, says the lack of federal regulations is “a form of a subsidy to factory farming. They are allowed to do whatever they want to increase production per dollar of investment.” The lack of regulations applies to all farms but, she argues, but it especially rewards large-scale farms that densely pack their facilities with pigs, putting smaller farms that give their pigs more space at an economic disadvantage.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The controversy

The NPPC and other meat industry trade groups have argued in court that California’s law violates the U.S. Constitution’s Commerce Clause by allowing one state to regulate businesses outside its borders.

“California, which doesn’t have any significant commercial hog production, is seeking to regulate how farmers across the country operate, imposing onerous regulations, inspection and permitting requirements, and highly prescriptive measures on livestock farmers,” the NPPC says on its website.

But so far, three federal courts have disagreed with that argument, ruling that Californians have the constitutional right to regulate products sold in their state. The Supreme Court declined to hear the case in June 2021.

The NPCC’s Monroe argues that overhauling the industry to cater to specific states is unsustainable. “How does our national pork production system respond when another state decides to establish different pork production standards?” he says.

Not all pork producers are pushing back. Hormel, a top pork producer, has said that it will fully comply with the law. Perdue has come out in favor of it. Its pork divisions, Niman Ranch and Coleman Farms, make up less than one percent of the national pork industry, but none of their farms, which own 32,800 sows, use crates.

“There’s nothing humane about keeping a sow in a seven-foot-by-two-foot crate for the four-month gestation period,” says Chris Oliviero, general manager at Niman Ranch, which comprises 740 family farms in Iowa. “There’s a high cost to cheap food that we don’t talk about very much, and Prop. 12 is one step in the right direction—it’s better for animals, farmers, and communities.”

On the other hand, higher welfare standards translate to higher production costs, and higher costs for supermarket shoppers. Niman Ranch pork costs more on the shelf, but the tradeoff is that its farmers go beyond the requirements set by California’s Proposition 12, Oliviero says.

Sows live either outside on pasture or in groups in barns, with the freedom to move around. Niman farmers don’t cut off pigs’ tails (an industry-standard practice, typically done without painkillers, to prevent pigs from biting each others’ tails). Niman also provides pigs with hay bedding (as opposed to industry-standard concrete or slatted floors), allowing them to engage in natural behaviors like digging and nesting.

Opponents, including the NPPC, argue the regulations will decrease productivity and harm small farmers.

Austin Frerick, deputy director and agriculture specialist at the Thurman Arnold Project, a competition policy research group at Yale University, expects the opposite will be true. “The ones complaining are the industrial operations that pack hogs into metal sheds that never see the light of day or even a blade of grass,” he says. “That's why I see this legislation as extremely pro-farmer, as it will enhance the market position of traditional hog farmers over corporate operations.” (Since 1992 in Iowa, for example, the number of farms has decreased by 80 percent, but the number of pigs has risen, as small farms have been replaced by industrial-scale CAFOs.)

Will bacon disappear?

Despite recent headlines proclaiming otherwise, bacon will not disappear from California in 2021. But it may get more expensive.



It’ll cost “billions of dollars” for U.S. hog farms to renovate their facilities, the NPPC’s Monroe says.

“The cost of production has to go up,” Hale says. “That’s obvious.”

But Californians knew price increases were a possibility when they voted to pass this bill—the opposition made that a central part of their argument against passage of the law in 2018.

Just how much pork prices may increase is still unclear, and it will depend in part on how many farms move to comply with the regulations. If many choose not to, California’s pork supply may drop and prices could rise more significantly. One study, by a consulting group hired by opponents, estimates that if California’s pork supply decreases by half, prices for pork may rise by 60 percent, for instance. But the California Department of Food and Agriculture estimates that the price for pork and veal per Californian will go up by only $10 per year.

One thing that’s certain: Most pork suppliers won’t have upgraded their facilities for pregnant hogs by January 2022, when the law goes into effect. “If there is not an extension on the timeline and/or other changes, I currently expect notable reductions in the volume of some pork items available in [California] come January 2022,” says Glynn Tonsor, an agricultural economist at Kansas State University.

Producers that choose to comply likely would renovate only a portion of their facilities and make sure that meat from that section of the farm is allocated to California markets, Tonsor and Hale say.

The industry has long talked about phasing out gestation crates, but it has delayed repeatedly, says Winders, from Vermont Law School. California’s law may be the push that’s needed, she says, “but I have to underscore that it’s such a baby step.”

Nonetheless, it’s a step in the right direction, Oliviero says. “Most change starts small and builds momentum over time.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As Alexander the Great did in 330 B.C., Taliban forces this week conquered the strategic cities of Herat and Kandahar while also taking a dozen other major towns across Afghanistan. The sudden victories caught the nation’s museum curators and archaeologists off guard, and they are scrambling to secure sites and artifacts still under their control. The fate of those within Taliban-run territory remains uncertain.

“We didn’t expect this to happen so quickly,” said Noor Agha Noori, who leads Afghanistan’s Institute of Archaeology in Kabul. Officials intended to transport artifacts from cities like Herat and Kandahar for safekeeping, but the abrupt collapse of Afghan government resistance in recent days prevented those actions.

Now, with Taliban forces closing in on Kabul, the collection of more than 80,000 artifacts in Afghanistan’s National Museum is vulnerable. “We have great concerns for the safety of our staff and collections,” said Mohammad Fahim Rahimi, the museum's director.

As an important crossroads for millennia, Afghanistan has an unusually rich heritage. Here, Buddhism spread to China, while Zoroastrianism, Christianity, Judaism, and Hinduism flourished before and after the arrival of Islam in the seventh century A.D. As a major artery on the Silk Road connecting India with Iran and China, Afghanistan is strung with remains of ancient cities, monasteries, and caravanserais that housed travelers—including Marco Polo on his way to the glittering court of Kublai Khan.

The Taliban, however, espouse a fundamentalist version of Islam that rejects all images of humans and animals and looks askance at the pre-Islamic past. Cultural heritage officials are divided over whether the group will again go on a rampage as it did in 2001, when it destroyed the famed Bamiyan buddhas as well as a host of objects and statues in the Kabul museum. (The freedoms Afghans have gained since 2001 are in jeopardy.)

In a February statement, Taliban leaders instructed their followers to “robustly protect, monitor and preserve” relics, halt illegal digs, and safeguard “all historic sites.” Significantly, they added that they would forbid selling artifacts on the art market.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

But many Afghan cultural heritage experts are skeptical. “They have whitewashed their image, but they are still a very ideological and radical group,” said Omar Sharifi, a social science professor at the American University of Afghanistan. He fled Kabul for Delhi yesterday, saying he had received direct threats from Taliban members. Other Afghan sources added that cultural heritage staff across the country have received texts and phone calls from Taliban officials accusing them of working with international organizations.

Noori and Rahimi said that they have been in contact with their staffs in Taliban-controlled cities, and that these people appear to be safe. Lower-level employees have been told by Taliban officials that they will continue in their jobs. Since these employees have been confined to their homes, however, they have no information about the status of archaeological sites, museums, and artifacts.

“If they have bad intentions, it will become obvious down the road,” said Cheryl Benard, who directs the Alliance for the Restoration of Cultural Heritage (ARCH) based in Washington, D.C. “They are dealing with issues of borders and infrastructure now.”

Meanwhile, Kabul curators are speeding up efforts to export objects to a scheduled museum exhibit in Paris. Philippe Marquis, director of the French Archaeological Delegation in Afghanistan, hopes to return to Kabul shortly to oversee packing of the Paris-bound artifacts. “The situation is very unpredictable,” he said. “People in Kabul have a terrible fear of the Taliban. But a quick war with few casualties could be better than anarchy.”

Afghan officials declined to specify what plans they have for the National Museum’s world-famous collection. “We need to safeguard the artifacts, but the question is how to find a safe location,” one government source said. “There is no way for them, or the staffs, to leave the country.” Another added that he is confident the United Nations will put pressure on the Taliban to protect both cultural heritage officials as well as artifacts and ancient sites.

The Taliban already is in full control of Mes Aynak, one of Central Asia’s great ancient Buddhist monasteries located just outside the capital. Along with the myriad stupas and statues are a total of 10,000 artifacts excavated from the site, including more than 2,500 coins. The group also now oversees the new museum in the Herat citadel, as well as smaller museums and collections in Kandahar, Ghazni, and Balkh.

Meanwhile, those in Kabul await an uncertain future. “The Taliban know me, and it’s not a comfortable thought for me and my family,” said one cultural heritage expert, who added that the city's parks and sidewalks are filled with refugees. “But there are no visas to be had.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In the blue haze of hookah smoke that filled Kandahar’s Cafe Delight on a recent weekend afternoon, it was easy to forget there’s a war outside.

Young male professionals with well-groomed beards and mullet cuts, slumped in plush chairs, sipped espresso drinks beneath flat-screens that pulsed with racy Turkish and Indian music videos, the bare midriffs of women blurred by channel censors.

This was still Afghanistan, a conservative Islamic society. But the patrons belonged to a more permissive, urbane generation that came of age after the fall of the Taliban, with vague to no memory of the oppressive, fundamentalist regime, born in this southern city, that banned television, music, and cinema; forbade men from trimming their beards; and forced women to wear head-to-toe burkas.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Sumbul Rhea, 17, a student at Afghanistan’s National Institute of Music, is from a remote village in Nuristan. Her father was kidnapped and ransomed three times by the Taliban, she says, for letting his daughters study music.

Café owner Ahmadullah Akbari returned from two years in cosmopolitan Dubai in 2018 to start his business in Ayno Maina, a sprawling modern development on the outskirts of Kandahar. Behind the café counter a few months ago, Akbari monitored closed-circuit TV cameras he had recently installed to thwart “sticky bombs”—crude explosives triggered by mobile phones—that were targeting officials, activists, minorities, and journalists, as well as random civilians, part of the extremists’ strategy to eliminate dissent and project fear deep into urban centers. Emboldened by a February 2020 agreement with the United States that sidelined the Afghan government and paved the way for the withdrawal of American forces by the end of August this year, the Taliban had established their grip on rural areas and were closing in on cities at breathtaking speed.

Still, with its eucalyptus-lined streets, luxury villas, and shopping plazas lit by nearly round-the-clock electricity, the Ayno Maina gated community offered an atmosphere of suburban normalcy for middle- and upper-class Afghans, many on a government payroll. “We have no worries here,” said Suleiman Aryan, 28, an English teacher who works and lives in the complex with his wife and two children.

That was then. The calm has been shattered.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

On August 15 the resurgent Taliban entered the capital of Kabul, as President Ashraf Ghani was reported to have fled the country and gunfire and panic broke out in the streets. Days earlier, the radical Islamist militants had seized Kandahar, the country’s second largest city, along with a string of provincial capitals.

The State Department and Pentagon were racing to evacuate personnel and some of the Afghans who worked for the American government from the U.S. Embassy in Kabul, where the American flag had been lowered, drawing comparisons to the fall of Saigon.

Twenty years have elapsed since the U.S. invaded Afghanistan to rout the al Qaeda terrorists behind the September 11 attacks and toppled the Afghan Taliban regime that sheltered them. Taliban leaders took refuge in neighboring Pakistan, and when Washington’s attention swung to war in Iraq, they mounted a comeback. An infusion of military and development funds to the post-Taliban government followed, mostly from the U.S., totaling more than 150,000 international troops and nearly seven billion dollars in annual aid at the height in 2011. But the surge failed to quash the Taliban, and the U.S. eventually decided to end its longest modern war.

As of this week, Taliban militants have taken back nearly all the major cities, and contest or control most local districts across the country’s 34 provinces. More than three in four Afghans today are under 25: too young to remember the Taliban’s reign of fear and, especially in urban centers, too accustomed to freedoms to be eager to relinquish them. Some in rural areas see the fundamentalists’ return as inevitable and preferable, but many Afghans shaped by the post-2001 reality are defiant, unwilling to revert to a reactionary and repressive past.

Less than five miles outside Kandahar, the Arghandab River was already a front line months ago. On a clear morning in March, an Afghan Air Force A-29 aircraft wheeled and dive-bombed a mud-brick target on the Taliban-held side, sending a rumble through the valley. The militants responded with erratic rocket fire of the kind that has killed civilians and turned a nearby market into a ghost town.

“Rockets and shells are launched blindly every day,” said Hayatullah, a farmer who like many Afghans uses just one name. He fled his village months earlier with only the clothes on his back and was living in one room with his wife and nine children. Like thousands of displaced families in the south, they were awaiting government aid that hadn’t come. “The fighting has destroyed our homes and crops, and we are not safe here,” he added, flinching at the sound of artillery fire from a former U.S. base now used by the Afghan Army.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

In summer, the river valley that gives its name to the surrounding district becomes a dense maze of lush fruit orchards, canals, and earthen walls that gave militants cover to ambush American soldiers here a decade ago. Security later improved, allowing farmers to harvest the grapes and pomegranates for which the valley is famous. But locals said the relative calm was undone by rampant graft, tribal favoritism, and predatory policing that alienated a population bereft of basic services. Twenty-five years ago, discontent with corrupt warlords helped enable the Taliban’s rise to power. Today similar abuse is fueling the group’s resurgence.

A few years ago, “Arghandab was the most secure district in the region,” lamented Shah Mohammad Ahmadi, a former district governor. “The U.S. did what they should have done; there were many good projects here. Unfortunately, some of our corrupted officials have betrayed our country and fed only themselves. When people are not heard by the government, they seek help from others such as the Taliban.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: In a suburban development on the outskirts of Kandahar, Cafe Delight entertains businessmen, officials, and boys with risqué music videos and sports, often past midnight. Women aren’t barred, but only a few have come in the two years since it opened. Under the Taliban, music and TV were banned and women couldn’t leave home without a male relative.

Haji Adam, a tribal elder on the Taliban-controlled side of the river, said, “For 20 years the whole world came and money poured in, but how did it help us? If the water was in our control … if there was electricity, we would have products instead of war. If the roads were paved, there would not be so much destruction.” Instead, “nothing significant has been built” in Kandahar since the Taliban were ousted in 2001, he asserted. The region’s only large-scale hospital, he noted, was built by the Chinese in the 1970s.

These days, Mirwais Hospital, known as the Chinese hospital, is packed with casualties. A pair of police officers shot on patrol laid on gurneys, dead on arrival. In intensive care, three men recovered from a roadside bomb blast. Down the hall, 16-year-old Lalai was in critical condition from a stray bullet fired in a Taliban-ruled district six hours’ drive away. Relatives brought him to Kandahar after two failed surgeries at a local clinic.

“He’s an orphan,” whispered his uncle. “His parents are gone, and his older brother was killed three months ago.” After a month of care, Lalai was getting worse. Ten days later, he died.

Afghanistan's urban-rural divide has only widened in the past 20 years, and ruling classes ignore it at their peril. Since the late 19th century, “we have had at least a dozen cycles of rural elites who came and captured power in Kabul, became rulers, and then eventually became almost alien to their former bases,” said Tamim Asey, a former deputy minister of defense and founder of the Institute of War and Peace Studies, a Kabul-based think tank. It’s a “war of two worldviews and systems of values. On one side are people in major cities who are more liberal, moderate, and educated but have grown out of touch with the rural population. On the other are conservative, rural Afghans who feel neglected by a centralized state run by elites.”

For 50 years, Afghanistan has swung from coups to conflicts. In 1973 an Afghan general ousted the king and declared himself president. Five years later, Afghan communists assassinated him and seized power. The Soviet Union invaded the next year to prop up the unpopular communists, sparking a decade-long guerrilla war. The U.S. funneled billions of dollars via Pakistan to anti-Soviet mujahideen fighters from across the Islamic world—including the Saudi jihadist Osama bin Laden—and they eventually forced the Soviets to withdraw. A power-sharing deal failed, and the militants fractured into warring factions. The Taliban emerged in the chaos and seized power in 1996.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The Taliban soon grabbed headlines for ruthlessly enforcing an eye-for-an-eye brand of sharia law, brutally oppressing women and minorities, destroying cultural treasures, and sheltering al Qaeda. After 9/11, the U.S. invaded to root out those behind the attacks, but another, less clearly defined mission took shape. U.S. and NATO leaders hoped economic opportunity and democracy would inoculate the country from becoming a terrorist haven again.

Education, political participation, and the status of women improved, but a deluge of foreign money exacerbated urban-rural fault lines. Aid and military contracts stoked a bubble economy in cities. But most Afghans still scrape by on subsistence agriculture, despite the $144 billion-plus that the U.S. has invested in reconstruction since 2001—far more, even in inflation-adjusted dollars, than it contributed to rebuilding Western Europe after World War II.

Keenly aware of the disparities, Afghanistan’s first elected president, Hamid Karzai, launched ambitious rural development programs. Led by then finance minister Ashraf Ghani, a former World Bank official who is now the country’s president, the central government directed almost three billion dollars from international donors to self-governed community councils to fund local priorities and loans. Donors spent billions on road construction to connect villages to markets. The oft-repeated mantra justified the investment: Where the road ends, the Taliban begin. (Ironically, better roads have helped militants and opium traders extend their reach too.)

“Access to roads, modern education, health care, electricity—all of that was going to help stabilize the country,” said Richard Boucher, the top U.S. diplomat for South and Central Asia from 2006 to 2009. The theory was good, but the implementation, he said, was flawed. “We should have put more effort into training the class of Afghan technocrats, the people who administer programs, who could account for money and could carry out government policies … We were spending a lot of money on ourselves and our contractors, and not so much on the people of Afghanistan.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Reconstruction and security contracts were controlled by warlords and elites who fed patronage networks along ethnic, tribal, and family lines. According to Integrity Watch Afghanistan, an anti-corruption nonprofit, nearly all major contracts still go to people with close ties to officials. “By now we should have institutions,” says Rahmatullah Amiri, a security analyst from Kandahar. “Instead we have individuals.”

An October 2020 report by the U.S. inspector general for reconstruction in Afghanistan found that of $63 billion in reconstruction funds reviewed, nearly a third, roughly $19 billion, was “lost to waste, fraud, and abuse.” Some of that money is flaunted in the capital, Kabul, where so-called overnight millionaires shuttle between high-rise towers and fortress compounds in armored Lexus SUVs, trailed by convoys of gunmen. Some made fortunes in new industries after 2001, but untold millions in cash have been whisked away to Dubai by officials and cronies, stashed in bank accounts and luxury condominiums.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

A top-down culture of corruption fueled by foreign money has had an exceptionally damaging effect on police. “If a police station needs 15 officers, there are only three; the rest of the money is stolen,” said Ahmadi, the former district governor in Kandahar Province.

Poorly equipped, police also are widely loathed for shaking down people to make up for unpaid salaries and scarce supplies. “The Taliban don’t provide any services, and they don’t build houses or clinics, but they do not steal,” asserted Abdullah Jan, an unemployed farmer who fled Arghandab, echoing a common refrain among rural Afghans.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Commander Ayatullah, 48, a former mujahideen fighter, commanded a pro-government militia unit on Karsai Peak that included his 17-year-old son. He was killed in the July 2-3 battle.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Azimullah, 24, a pro-government fighter, was killed by the Taliban in the July 2-3 battle for Karsai Peak.

Armed with the right connections, Mahmood Karzai left behind a string of Afghan restaurants in the U.S. and returned home to stake his claim to the post-2001 construction boom. An older brother of then President Hamid Karzai, he became the driving force behind Ayno Maina, one of Afghanistan’s most successful private developments.

“I always took the risk. If I had a million, I’d gamble it in Las Vegas,” said Mahmood, holding court beneath a crystal chandelier in his Italianate headquarters in the heart of the complex. An oil portrait of another Karzai brother, Ahmed Wali, hung by the door. Until his 2011 assassination, Ahmed Wali was head of Kandahar’s provincial council, the most powerful man in southern Afghanistan and a symbol of a flawed U.S. mission. He was a businessman and political enforcer, allegedly on the CIA’s payroll, believed to have used his position and ties to cover drug trafficking and money laundering on a grand scale.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Ethnic minority Uzbek girls emerge from Marshal Dostum High School in the northwestern city of Shibirghan, Jowzjan Province. The families of more than two dozen students relocated to the provincial capital after the Taliban seized the province’s southern districts and banned girls’ education again in 2018.

Mahmood’s rise likewise was shadowed by allegations of foul play, notably a 2010 scandal at Kabul Bank, then the country’s largest private bank, in which he was the third largest shareholder. Rumors the bank was failing sparked a run that nearly caused its collapse. An independent investigation found about $900 million had been stolen from the bank, 8 percent of the country’s $12 billion GDP at the time. A U.S. grand jury investigated Mahmood over allegations of racketeering and tax evasion on a property sale in Dubai but never charged him.

Mahmood dismissed the allegations as smears by Karzai family enemies, but he acknowledged his proximity to power helped him. When his brother was president, the governor of Kandahar deeded him the land for Ayno Maina. Mahmood said he started with $50,000 of his own savings and secured a three-million-dollar loan from a U.S. government agency.

“Wealth came and was consumed by a few, and I’m one of them,” he said unapologetically. “Unfortunately, most Afghans did not get their proper share. We paid too much attention to urban development and forgot rural areas. And rural areas, they have the guns.”

Last year President Ghani named Mahmood minister of urban and rural development. He vowed to make homeownership more accessible to an urban population growing rapidly because of a high birth rate and grim economic prospects and insecurity in rural areas. Mahmood had been expanding affordable housing at Ayno Maina and breaking ground on a bigger project in Kabul: a 12,500-acre, government-funded development featuring U.S.-style residential communities.

“The demand is unbelievable,” he said, with the zeal of a salesman. “If I sell everything, I will be so rich.” Even so, he admitted, “I’m not sure about the future of the country.” When the U.S. leaves, he expects the Taliban “will take the country by force.” If civil war breaks out, he said, he will leave. “I don’t want to be killed.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Every morning at the Ministry of Refugees and Repatriation in Kandahar, women and men displaced by fighting in districts contested by the Taliban line up seeking emergency food rations and small cash stipends. Nationwide, thousands are displaced weekly by fighting between the army and pro-government militias on one side and the Taliban on the other.

Seated in the lounge of the five-star Serena Hotel in Kabul a few months ago, Raihana Azad, 38, exuded the swagger of the capital’s moneyed elite. A member of parliament since 2010, she wore a svelte black business suit without a headscarf, and spoke in a rapid-fire patter that fills the room.

An ethnic Hazara born in a hardscrabble pocket of Daykundi Province, she bore two children after an arranged marriage at 13. The story could have ended there, as it has for countless Afghan women, but Azad stayed in school, got a job with the UN promoting girls’ education, and made it to Kabul, where she earned a law degree. She used her education to break taboos, suing for a divorce that made her an outcast in her own family. She ran for parliament and was elected to back-to-back terms, despite making no secret of her atheism or divorce. “People do not care about my personal life because I work for them and always tell them the truth,” she says with a shrug.

Azad’s brazen style has made her enemies. She survived a suicide bombing and an assassination attempt on a post-campaign trip to the countryside. Death threats forced her to move her children abroad, change locations frequently, and travel in a bulletproof vehicle. “I’m not afraid anymore,” she said. “I fight on so that our next generations are not as miserable as we were.”

Her driver navigated a maze of concrete blast walls and checkpoints en route to parliament, where Azad has come for a floor vote to support a female colleague. Women now make up 27 percent of the body, a share similar to that in the U.S., thanks in part to quotas built into the post-Taliban constitution. An independent who refuses to ally with strongmen, Azad has struggled to channel resources to her constituents in Daykundi, most of whom are minority ethnic Hazara in an isolated region that lacks infrastructure. The government and foreign donors “only focus on insecure areas,” she said. “We are an exemplary province, and we have been forgotten.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

About 250 miles west of Kabul, Daykundi is cut off from trade and travel three months a year because roads become impassable in winter. When weather is good, it still takes two days or more to reach the capital by car, on an abominable dirt road prowled by bandits and Taliban. There’s a small airport used mainly by the military; the only alternative, for the well-connected, is UN aid helicopters that climb past snowcapped peaks and settlements that look as if they’ve been carved from rock.

Daykundi has been one of the most peaceful, education-minded parts of Afghanistan, largely populated by Hazara, Shiite Muslims who were persecuted as heretics by the Taliban. Hazara culture tends to be more progressive; boys and girls typically study together, English is widely spoken, and women are involved in agriculture, run businesses, and drive. Hazara students often perform at the top of the national university entrance exam, even when some must take tests outside, squatting in the snow.

“Education is everything here,” said Rahmatullah Sultani, a former shepherd who attended a university and teaches English at a U.S.-funded learning center in Nili, the provincial capital. “It means freedom,” he added, “the ability to think for yourself and choose your own path.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Every morning, Nazanin Mohammadi, a fresh-faced 22-year-old, walks four miles from her shared apartment to the university campus. Her home village, 10 hours away by car, has no electricity or running water. Nearly all of her friends married as teenagers, but Mohammadi stuck with school, inspired by her hero in parliament, Azad. Her goal is to earn a master’s in rural development and a job with the Ministry of Agriculture in Kabul, before coming back to help modernize farming techniques. That may no longer be possible, given the Taliban’s advance toward the capital.

Rugged, remote geography is partly to blame for underdevelopment in the highlands, but it hasn’t insulated the Hazara from attacks on religious and ethnic minorities by the Taliban and ISIS, another group of Sunni extremists. With peace talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban stalled, ethnic militias—including Hazara fighters—have begun reassembling ahead of what many see coming: a return to civil war. Since the U.S. confirmed its troop withdrawal, the Taliban have overrun more than half the 34 provincial capitals.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Boucher, the former U.S. diplomat, is among many in Washington who believed it was time to end a directionless war that cost two trillion dollars in U.S. taxpayer money—as well as the lives of more than 170,000 Afghan civilians, soldiers, police, and opposition fighters; American and NATO troops and contractors; and journalists and aid workers, according to the Costs of War Project at Brown University.

“We’ve been there for two decades, and we don’t have an Afghan government that can protect itself and provide security,” Boucher said.

“The world lost a great chance over the last 20 years and won’t be able to fix it in another 40,” said Amiri, the analyst. “The Taliban are coming, whether we like it or not.” Afghan Army forces are struggling to slow Taliban advances with less U.S. air support, and fatigue and desertions are depleting the ranks.

At a lone police outpost in Panjwai district, a half hour’s drive west of Kandahar, the Taliban’s white flags were visible in the near distance a few months ago. Unkempt and groggy from little sleep, police officer Abdul Ghafoor said enemy snipers armed with U.S. weapons and night vision binoculars, likely confiscated from Afghan troops, were staging attacks after dark and seeding roads with bombs. The ground at his feet was strewn with bullet casings, expired U.S. body armor, and IV bags discarded after a recent attack that critically injured three of his comrades.

Ghafoor, 22, wanted to study medicine. But slim prospects in his home province of Kapisa and a patriotic streak compelled him to enlist for a paltry monthly salary of 13,000 afghanis, or $165. Engaged to be married, he had to delay the wedding because he hadn’t been paid in six months. “Our salaries disappear in the system,” he said, sighing. “But it’s getting worse here, and we have to defend the nation,” as long as “we are alive and blood runs through our body.”

His district has since been overrun by the Taliban.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Three hundred miles away, on a backstreet of one of Kabul’s fancier neighborhoods, Nilofar Ayoubi celebrated the opening of her women’s boutique with balloons and TV cameras: a bold move considering militants and criminals are targeting prominent women. Ayoubi has received death threats and was carjacked in broad daylight but she has refused so far to abandon the relative freedom she’s found in Kabul. “I really don’t see myself anywhere else,” she said.

A Pashtun from the northern city of Kunduz, Ayoubi, 26, recalled her mother being beaten under the Taliban for shopping without a male relative. Now she owns a boutique for modern women who shop unaccompanied. “You have to keep going,” she said.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Even as the Taliban have unseated the Afghan government and taken the country by force, they “cannot rule this new Afghanistan through the barrel of a gun,” asserted Asey, the former defense official. “This freedom-seeking, liberal, and tolerant generation will be the torchbearer of a new Afghanistan post-U.S. withdrawal, and they will not tolerate their mothers and sisters being flogged in front of them, or people hanging in the streets.”

Raihana Azad was less sure. She’s deeply disappointed Washington cut a deal with the Taliban without protections for women and minorities. When we first met, she told me Afghans would stand up to the Taliban. She grew cynical after the U.S. announced a full withdrawal. With two years left in her term, she too was thinking of leaving Afghanistan.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Finally!” exclaimed Margaret Collins, a 43-year-old geologist from Fort Worth, Texas, in response to the news that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has authorized the use of booster vaccine doses for some people with weakened immune systems.

The Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines normally require two doses to elicit full immunity. But this week the FDA updated its authorization for both shots based on mounting evidence that a third dose could significantly increase protection for certain immunocompromised people, who have been showing a decreased response to these vaccines.

Collins had received both doses of the Moderna vaccine but recently learned that she has virtually no antibodies against the SARS-CoV-2 virus. She tried to get a third dose at a local pharmacy, but the pharmacist told her they couldn’t administer it under the original FDA authorization. After hearing about the revised authorization late Thursday night, she immediately made an appointment for Friday.

“FDA authorization of a booster for immunocompromised people is wonderful news for the millions of immunocompromised people in the United States who have spent the last several months knowing that they had a suboptimal response to the vaccine and desperately waiting for some opportunity to improve their immune response,” says Dorry Segev, a transplant surgeon and researcher at Johns Hopkins Medicine. Segev published the earliest studies on vaccine-induced immune response in transplant recipients.

After initially calling for a moratorium on all COVID-19 booster shots until more people across the world had gotten vaccinated, the World Health Organization clarified its guidance a week later regarding when boosters might be justified, including inadequate protection in certain risk groups. For those who lack fully functioning immune systems, such as transplant recipients, a booster shot might mean the difference between remaining bunkered down at home and being able to venture a bit more into the world again.

“You’re dealing with a transplant community that has faced death and survived,” says Valen Keefer, a 38-year-old patient advocate in Auburn, California, who received a donated kidney 19 years ago and a liver three years ago. “For me personally, I don't want to do anything to compromise or risk my health. But then you have the other side, that you want to live life to the fullest.”

That tension has been exacerbated by people who refuse to wear masks or haven’t had the vaccine yet, says Keefer, spurring some people to seek a booster even before the FDA changed its authorization.

“Our community has been so desperate that they’ve been lying about it and going to get a third booster shot because some people that have no antibody response may have jobs out in the public and can't be as careful. So now, you have people that haven’t even gotten one dose, and you have us begging for a third dose just to protect ourselves.”

A third dose is safe

Several recent studies have shown that a third mRNA vaccine dose is safe to administer to solid organ transplant donors and can increase antibodies in some patients who responded poorly to the first two doses of the mRNA vaccines.

Segev published a case series in June that found a third of fully vaccinated transplant recipients with no antibodies had responded to a third dose, and all those with low levels developed strong antibody responses afterward. A subsequent pair of larger French studies confirmed the safety of a third dose and its ability to substantially boost antibody levels in those with weak or no response to two doses.

The most recent study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine one day before the FDA’s decision, is the only randomized controlled trial of a third dose in organ transplant recipients. It found a significantly greater immune response in the study group that received a third dose and concluded that the dose is “safe when risk versus benefit was considered.”

“These studies showed that the third booster is effective in inducing a good antibody response in this population—but still not to the same level expected in otherwise normal individuals—and hopefully this will be the case for other immune-compromised patients,” says Mounzer Agha, director of the Mario Lemieux Center for Blood Cancers at University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

The next step will be conducting studies to determine the best timing for a third dose and “how to help those who fail to respond to the third vaccine dose,” he says.

All immunocompromised people are not the same

The FDA’s authorization now allows for an extra dose in “certain immunocompromised individuals, specifically, solid organ transplant recipients or those who are diagnosed with conditions that are considered to have an equivalent level of immunocompromise.” That might include people with certain blood cancers or those taking medications such as rituximab, which deplete B cells—the body’s antibody factories.

But the “devil is in the details,” says Peter Martin, a hematologist and oncologist at Weill Cornell Medicine in New York City. “The definition of immunocompromised is vague,” and people in this population vary based on their condition and how much their immune system is suppressed.

“There are probably some people who will not benefit from any number of additional doses, there are some people who might need extra doses to augment their immune response, and there are some people, such as cancer patients, who were transiently immune suppressed when they received their vaccine and are likely now nearly normal and would clearly benefit from an additional dose,” he said. “There is probably another group of people who are mildly immune compromised but responded to the vaccine and probably don’t really need a vaccine. This group with the transient immune compromise clearly has the most to gain.”

Now that the FDA has made its announcement, Emily Blumberg, director of Transplant Infectious Diseases at Penn Medicine in Philadelphia, hopes for more specific guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices meets on August 13 to make its recommendation for whom among the wider group of immunocompromised people should receive a third dose.

“I think that interpretation is going to be very difficult, especially because the levels of evidence vary so widely depending on the population,” Blumberg says.

Alfred Kim, a rheumatologist at the Washington University School of Medicine, also hopes the CDC will clarify the guidance regarding which vaccine brands to use for extra doses. The new authorization only applies to Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna, leaving no guidance for immune-compromised people who may have received the Johnson & Johnson vaccine.

Paul Offit, director of the Vaccine Education Center and an infectious disease pediatrician at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, echoed concerns about grouping all immunocompromised people under one umbrella and pointed out another key question about administering third doses in practice.

“You would like to have some advice on how to manipulate their therapy,” Offit says. For instance, “if you’re getting methotrexate for your rheumatoid arthritis, would it be reasonable when you give a booster dose of vaccine to withhold the methotrexate? If so, for how long?” That kind of guidance could be essential to improving patients’ immune response to the vaccine. “What I fear is going to happen is we’re just going to get a blanket recommendation.”

Offit has previously served on ACIP and currently serves on the Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee (VRBPAC), a group of independent experts outside the FDA that reviews evidence and makes recommendations to the agency regarding authorizations and approvals. But the FDA did not consult VRBPAC on this decision, Offit says.

Segev has just begun an study that will eventually address the question of whether it’s safe and effective to temporarily reduce patients’ immunosuppressive therapy before they get a third dose. He also hopes to gather more safety data regarding which patients might benefit most from a third dose.

“There are some situations where this will be a very easy decision, and there are some situations where this will be a little bit trickier of a decision,” Segev says. For his transplant patients, Segev says there could be a risk that the transplanted organ is rejected because of the immune activation after a booster dose.

“That’s why we’re studying transplant patients very carefully.” But with many other immune-compromised populations, the third dose will be as safe as the second dose, he adds. “Then, really the question is, does the person need it? And I hope that people work with their doctors to figure that out.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Millions of parents across the nation are facing a stressful dilemma in the coming weeks: whether to send their children back to school for in-person instruction as the highly transmissible Delta variant surges across the country.

There were 93,824 new cases among U.S. children recorded the week of August 5, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics, a 30 percent increase from the previous week and the highest since February. Hospitalizations are also rising among those under the age of 17.

But even though cases are rising, it’s not clear whether this means that kids are more susceptible to Delta than previous strains. Infections are surging among all those who remain unvaccinated—which includes all children under 12, who are not yet eligible for the vaccine.

Although kids 12 and older became eligible for Pfizer’s vaccine in May, it’s not clear when younger kids will be able to get their shot. Despite initial hopes that the vaccines would be available in early fall, experts now believe that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is not likely to grant that authorization until late November. (Here's the latest on COVID-19 vaccines.)

That has led many parents to ask what’s taking so long—and whether it’s possible to speed things up. But Joseph Domachowske, professor of pediatrics at State University of New York (SUNY) Upstate Medical University in Syracuse, points out that for every parent asking why the FDA isn’t moving faster, there are others asking, “Why are you going so fast?”

COVID-19 vaccines have been developed and authorized among adults in record-shattering time. But even as the Delta variant injects new urgency to get jabs in arms, experts say it’s equally critical to ensure the vaccines are safe and have the appropriate dose for kids. Balancing those two objectives is incredibly tricky—and necessary.

The challenges of testing vaccines in kids

Children are not just tiny grown-ups—and their immune systems work differently, too. While kids are still maturing, their immune systems are unpredictable. They might mount a different immune response to the COVID-19 vaccines, and they could have side effects that aren’t seen in adults.

“They might respond better or worse,” James Campbell, professor of pediatrics at the University of Maryland School of Medicine’s Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health, told National Geographic earlier this year. “Until you do the study with the vaccine, you don’t know what will happen.”

Typically, however, new drugs and vaccines are tested in healthy adults before launching clinical trials among riskier populations like kids and pregnant women. (Here's why kids need their own COVID-19 vaccine trials.)

Adolescents are a different story. By September 2020, Pfizer had accumulated enough safety data in its clinical trials to expand them to include teenagers as young as 16. In October, the company expanded its trials to include kids as young as 12.

“[With teenagers] you pretty much were confident that you had the dosing,” says Paul Offit, director of the Vaccine Education Center at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. “So that was easy. It’s not so easy when you go down to five or six years of age.”

Figuring out the right dose to give kids requires additional study. First, researchers test a low dose of the vaccine in an older group—say, kids ages five to 11—to determine its safety. Then they give a higher dose to see if the vaccine remained safe and elicited an immune response comparable to a healthy adult. Then they test it among increasingly younger age groups.

A slow start—and quick acceleration

Still, some scientists were disappointed last fall when those trials were slow to materialize. Even though the FDA had granted emergency use authorization to Pfizer and Moderna’s vaccines in December, the companies didn’t launch their clinical trials among kids ages 11 and younger until March.

“It didn’t seem from early on that these trials in kids were happening with the same urgency that they were with adults,” says Sean O’Leary, a professor at the University of Colorado and vice chair of the American Academy of Pediatricians Committee on Infectious Diseases.

Once the trials got underway, however, they moved quickly. Completed within two months, the first phase of Pfizer's clinical trials demonstrated that the vaccine was safe and effective in a small group of 144 children. In June, Pfizer launched its combined phase two and three clinical trials to assess the efficacy of the vaccines among up to 4,500 children ages six months to 11 years.

“I’ve never seen anything like it,” says Domachowske, who is supervising the Pfizer-BioNTech pediatric trials at SUNY Upstate Medical University. “If we could run clinical trials like this all the time, we would improve public health in an astonishing way.”

At the time, Pfizer said it expected to submit data to the FDA in September for emergency authorization of its vaccine for the oldest group in its trials, kids ages five to 11. Data for the younger age groups were to be expected in the subsequent weeks and months. Moderna, meanwhile, filed for emergency use authorization to use its vaccine among adolescents in June.

Side effects cause delays

But around that same time, reports arose of rare cases of heart inflammation among young adults and teens who had received the mRNA vaccines. Most of these cases were reported among males between the ages of 18 and 24. (Heart problems after vaccinations are very rare—and often resolve quickly.)

At an FDA advisory committee meeting in June, scientists debated how to balance the risk of this new side effect with the decision to authorize the vaccines among younger children. Given that kids are at a lower risk of severe disease, some argued that it would be better to conduct further study. Others argued that the vaccines were needed sooner rather than later.

Ultimately, in late June the FDA added a warning label to the vaccines and updated the consent form that’s used to enroll new clinical trial participants. Domachowske says that although it was just a small adjustment, it stalled his trial for three or four weeks.

Then, in late July, federal regulators asked Pfizer and Moderna to expand their clinical trials to include up to several thousand more children in the 5-to-11-year-old age group and provide four to six months of safety data rather than just two. Sources told the New York Times that this was a precautionary measure to allow researchers to detect rare side effects like heart inflammation. Moderna has said it will expand its trial; a spokesperson for Pfizer says it has not updated its trial at this point.

Not all scientists agree with that approach. On August 5, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) sent a letter to the FDA urging it “to continue working aggressively towards authorizing safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines for children under age 12 as soon as possible” —and to consider authorizing the vaccines for children ages 5 to 11 based on the data from the initial cohort.

Offit says it’s unclear why the FDA requested additional months of safety data given that all safety issues so far have been seen within six weeks of a dose. A few thousand additional participants would also still be far too few to detect an extremely rare side effect. Still, he notes that he’s not privy to the FDA’s data. “Maybe they’re seeing something that worries them,” he says. “Maybe they’re not seeing enough disease in the studies so that they can actually make statements about efficacy. I don’t know.”

Ultimately, Domachowske says, researchers need more time. “We don’t know yet that we’re using the right dose at the right time at the right age,” he says. “We’re getting closer. But rushing this is not a wise decision.”

What happens next?

O’Leary says the request to enroll new participants in the vaccine trials may be frustrating and will certainly cause delays—but it might not necessarily take all that long. Parents who weren’t able to get their kids into the vaccine trials in the spring now have another chance.

Meanwhile, Pfizer says it expects to have the data to support its application for emergency use authorization among kids ages five to 11 by the end of September. Moderna told ABC News that it expects to seek emergency use authorization by the end of 2021 or early 2022.

But it’s anyone’s guess when authorization may finally come through. Domachowske, whose Pfizer trial is just now collecting data from participants who are one month past their second dose, says he doesn’t expect authorization before Thanksgiving.

“We’re talking about sometime after Labor Day to have all of the data crunched,” he says. Then, he says, Pfizer will need at least a month to put together the request for emergency use authorization and the FDA will need a month or two to review it.

In the meantime, experts say we already have a powerful pathway to protecting kids from the Delta variant: vaccinating more adults.

“If everyone who was eligible to be vaccinated got vaccinated, we wouldn’t be seeing this surge,” O’Leary says. “That’s tragic but it’s not too late. The more people that can be vaccinated right now, the better off our children will be.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nazir Ahmed stands on a hilltop in the Indian territory of Jammu and Kashmir gazing at the rolling green landscape that unfolds before him. The health-care worker scans a nearby valley, searching for shepherds tending their sheep by the meandering branches of the river below. Dangling by his side is a bright blue cooler, a vibrant reminder of Ahmed and his team's urgent task: Deliver as many COVID-19 vaccinations as possible.

Zoom in and pan the map to view all photographed locations.

The team is among many groups who are trekking, boating, dogsledding, and more to deliver vaccines to people in the most remote corners of the world. No matter how secluded, all communities are at risk from the deadly virus. The question is not if it will arrive: "The virus has already reached these areas," says Miriam Alía Prieto, the vaccination and outbreak response advisor at Doctors Without Borders.

While the total number of COVID-19 cases in remote areas is small compared to big cities, the risks of a coronavirus infection are much more severe, Prieto explains. Many rural dwellers have limited or no access to intensive care facilities or supplemental oxygen—one of the few ways to help patients as the disease infiltrates their lungs. Prieto recalls a recent five-day boat trip through the rivers of Peru to deliver cylinders of oxygen to a community in need.

What's more, the slew of variants racing around the world has laid bare the risks of allowing the coronavirus—or any virus—to spread like wildfire. The more people who become infected, the more chances the virus has to accrue mutations, potentially shapeshifting into more formidable foes. The mantra that much of the health-care community adopted early in the pandemic is now truer than ever: No one's safe until everyone's safe.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

This is not the first time health-care workers traveled far and wide to deliver vaccines, but the scale and urgency of the current vaccination efforts are unlike any in modern memory. "We've never had a vaccine-preventable pandemic before," Prieto says.

Steep challenges and steep terrain

The challenges with distributing vaccines started bubbling up long before the shots were approved, when wealthy countries placed big orders from pharmaceutical companies and shoved others to the back of the distribution line. Around 4.6 billion vaccine doses have been administered around the world as of August 13, and about 31 percent of the world's population has gotten at least one dose. But a paltry 1.2 percent of those people are in low-income countries.

Many African countries, for instance, don't yet have enough doses to fully vaccinate frontline workers, Prieto says. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a nation of 89.6 million, vaccination is yet to reach one dose per 100 people.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The COVAX alliance—a joint effort led by the World Health Organization, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations—launched in April 2020 with a bold mission to ensure all countries have fair and equitable access to the COVID-19 vaccine. Yet the organization has struggled to collect enough vaccines and funding to effectively get shots into arms.

Bringing the vaccines to rural communities poses even more challenges. In countries where vaccines are scarce, new shipments are often used up in large cities before doses can trickle out to surrounding regions and rural communities, Prieto says.

In some places, particularly in middle- or upper-income countries, the doses are slowly moving out to people that live far from city centers. In the U.S., for example, a series of airplanes, water taxis, and even dogsleds helped ferry vaccines to rural Alaskan communities and Native people, who are particularly at risk for severe COVID-19. Teams in Colombia have also run vaccination drives in rural communities to ensure elderly people are immunized.

All of these efforts, however, face a common hurdle. The COVID-19 vaccines—similar to many other immunizations—have to be kept cold nearly until they're injected, which requires an expensive series of temperature-controlled shipments and storage, known as the cold chain. But electricity is often inconsistent or absent the further from cities that teams travel.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

To keep vaccines cool, the transporters pack the shots in coolers with ice packs. The coolers then must be kept safe en route. They are often strapped to the back of motorbikes, Prieto says, but if the roads become impassable, teams must forge ahead on foot. Sometimes the coolers are suspended on poles between two people walking, she adds.

For all these efforts, the clock is always ticking. If the cooler remains closed, teams usually have around three to five days before the shots need to be used or the ice packs replaced, Prieto says.

Another challenge for rural COVID-19 vaccinations is that the shots require the presence of health-care workers to give the injection. That differs from past vaccination efforts for other diseases, such as cholera or polio, that can be controlled with oral immunizations that require no special training to dole out. Prieto notes that this is likely the reason behind the eradication of polio in Africa. "You go door-to-door with people from the community—mothers, teachers—you don't need medical staff," she explains.

Yet health-care workers have risen to the challenge for COVID-19. To capture this herculean task, National Geographic selected images from around the world showing just how far health-care workers have been willing to go to help bring this pandemic to a swifter end.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A nurse crawls beneath a barbed wire fence while moving from house to house on a vaccination campaign in Chaguani, Colombia, on April 8, 2021. Depending on the treacherousness of the terrain they must travel, the team can administer Novavax doses to 12 to 18 people per day. Right: Saturia Campos, 80, grasps her vaccination card after a vaccination campaign traveled to Chaguani, Colombia, to deliver life-saving doses to senior citizens.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Anselmo Tunubala, an indigenous nurse of the Misak ethnic group, searches the Colombian forest for elderly people who have yet to be vaccinated for COVID-19. She completes this trek daily to find locals she can persuade to get their vaccines by explaining the importance of the shots in their native language. The community's indigenous people have resisted vaccination due to ancestral beliefs in plant-based medicine and the recommendations of religious leaders. Right: Nurse Anselmo Tunubala prepares to give a shot of the Sinovac vaccine to an elderly indigenous man in Colombia's Guambia indigenous reservation on April 14, 2021.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than a decade after a powerful quake devastated Haiti in 2010, the region's complex geology has sent the island into yet another spate of deadly convulsions. An intense magnitude 7.2 earthquake rocked Haiti in the morning hours of August 14, some 46 miles west of the 2010 temblor.

Both quakes are part of Haiti’s long history of shakes, which results from the island nation’s position at the edge of the slowly shifting Caribbean plate. The movements build stresses in a network of fractures that crisscross the island, which occasionally release pent-up stress in ground-rattling earthquakes. While the region's quakes are not the most powerful in the world, their deadliness is magnified by Haiti's abundance of concrete and masonry buildings that were not built to withstand earthquakes.

The full impacts from this latest event are not yet clear, but the quake likely wreaked havoc in communities that are already struggling from multiple pressures. The country is still recovering from the 2010 earthquake, which struck closer to the capital city Port-au-Prince, flattening many buildings and causing more than 200,000 deaths. It will take time for officials to determine how many people were killed in this latest event, but the U.S. Geological Survey estimates fatalities could number in the thousands.

The shaking was intensely felt in the cities of Les Cayes and Jeremie—both of which are still recovering from Hurricane Matthew in 2016, which battered the island with 145-mile an hour winds, significant floods, and downpours of rain. This new disaster also strikes as the country is still reeling from the assassination of President Jovenel Moïse on July 7.

"They just have one thing after the other," says Susan Hough, a geophysicist at the United States Geological Survey.

Constantly shifting tectonics

The island of Hispaniola, which includes the countries of Haiti and the Dominican Republic, sits atop the Caribbean tectonic plate, which is surrounded by a sea of other plates. Between the jostling of the North American, Cocos, South American, and Nazca plates, the Caribbean plate is constantly shoved and squashed by tectonic movements.

The key juncture that sparks shaking on the surface in Haiti lies just to the north of the island nation, where the Caribbean plate creeps eastward roughly three-quarters of an inch each year relative to the North American plate. Yet the boundary between the plates is not one straight fracture.

As the plates grind against each other, the forces produce a series of fractures that crisscross the region. Both the 2010 event and this latest quake—as well as multiple older quakes—occurred within one set of these breaks, which are known collectively as the Enriquillo-Plantain Garden fault zone.

Scientists believe that the 2010 event is likely connected to today's temblor. "An earthquake releases stress, but it also nudges—pushes—nearby faults in a way that makes other earthquakes more likely," Hough explains.

Analyses of the region after the 2010 temblor suggested that the shifting of the surface increased stresses both eastward toward Port-au-Prince and westward toward the epicenter of today's magnitude 7.3 quake, says Newdeskarl Saint Fleur, a geophysicist at the University of Haiti currently based in Paris, who is the lead author of a 2015 study that modeled these stress changes. Hough adds that a similar increase in stress on faults in this area was seen during the 1700s, when a spate of earthquakes struck in 1701, 1751, and 1770.

Stress also tends to accumulate most at bends or curves in the faults, Saint Fleur says, and today's event seemed to strike at one such bend. The epicenter is near the site of the 1770 quake, which, at an estimated magnitude 7.5, is the largest known to ever strike within this fault zone.

Yet even with this information, it's still not possible to predict quakes, Hough notes. "We see the patterns after the fact, and we say okay this domino nudged this domino," she says. But "there's no way to know which domino might go next."

A nation under strain

While the region has a history of shakes, the temblors in Haiti are not as large as those that occur where one plate plunges beneath another in what’s known as a subduction zone. One such quake, clocking in at a magnitude 8.2, recently shook Alaska's Aleutian Islands.

But the Aleutian Islands are sparsely populated, so that quake caused little damage. The deadliness of quakes in Haiti is the result of the structures on the surface as much as the shaking underground. Years of exploitation from outside countries, dating back to the enslavement of the island’s people after Christopher Columbus arrived in 1492, and political unrest within Haiti have resulted in the country’s current standing as the poorest in Latin America.

The unrest and poverty have translated to the development of the region, which is rife with substandard structures and building materials. Many structures use concrete, which is inexpensive and can be used to create heavy walls and roofs that resist hurricane winds, Hough says. But much of the region's concrete is unreinforced, and it readily crumbles under the shaking of earthquakes. While rebuilding after the 2010 devastation led to some structures built with earthquakes in mind, corruption and political turmoil have stymied many efforts to rebuild.

"The construction in Haiti is just like a perfect storm of unfortunate factors," Hough says. "It's everything you don't want in an earthquake."

The blow of this latest event, however, may have been blunted by the direction in which the earthquake traveled. The quake appears to have traveled westward, which means the most intense shaking was directed away from the densely populated city Port-au-Prince. Still, modeling from the U.S. Geological Survey suggests that landslides will be a significant hazard, barreling into structures, blocking roads, and limiting access for recovery crews.

Aftershocks will continue to rattle the region, and scientists will be keeping close watch on the sequence of shakes. After the 2010 earthquake, Hough was part of a team of scientists that traveled to Haiti to install seismometers. She returned in the subsequent years to help establish an earthquake monitoring network and, she says, is working now to figure out "what we can do to support this fledgling network and this community."
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Desert-dwelling prairie rattlesnakes of the western U.S. are ultimate survivors, able to get by on just one hearty meal a year. But without a sip of water now and then, the snakes would shrivel up and hiss their last.

So how do these sit-and-wait predators stay hydrated way up in the Rocky Mountains, where standing water is scarce? Easy. They turn their bodies into rain-collecting bowls.

When it sprinkles, prairie rattlesnakes slither out in the open and coil up, says Emily Taylor, a snake biologist and director of the Physiological Ecology of Reptiles Laboratory, at California Polytechnic State University, in San Luis Obispo. With their bodies flattened into a disk, the rain beads up on their scales thanks to a microscopic, labyrinth-like texture that prevent the droplets from sliding off.

In 2017, Taylor and her colleague Scott Boback, of Dickinson College, in Pennsylvania, placed time-lapse cameras near wild rattlesnake nurseries in Colorado as part of a citizen science initiative called Project RattleCam. The images revealed that baby rattlesnakes assume the flattened position the day after they’re born. (Read how rattlesnakes have “friends.”)

“So they’re born thirsty, and they’re born with this instinct to do the rain-harvesting behavior,” Taylor says.

Of course, most animals can’t turn their bodies into a bowl at a moment’s notice. Here’s how some other creatures quench their thirst.

Thorny devils tap water with their skin

In Australia’s outback lives a lizard that looks more like a cactus. Known as thorny devils, these animals specialize in eating ants, which is also where they get a lot of their hydration.

But when ants are scarce, or conditions are even drier than normal, the reptiles have a backup. A network of tiny canals on their spiky skin catches small amounts of water and guides the liquid directly to their mouth.

What’s more, the devils can use the same trick to leech liquid out of moist sand after a rain or heavy dew. All they do is kick the sand up onto their back and let their skin do the rest.

An ocean away in southwestern Africa, the Namib desert beetle pulls off a similar feat.

Tiny bumps on the beetle’s back serve as a condensation site for moisture trapped in the morning fog. As more liquid beads up, the droplets grow in size until they run down the insect’s back toward its mouth.

Chimps use tools to scoop water

Chimpanzees may live in rainforests, but even in places with lots of moisture, it can sometimes be difficult to find a drink.

“Chimps, like many other animals, are a little hesitant to drink directly from big bodies of water,” says Cat Hobaiter, a primatologist at the University of Saint Andrews, in Scotland.

After all, rivers and lakes can harbor crocodiles, and puddles and mudholes can stagnate quickly. As a work-around, many chimpanzees in Central and West Africa make special tools, such as folding a leaf into a spoon, for extracting fresh rainwater caught in tree cavities. (Read how chimpanzee moms are so much like our own.)

“At the most basic level, you could pop your hand in and lick the water off, which they will sometimes do,” says Hobaiter, who studies chimps in Uganda’s Budongo Forest Reserve. “But using chewed-up leaves and moss as a kind of sponge is a much more efficient way to get that water.”

Some chimpanzees in Uganda have been observed using their hands to dig small wells in seemingly dry riverbeds. Elephants, coyotes, wild horses, and donkeys also dig for water, sometimes tunneling down as much as six feet.

Sandgrouse mop up water

Birds in the sandgrouse family, native to Africa and Asia, can’t build tools, but lucky for these pigeon relatives, they have mops built into their feathers.

In the cool of the morning, male sandgrouse fly up to 20 miles in search of water. After quenching their thirst, the birds dip their bellies into the pool, and their abdominal feathers soak up water. The waterlogged males then fly back to their ground nest, where their chicks use their beaks to scrape water from dad’s feathers.

Kangaroo rats of the U.S. Southwest take a different tack.

These pocket-size rodents survive in the desert on a diet of dry grass seeds and mesquite beans, which they pack into their cheeks and cache in underground burrows. Because the burrows are more humid than the surface, stored seeds may absorb as much as 30 percent more moisture than ones above-ground. So when the rodents eat their seed stash, they get both food and water. (Watch a kangaroo rat kick a rattlesnake in midair.)

Camels use their noses

Camels may be famous for making do in the desert, but it’s a common misperception that the ungulates keep water in their hump (or humps, depending on the species). Instead, the humps store energy-rich fat, which allows camels to go several months without eating.

But as desert animals, both camel species—the dromedary and the double-humped Bactrian—have a few other water-related strategies in their repertoire. For starters, when the animals do have a chance to drink, they can ingest upwards of 30 gallons of water at a time. In a pinch, Bactrian camels can survive on salt water. (Read how dromedary camels can eat spiky cacti.)

Camels also have evolved a nose that reduces the amount of moisture lost while breathing on chilly desert nights. A complex array of folds and ridges in their nasal passages creates more surface area for water to condense on the skin. This keeps moisture inside the body rather than expelling it out into the world.

Such water-saving adaptations may seem extreme, but in the desert, every drop can make the difference between life or death.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hidden inside the solar system’s god of plenty is an unexpected bounty: Saturn’s mammoth core, spanning up to 60 percent of the planet’s width. The newly measured core, revealed through subtle waves in Saturn’s rings, appears to be ice, rock, and gas, blended into a soupy mass with blurry edges.

“It’s huge,” says Chris Mankovich of the California Institute of Technology, one of the authors of a new study describing Saturn’s core in the journal Nature Astronomy. “It’s definitely not something we expected to find.”

The characteristics of Saturn’s immense heart have scientists rethinking how the ringed planet may have formed, and how it generates its strangely uniform magnetic field. “It’s just more complex than we thought was going to be the case,” says Johns Hopkins University’s Sabine Stanley, who was not part of the new study.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

To scrutinize Saturn’s innards, scientists turned to the planet’s rings, which act like a seismograph and record the gas giant’s internal sloshing and pulsing. By decoding subtle ripples in the rings, the team learned that Saturn’s nucleus is packed with 17 Earths worth of material, and that it isn’t a discrete, compact hunk of rock and iron as expected.

“It’s really hard to learn anything about the deepest parts of a planet, especially the giant planets,” Stanley says. “Any information we can get improves what we knew before.”

Now scientists have to figure out how giant planets such as Saturn can grow with such large, jumbled cores. And to complicate the matter, the newly revealed interior of Saturn makes it difficult to explain how the planet powers its enigmatic magnetic field.

“A can of worms with Saturn is explaining the observations with Saturn’s magnetic field, which is a fairly bizarre magnetic field for many reasons,” Mankovich says. “This is a non-standard picture for the interior structure of the planet.”

A portal to the planet’s interior

Saturn is perhaps best known for its shimmering rings, which orbit the planet and appear solid from afar. In reality these rings are made of innumerable icy chunks—some as big as houses, others smaller than pebbles—that can be pushed, tugged, and sculpted by gravitational interactions with the planet and its moons. Some of those moons mow gaps into the rings, while others prune the edges and keep them neat.

The rings also record Saturn’s inner workings. Normally scientists use fluctuations in a planet’s gravitational field to take a look beneath its surface—but that technique cannot penetrate the deep interior of a gas giant like Saturn. The rings, however, do offer a window into the depths of the planet’s heart.

In the early 1990s, planetary scientist Mark Marley surmised that movements within Saturn could create observable ripples in the planet’s C ring, which is a wide but dim ring tucked near the planet. As its heart beats and its innards slosh, the planet pulses. Those oscillations interact with ring particles and sculpt what are known as spiral density waves, or ripples within the C ring.

All these ideas “turned out to be 100 percent right,” Mankovich says. But it would take more than two decades and a multibillion-dollar space mission to confirm the predictions.

In 2013 scientists studying data from NASA’s Cassini spacecraft—which orbited Saturn from 2004 to 2017—read the first seismic signatures in the rings and used them to peer inside the planet. That team coined the term “kronoseismology” to describe this new field of study, and they linked most of the observed ripples to movements within the planet. In 2019 scientists used kronoseismology to determine that Saturn rotates once every 10 hours and 33 minutes.

“This is not a field for the impatient,” says Marley, chuckling, who is now at the University of Arizona and served as a reviewer of the new study. “It’s turned out that all these waves are really there, that there’s something like two dozen or so that are more or less where we predicted.”

But there’s also at least one mysterious wave that Marley didn’t predict—and it’s the one Mankovich and Jim Fuller, also of Caltech, used to look straight into Saturn’s heart.

“They show really convincingly that you can only explain this extra wave, along with all the other ones, if Saturn has this fuzzy, gradual core,” Marley says. “This particular ring wave is very sensitive to deep in the planet.”

The colossal heart of Saturn

Using that ring ripple, Mankovich and Fuller discovered that Saturn is mostly heart, with a core that occupies the majority of the planet. Contrary to expectations, the planet’s core is a diffuse, soupy mix of hydrogen, helium, ice, and rock, rather than a solid pit of stony iron. If you were to slice Saturn in half, you wouldn’t see discrete layers like the ones inside onions, candy gobstoppers, or planet Earth. Instead the core has a fuzzy boundary, and the deeper you dive, the denser the material becomes.

At the extreme temperatures and pressures in Saturn’s core, gases behave more like metallic fluids than puffs of air, and the whole assemblage is a blend of exotic material that’s difficult to replicate in labs on Earth. Mankovich says that when he and Fuller saw how strange their picture of Saturn was, they tried to find another explanation for the seismic signature in the rings.

“We were trying to shut it down as hard as we could,” he says, but the picture of Saturn’s core in the new study “does seem to be what the data required.”

Although unexpected, the model of Saturn’s core fits nicely with the wealth of gravity data that scientists have collected from Saturn. It also echoes findings from NASA’s Juno spacecraft, which suggest Jupiter’s core might be a similarly diffuse mixture of ingredients.

Jupiter, however, doesn’t have a thick ring system to record its inner jostles. “We need to blow up one of Jupiter’s little moons,” Marley jokes, to create a ring that will record the pulses of Jupiter’s heart.

Many mysteries to solve

The classical origin story for a large gassy world starts with small chunks of material that clump together, growing more and more massive until the protoplanet’s gravity draws in all the nearby gas. But it’s not clear whether that scenario can craft a core like the one Mankovich and Fuller observed.

It’s possible that Saturn’s heart evolved and changed during its 4.5 billion years of existence, perhaps slowly dissolving into liquid metallic hydrogen or being modified by other unknown processes. “We just don’t know yet,” Mankovich says.

Another surprise is that Mankovich and Fuller deduced that the core is not convective, meaning it doesn’t move heat around as expected—an observation that might explain why Saturn is surprisingly bright in the infrared. “Jupiter is about as bright as you would expect Jupiter to be after 4.5 billion years, but Saturn is too bright,” Marley says. “Because this [core] doesn’t want to convect, it slows down the cooling and is brighter than it should be.”

But a non-convective core presents a substantial challenge for understanding the planet’s magnetic field. Normally planetary magnetic fields are powered by a dynamo—a rotating, convective layer of electrically conductive fluid deep within a planet’s core. But that’s not possible inside Saturn, where 60 percent of the planet isn’t convective, according to the new study. Scientists are now wondering whether a thin layer of liquid metallic hydrogen might be churning within the core, or perhaps just outside it.

But even those ideas struggle to account for Saturn’s oddly symmetric magnetic field, which is unlike the tilted, irregular ones of Earth and Jupiter. One possibility is that a layer of helium rain might be smoothing the magnetic field lines before they reach the planet’s surface, but the researchers don’t have a good explanation for how the giant core could affect this process.

“It’s really hard to do that with magnetic fields, and you can’t really do that with a dynamo, and then we have a giant planet doing it,” says Stanley, who is working with Mankovich and Fuller to untangle the magnetic puzzle. “That’s why science is fun.”

Answering these Saturnian questions will require poring over the wealth of information gathered by the Cassini spacecraft, performing detailed simulations of planetary interiors with supercomputers, and crafting experiments with Earth-based telescopes. In the future, scientists could also use these methods to scrutinize the rings of other planets such as Uranus and Neptune, uncovering any secrets that might be written into their icy particles.

“There’s a number of mysteries about those rings,” Marley says, “so we’re looking to see if the same kind of thing happened there.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Twin silhouettes are motionless in the night. Above, a silver-veiled moon hints of a sky. Below, Earth is a darkened disk.

Sound gives the night depth: Common barking geckos rattle like castanets in receding waves into the shadows. The two women have been seated on a shallow dune for hours in hushed anticipation. One unfolds her legs, stretches, crosses them at the ankles. The other rocks, as if uttering a prayer mantra, limbering her muscles. Their radio-tracking gear drew them at sunset to this spot in the southern part of the Kalahari, which has long been called a desert but has characteristics of a dry savanna ecosystem.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Somewhere below them in a warren of burrows is a ground pangolin they’ve been monitoring for two months. She’s late to rouse—it’s 10 p.m.—which might have something to do with the day’s withering heat.

For the purpose of recordkeeping, she’s called Hopewell 3, after the place where local trackers first found her and doctoral researchers Wendy Panaino, 28, and Valery Phakoago, 30, tracked her by following her spoor in the sand. Now they follow her by reading the bleep-bleep-bleep of radio waves sent by a device fixed to a scale on her rump.

Tonight the researchers are on a quest for pangolin dung—“Kalahari gold,” they call it—the source of a trove of information about how this shy, ant- and termite-eating animal’s life is interwoven with grasses and the tiny insects that reap their seeds and eat them. It’s another important thread in scientists’ understanding of the interconnectedness of living things in the dry African savanna, all of which starts with the summer rains, usually from November to March.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Their research, through the University of the Witwatersrand’s Wildlife Conservation Physiology lab in Johannesburg, is part of a bigger study called the Kalahari Endangered Ecosystem Project (KEEP) that aims to understand how climate disruptions will tug on the delicate fabric of life here.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

This part of the Kalahari is already red-flagged as a climate hot spot. Modeling by climate scientists at the University of Cape Town suggests that within a decade, when the global temperature could exceed the rise of 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) that the UN’s Paris Agreement seeks to avoid, average temperatures in Botswana—just north of Hopewell 3’s foraging grounds—will already have warmed by nearly four degrees F. Beyond 5.4 degrees F in average warming globally, which would mean 7.6 degrees F here, the science points to system collapse for the Kalahari.

A recent study of the pangolin’s termite-eating dune neighbor, the aardvark, during a drought in the summer of 2012-13, gives distressing clues as to what climate change could mean for life here: If the rains fail, a cascade of disasters may unfold, starting with the withering of the grasses, a crash in numbers of ants and termites that feed on them, and hunger—or starvation—for anything that depends on those insects for nourishment. If the failure of the annual greening means disaster for these two insect-eaters during a drought spell, what would a longer-term system collapse driven by searing temperatures and crippling droughts mean for the many different threads of life that are entangled in a food chain that draws vitality from the grasses?

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The Kalahari is the world’s largest expanse of unbroken sand, a rolling ocean of windblown dunes across Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, and beyond that are topped with savanna, a mostly grassy landscape dotted with occasional trees. Here on the region’s southern edge, air currents have swept up a series of north-south–running dunes lapping against the flanks of bare, quartzite hills that rise like whalebacks from the deep.

Decades of farming have thrown the region into disarray, and now it seems that the freight-train effects of planetary heating are bearing down too. What Panaino and Phakoago learn about the secretive lives of creatures out here on the dunes will give conservation managers emergency signals to help them better protect this vestige of the Kalahari.

(Surviving the extremes of the Kalahari)

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Hopewell 3 is the third pangolin found for the study on what was formerly Hopewell Farm, one of 50 reclaimed cattle ranches that have been absorbed into Tswalu Kalahari Reserve, established nearly 30 years ago. At 294,000 acres, Tswalu is South Africa’s largest private game reserve, a remnant of the once wild Kalahari that has been carved up by farms, roads, and iron ore and manganese mines.

Aside from its luxury private lodgings for game-watchers, the reserve hosts the KEEP research hub, managed by the Tswalu Foundation, which connects the work of scientists interested in semiarid ecologies. Their efforts focus on a central question: How will this hot, dry place respond to rising temperatures and more frequent and intense droughts if, as predicted, atmospheric carbon dioxide pollution keeps heating the planet?

Answering that question will be key to how the reserve’s managers balance the abundance of the grasses with the appetites of the creatures that depend on them, from grazing insects and their pangolin predators to the roaming antelope herds and the carnivores that chase them down.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: How to revive a snake: After a surgical procedure to implant a tracking device in this Cape cobra, veterinarian Jessica Briner delivers a puff of carbon dioxide to flush its lungs of anesthetic and restore normal breathing.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

When Hopewell 3 surfaces, she’ll announce herself with sound. Eventually, they hear it—even over the clicking of geckos—the scritch-scratch of bony grass rasping against the pangolin’s scales. Panaino and Phakoago glide to their feet, their headlamps casting a stage light into which Hopewell 3 sways, floating over the dune like a hunched clockwork toy in a suit of armor. Her shield of articulated plates starts with a widow’s peak over the bridge of her nose and flares out across her shoulders. It flows down her domed back and tapers across a broad plank of tail. The hem has a jagged edge.

If startled, she’ll snap into a ball so tight that even a lion would struggle to pry her open. But Hopewell 3 is unfazed. She totters across the dune on stout hind legs, her feet pressing blunt marks in the sand. Her forelegs are tucked demurely into her chest, like a mantis in prayer, touching the ground only when she tips off kilter.

A button eye glints above a conical snout that nods this way and that, reading the ground. Olfactory wizardry leads her to tonight’s first course: cocktail ants, as they’re commonly called. She claws at the bole of a runty gray camel thorn, pulling the cap from a nest hidden in the bark, releasing a rivulet of ants flowing up the trunk.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

She plunges headfirst into the stream, face hidden as her sticky ribbon-tongue laps up dinner. It’s impossible to know how many ants she eats with each mouthful, but after five years of sifting through the digested remains of meals like this, Panaino knows that less than a third of what the pangolin takes in tonight will be insects. The rest will be dune sand. Panaino also knows that Hopewell 3’s preferred foods are cocktail ants, pugnacious ants, and snouted harvester termites.

Panaino has calculated that on average the pangolin will eat about 15,000 of the rice-grain-size insects each night, supplying most of the nutrition and water she needs to survive in this parched dunescape.

Satisfied with her first feeding, Hopewell 3 toddles off in search of her next course. The humans follow behind, hoping for gold.

4:18

October in the southern Kalahari is anguished and liminal, poised for rains to break the fast. The dry winter of 2020 has drawn to a close, and the grasses that anchor the dunes are as brittle as fine fossils. Winter has taken its usual toll. The dunes are also threadbare after intermittent droughts and decades of gleaning by cattle and, more recently, game such as antelope, zebras, wildebeests, and buffalo.

Forecasts hint that this summer’s rains may be good. A La Niña has been brewing half a planet away in the Pacific Ocean. This cyclical ocean-atmosphere dance usually conjures rain for parts of southern Africa. It’s the yin to the El Niño’s parching yang, and Tswalu is gasping for it.

On an artist’s swatch, the color of the sand might show as pumpkin or carrot, tinting into apricot when the sun’s low on the horizon. But life here doesn’t have the effortless fecundity of an orchard. Rust doesn’t describe its particular hue either, even though it’s mixed from a palette of ground-down quartzites stained by oxidized iron.

Grass is the golden thread that makes life possible in this nutrient-scant ocean of sand. It tethers the dunes against the winds’ pull. It soaks fickle moisture from the soil and dams it in its cells, to quench the thirst of ants and termites; their subterranean homes are larders for pangolins and aardvarks but also insect-eating bat-eared foxes and aardwolves.

Grass is the wattle and daub for the Kalahari’s aerial architects—the sociable weaverbirds, whose decades-old nesting chambers are stitched from grass blades. These high-rise tenements give shelter to generations of weavers and also draw in African pygmy falcons as tenants. Their avian residents entice hungry Cape cobras and boomslange whose lithe forms loop among the chambers like strings in a chandelier. Grass is fodder for the grazing ungulates that themselves are food for lions, cheetahs, leopards, wild dogs, and other predators of the African savanna.

Rebirth in Tswalu starts with the rain-fed flush of grass. Thundershowers deliver an average of about 13 inches a year, and they’re notoriously capricious. In some years, rain gauges might register fewer than seven inches; in others, nearly double the average. In times past, game animals responded to the boom-and-bust greening by traveling across great distances, often tracking the rain clouds, knowing that they would lead them to grazing bonanzas. But decades of cattle ranching slung fence lines across migratory paths, corralling the remaining wild herds into reserves like this one.

Conditions are changing further still. During the past half century, temperatures in parts of southern Africa have risen at twice the rate of the global average.

According to the South African Weather Service, 2015, 2016, and 2019 were the hottest years on record since at least 1950. In January 2016, thermometers at Augrabies Falls, about 150 miles southwest of Tswalu, registered more than 119°F. That’s “amongst the highest temperatures ever recorded so high above sea level in the Southern Hemisphere,” says Stefaan Conradie, a doctoral researcher with the Climate System Analysis Group at the University of Cape Town, and “the second highest reliably measured temperature in southern Africa.” Without climate change, the 2015-16 heat wave would have been about a 1-in-10,000-year event, he says, citing recent analysis.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

How temperature increases will disrupt rainfall is difficult to predict, but in this part of the continent, the summer rainy season is likely to start later and be shorter. When rainstorms occur, they may be more intense, dropping greater volumes of water over shorter periods, which could result in surface flooding. There could be longer dry spells between storms.

What could this mean for the tenuous web of animals and plants in the southern Kalahari? What would happen if the summer rains failed repeatedly, if drought conditions were more frequent, if the summertime greening didn’t come on time? What would it mean for the ants and termites that fill up their underground larders with seeds and grasses each summer?

And if the numbers of those insects fell drastically, what would happen to the pangolins, already threatened with poaching in many parts of southern Africa, and the other ant-eating mammals?

0:40

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The aardvark looks as if it has trotted right out of a nonsense verse: the snout of a pig, the ears of an ass, an improbably long face in between. It has the skin of a balding man and whiskers like the eyelashes of a drag artist, but only on the lower lids.

Aardvark means “earth pig” in Afrikaans, and they’re earthmoving machines. Shovel-shaped claws on taloned feet allow an aardvark to jackhammer through baked soil crust, opening up the ground for burrow-building or to break into rooms stuffed with bugs.

A host of other animals—jackals, Cape cobras, puff adders, pythons, ground squirrels, mice, wild cats, warthogs, swallows, chats—use the underground dwellings that aardvarks hollow out in a sort of time-share arrangement to endure the Kalahari’s extremes.

Nora Weyer, also with the Witwatersrand physiology lab at the time, tracked aardvarks in Tswalu from the winter of 2012 to the spring of 2015 for her doctoral work. She used small traps sunk into the ground to collect ants and looked for telltale conical soil heaps left by termites in the area to measure their abundance. She collected their scat to find out what insects they ate, and how many, and found that harvester termites account for about 90 percent of an aardvark’s water and energy needs. She also monitored temperature-logging implants in the aardvarks to determine if the animals were getting enough energy to keep warm through the chilly Kalahari nights, when daily minimum temperatures can dip to about 65°F in summer and even nudge below freezing in winter.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

In typical years, when the summer rains arrive with their usual sound-and-light show, the dunes burst to life, with ants and termites thriving and aardvarks feasting on them. But in the first summer of Weyer’s study, 2012 into 2013, no rain fell during the hottest months. The overall season was well below average, and Tswalu limped into the next winter with poorly stocked pantries.

While following her study aardvarks and decrypting their scat, Weyer noted a dramatic reduction in grasses, which she knew would lead to a decline in harvester termites. By summer’s end, the aardvarks were wasting away, their spines and hip bones straining against drum-tight hides. These normally nocturnal animals started leaving their burrows during the day, sometimes even before noon, in search of food to make up for their hungry nights.

The implants indicated that the animals’ body temperature swung wildly in 24-hour periods, compared with more stable body temperatures when their food supply was reliable and their energy levels good. This suggested that they weren’t getting enough energy to stay warm at night, and they seemed to compensate by using the daylight hours to bask and warm up.

But this immediate emergency adaptation didn’t see many of Weyer’s aardvarks through to the next rainy season. Of the six animals equipped with trackers in the study in 2012, five died in 2013. Weyer saw the bodies of many other dead aardvarks in the veld, and survivors looked listless, dazed, and gaunt. The message from this drought year was clear: If the rains fail, even for a single summer, the fabric that keeps grasses, ants, termites, and insect-eating animals woven together for survival may start to unravel.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: When summer thunderstorms roll in across the Kalahari, their soaking rains bring an explosion of life, including insects such as armored katydids. Grass and insects are vital links in the food chain that nourishes Tswalu’s animals and stabilizes the dunes against the push-pull of the wind.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

After Hopewell 3 has supped on her first helping of cocktail ants, she follows a meandering loop to her regular haunts, moving with an endearing swank and swagger. Panaino’s sneakered feet tread lightly behind her, while Phakoago slips away to scan for signs of buried dung.

About an hour later, the pangolin pauses, and scoops a slim hollow into the sand. Panaino shimmers with excitement, flashing her light to alert Phakoago.

Poised over the depression, Hopewell 3 delivers a mound of glistening black scat. Panaino usually avoids interfering with study animals, but if the pangolin drags her tail as she waddles off, this Kalahari gold will melt into the sand. Using one finger, Panaino raises the pangolin’s tail a fraction as she moves, keeping the treasure intact.

For the scientists, it’s hard enough to find an animal as secretive as this, let alone the dung that might otherwise be lost in the sand. The two women are on their knees, scooping it up with bare fingers and dropping it into a sample bag. Once they’ve recovered every last fragment, they erupt into a synchronized jig, stage-whispering an improvised ditty about “pango poo.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

A few days later, Phakoago is back at the research site, with little more than a bucket, jug, tea strainer, and a take-out food container as her lab equipment.

She weighs dried scat collected two months earlier. Then she drops it into the bucket, sloshes a cup or two of water onto the sample to separate the good stuff from the sand, and swirls the container like a frontier woman panning for gold.

The dung dissolves into a coffee-colored brew with a foam of body parts—mostly ant and termite heads and a million pinprick legs—collecting on the surface. She sieves the liquid, gathering a heap of what looks like coffee grounds. Later she’ll put a small sample of this under a microscope and count every insect head, identifying and tabulating each species.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A giraffe hide mummifies on Tswalu’s dunes in spring. The Kalahari’s boom-and-bust rainfall can mean years of abundance or drought. Temperatures range widely too, peaking at close to 110°F in summer and dipping below freezing in winter.

The researchers use this laborious technique to understand the nuances of pangolins’ and aardvarks’ diets. This knowledge ultimately will yield a better appreciation for the complexity of relationships that weave back to the veld and how it should be managed.

The drought that gripped Tswalu during Weyer’s aardvark study gave her baseline data for comparing aardvarks’ diet in good and bad foraging years and noting their resulting behavior changes.

Panaino’s study shows what pangolins eat, and how much. Phakoago’s contribution is to examine the dung of both pangolins and aardvarks, collected in the same seasons and under the same conditions, and give an apples-to-apples comparison between the two animals’ feed-ing patterns.

Based on Panaino’s findings—that a pangolin eats an average of 15,000 ants and termites a night—she calculates that it eats 5.5 million a year. Add to that the number of ants and termites eaten by one aardvark and one aardwolf in a year, and Panaino estimates the total for all three is about 100 million insects. The number would be far higher if it included the many other animals that also feed on ants and termites, even in part. Sociable weavers, for example, eat mostly plants, but about a tenth of their diet is termites, and the ant-eating chat is as its name suggests.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Late one evening, while Panaino and Phakoago scan the radio waves for signs of Hopewell 3 and other nearby study animals, the change comes.

It starts with iridescent orbs exploding voicelessly on the western horizon. But in less than an hour, strobes of lightning play closer on the surrounding dunes, followed by the sound of a drum mallet drawn across a corrugated tin roof. The sky begins to shatter. Luminous cracks tear through the clouds, skewering nearby hills with retina-searing blasts. The percussion is a clatter of cymbals and a roll of shuddering bass drums.

A timpani of droplets smacks the ground, ephemeral islands of moisture in an ocean of desiccated sand, filling the air with iron-scented mist. The researchers decide to retire for the night—it’s too dangerous to be out on the exposed dunes, and with the elements this voluble, the pangolins are very likely staying inside.

The crescendo is brief. The space between the veins of light and their accompanying drumbeats soon draws further apart and farther away as the storm hurries off to the east. It is over for now, but this is how the rains should come. This is how the greening should begin. The grasses will send up lush spears, seeds will swell like dewdrops on their tips, and the life that depends on their abundance will feast once more.

The geckos once again take up their chorus, clicking into the night.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@National Geographic magazine. This story appears in the March 2021 issue ofmagazine.

It’s a warm night in mid-October, and I’m winding my way up to the University of Virginia’s McCormick Observatory on a quest to solve an abiding mystery: Why are Earthlings so dang obsessed with Mars?

The observatory’s hilltop dome is open, etching a glowing amber crescent into the autumn darkness. Inside stands a telescope that will help me see Mars as it appeared to observers more than a century ago, when eager astronomers used this instrument in 1877 to confirm the discovery of the two tiny Martian moons, Phobos and Deimos.

Tonight UVA astronomer Ed Murphy has made a special trip up to the observatory, which is closed to the public because of the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. The whirling dance of orbital dynamics has put Mars at its biggest and brightest in the sky right now, and Murphy calculated that this would be the best time to see it from central Virginia, where the turbulent air can sometimes complicate nighttime sky-gazing.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Flight assembly technician Olawale Oluwo of Malin Space Science Systems in San Diego, California, holds part of Mastcam-Z, a pair of cameras with zoom capabilities installed on NASA’s Perseverance rover. Right: A Mastcam-Z camera is tested in a chamber that simulates the planet’s wide swings in surface temperature.

He climbs up a ladder and settles onto the viewing platform, a wooden perch constructed in 1885, and nudges the giant telescope toward the conspicuous orange dot of light. He fiddles with a knob, bringing the planet into focus. “Wait for those few moments when the atmosphere settles down, and you’ll actually see Mars looking crisp and clear … and then it will all get blurry again,” he says through his space-themed face mask.

We swap places. Through the telescope, Mars is an upside-down, peach-pink sphere that swims in and out of resolution. I hesitantly sketch its shadowy features during fleeting moments of clarity, doing my best to channel the 19th-century scholars who once charted its landscapes, some fervently believing that its alien face bore the markings of an advanced civilization.

Today we know there are no immense engineering scars crisscrossing the planet’s vermilion surface. But that doesn’t really matter. Human interest in Mars is ageless. For millennia we’ve made sense of Mars by attaching our deities to it, charting its motion, and mapping its face. We’ve worked Mars into our art, our songs, our literature, our cinema. Since the beginning of the space age, we’ve also hurled more than 50 pieces of hardware—engineering marvels that collectively cost billions of dollars—at Mars. Many, especially early on, have failed. And still our Mars mania marches on.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

As I meet with Murphy in October, eight spacecraft are operating in orbit around Mars or exploring its dusty surface. In February 2021, as of press time, three more robotic emissaries are scheduled to rendezvous with the red planet, including a flagship life-seeking NASA rover called Perseverance and two potentially history-making missions from China and the United Arab Emirates.

(See how NASA's new Mars rover will explore the red planet.)

But, why? Among the worlds we know, Mars is not superlative in any way. It’s not the brightest, the closest, the smallest, or even the easiest to get to. It’s not as mysterious as Venus; not as spectacularly adorned as jewel-toned Jupiter or ringed Saturn. It’s arguably not even the most likely place to find extraterrestrial life—that would be the icy ocean moons of the outer solar system.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

“A bunch of red dirt on Mars is not as interesting as some of these other worlds,” says Paul Byrne, a planetary scientist at North Carolina State University. “I don’t advocate for a second that we shouldn’t be exploring it. I do advocate, loudly, that we should be considering how Mars fits into the overall space exploration strategy.”

The scientific reasons why Mars is a compelling target are complex and evolving, propelled by a cornucopia of images and information from all those orbiters, landers, and rovers. Mars is a perpetual enigma, a place we’re always on the cusp of knowing but don’t truly understand. “This is one of the world’s longest unfolding discoveries,” says Kathryn Denning, a York University anthropologist specializing in the human elements of space exploration. “It’s this giant exercise in suspense.”

And the reason Mars remains lodged in the popular zeitgeist might be witheringly simple: Even as our picture of it has sharpened over time, we can still easily envision ourselves there, building a new home beyond the confines of Earth. “It’s just blank enough,” Denning says.

With a sloppy sketch of Mars in my hand, I think of the decades we’ve spent chasing little green men, and microbes, and human settlements, and how Mars fervor has returned after every setback. At the same time, I know plenty of scientists are ready to heap our dreams—and our robots—onto other inviting destinations across the solar system. As scientists juggle limited resources and increasing competition, I can’t help but wonder if we’ll ever shake ourselves loose from the allure of Mars.

Since civilizations first gazed skyward, humans have followed Mars and charted its capricious path through the heavens. As the Sumerians tracked this “wandering star” crossing the sky in the third millennium B.C.E., they noted its foreboding color and associated it with the malevolent deity Nergal, god of pestilence and war. Its movements and varying brightness portended the deaths of kings and horses or the fates of crops and battles.

Aboriginal cultures also note its color, describing it as something that has been burned in flames or linking it to Kogolongo, the native red-tailed black cockatoo. The pre-Columbian Maya carefully plotted the object’s position relative to the stars, tying its movements to shifting terrestrial seasons. The Greeks associated it with Ares, after their god of war, whom the Romans recast as Mars.

“There was always only one actual planet Mars, but there are a lot of different cultural Marses in play,” Denning says.

By the mid-1800s, telescopes had transformed Mars from a mythological figure into a world. As it came into focus, Mars became a planet with weather, shifting terrains, and ice caps like Earth’s. “The very first time we had a way to look at Mars through the eyepiece, we started discovering things that were changing,” says the SETI Institute’s Nathalie Cabrol, who has studied Mars for decades. With more advanced instruments, this dynamic place could be studied—and mapped.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

During the Victorian era, astronomers sketched the Martian surface and presented their drawings as fact, although the whims and biases of the mapmakers influenced their final products. In 1877 one of those maps captured international attention. As drawn by the Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli, Mars had harshly delineated topography, with islands that erupted from dozens of canals, which he colored blue. Schiaparelli stuffed his map with detail, and instead of conforming to contemporary naming conventions, he labeled the exotic features on his version of the planet after places in Mediterranean mythologies.

“That was a really massively bold statement to make,” says Maria Lane, a historical geographer at the University of New Mexico. “It’s basically him saying, I saw so much stuff that was so different from what anyone else had seen, I can’t even use the same names.”

As a result, Lane says, Schiaparelli’s map was instantly authoritative. Scientific and popular opinion pronounced it a powerful representation of truth. Three decades of unconstrained Mars mania followed, and by the end, any reasonable person would be forgiven for believing intelligent Martians had built a planet-spanning network of canals. Much of that fervor can be linked directly to Percival Lowell, a quirky aristocrat with a serious Mars obsession.

A wealthy Bostonian and Harvard University alum, Lowell had more than a passing interest in astronomy, and he was an avid reader of scientific and popular texts. Inspired in part by Schiaparelli’s maps, and believing that alien technology had crafted the Martian canals, Lowell raced to build a hilltop observatory before the autumn of 1894, when Mars would make a close approach to Earth and its fully sunlit face would be prime for observing those supposed canals.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: Rolling in the Deep Getting a spacecraft to Mars is not easy, and many early missions failed. But in 1997 NASA’s Pathfinder mission successfully landed and released Sojourner, the first wheeled rover on the planet. This pioneering robot has a supporting role in the 2015 film The Martian. Photograph by NASA/JPL

With the help of some friends and his family fortune, the Lowell Observatory emerged that year near Flagstaff, Arizona, on a steep bluff that the locals named Mars Hill. From there, among the conifers, he dutifully studied the red planet, waiting night after night for the shimmering world to come into focus. Based on his observations and sketches, Lowell not only thought he could confirm Schiaparelli’s maps, he believed he spotted an additional 116 canals. “The more you look through the eyepiece, the more you’re going to start seeing straight lines,” Cabrol says. “Because this is what the human brain does.”

In Lowell’s estimation, the Martian canal builders were supremely intelligent beings capable of planetary-scale engineering—an alien race intent on surviving a devastating change in climate that forced them to build mammoth irrigation canals stretching from the poles to the equator. Lowell published his observations prodigiously, and his conviction was infectious. Even Nikola Tesla, the electric pioneer who famously sparred with rival inventor Thomas Edison, got caught up in the moment and reported detecting radio signals coming from Mars in the early 1900s.

But Lowell’s story began to fall apart in 1907, in part because of a project he funded. That year, astronomers took thousands of photos of Mars through a telescope and shared them with the world. Planetary photography eventually replaced cartography as “truth,” Lane says. Once people could see for themselves how the photos and maps of Mars didn’t match, they no longer bought into the authority of Lowell’s maps.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Still, by the turn of the 20th century, Mars had become a familiar neighbor with changing landscapes and the lingering promise of inhabitants. The next wave of observations revealed that seasonally, the Martian polar caps shrank and expanded, unleashing a swath of darkness that crawled toward the equator. Some scientists in the 1950s thought those shadowy areas had to be vegetation that flourished and died back, theories that made it into top-tier journals. All this scientific fervor fueled a trove of speculative fiction, from H.G. Wells’s War of the Worlds and Edgar Rice Burroughs’s Barsoom serials to Ray Bradbury’s Martian Chronicles.

“In the days before we’d really explored Mars, pre-1960s, there was just a wealth of imagination,” says Andy Weir, author of The Martian. “A science fiction author could say, I don’t know anything about Mars, so I can say whatever I want about Mars.”

Then, in 1965, NASA’s Mariner 4 probe swept by the red planet. It captured the first close-up images of the Martian surface in black and white, transforming the rich pop culture playground into a grainy, cratered landscape. Seen at last, the planet’s arid sterility was a stark disappointment. But it didn’t take long for the idea of life on Mars to rekindle in human imaginations.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

In a sense, the isolation of the COVID-19 pandemic has given me a feel for what workdays must be like for Mars scientists. I usually travel extensively, getting my notebooks dirty as I chase stories across deserts, sweltering jungles, and sea ice. Currently, Mars explorers spend their lives trying to understand a place that will come into focus only through a lens or on a computer screen. They won’t soon plunge a glove into its alien soil or brush dust from their visored faces; remotely guided rovers must do the work instead.

On a Tuesday morning in October, I’ve turned on videoconferencing to talk to the SETI Institute’s Cabrol, who is across the continent in California. Instead of a bookshelf, artfully arranged, she has a vision of Mars as her backdrop. It’s an expansive vista, with dark, boulder-strewn peaks straddling rusty plains and distant ridgelines in the orange haze. That’s fitting, I think, for a scientist who’s spent decades immersing herself indirectly in Martian landscapes.

Then Cabrol shifts. Tire treads, trucks, and a cluster of bright orange tents appear in the foreground. Instead of staring at Mars, I’m seeing an image of one of Cabrol’s field sites in the Chilean Altiplano. For decades she has scoured this high desert for Mars-like environments, looking for life on volcanic peaks and in high lakes and trying to imagine how a robotic avatar might accomplish the same task, tens of millions of miles away.

Cabrol and other modern scientists focused on Mars owe a debt to Mariner 9, the first spacecraft to orbit Mars in 1971. At first, Mariner couldn’t see through a massive planetwide dust storm. “Mars was still trying, until the last minute, to keep a veil of mystery,” Cabrol says. But as the sand settled, the camera spied the summits of the humongous Tharsis Montes, a trio of volcanoes dwarfed only by neighboring Olympus Mons. To the east was mammoth Valles Marineris, a rift valley that resembles Arizona’s Grand Canyon, only nine times longer.

Most importantly, in the thousands of photographs taken by Mariner 9, scientists saw ancient river-carved valleys, floodplains, channels, and deltas. They also picked up chemical clues of water ice. These were all signs that flowing water once sculpted exotic Martian landscapes.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

“The geologic evidence is overwhelming that the climate was very different than it is today,” says Ramses Ramirez, who studies the ancient Martian climate at the Earth-Life Science Institute in Tokyo, Japan. That realization changed the course of Mars exploration. “It was so much more profound than all the folklore we could have in mind,” Cabrol says, “and another adventure started. The scientific one.”

Knowing that ancient Mars may have been a somewhat Earthlike abode ignited a new set of questions in planetary evolution, and it reinvigorated interest in finding out whether life may have once existed on Mars or, with luck, still did. “I think it’s fascinating that we’re still dealing with the same themes as Percival Lowell would recognize,” says Rich Zurek, chief scientist of the Mars Program Office at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). “Just ... no canals.”

NASA quickly followed Mariner 9 with an even more ambitious mission. In 1976 humans finally were able to gaze at the red planet from eye level when the twin Viking landers touched down in the northern hemisphere. By that time, scientists already knew vegetation didn’t seasonally carpet Mars; those shifting shadows were the work of dust storms whipping up volcanic sand. They also already knew that water didn’t flow abundantly over its surface anymore.

But they didn’t know whether the planet’s soils were devoid of life, and at least one astronomer—Carl Sagan—wasn’t ready to completely abandon the idea of even larger life-forms.

Just in case Martians were nocturnal, “for a long time, we had a very high-intensity lamp planned to be on Viking so that we could take pictures at night,” recalls Gentry Lee, a science fiction author and chief engineer at JPL. To Sagan’s disappointment, the Viking team decided to remove the lamp from both landers, and if you had pressed Sagan about whether he truly expected to see Martians wandering by he’d probably demur, Lee says.

The Viking experiments found no Martian microbes and no footprints in the sand. Instead, they unveiled hints of perchlorates in the soil, compounds that can destroy organic molecules and potentially erase any traces of carbon-based life. “So, you couldn’t even look for the bodies, if you will,” Zurek says.

But Viking did send back images of ruddy, rock-strewn plains that looked like they could have been snapped from any arid place on Earth. New views of Mars kept flooding in, as NASA landed rover after rover on the planet’s desolate surface: Pathfinder in 1997, then the twin Spirit and Opportunity rovers in 2004, followed by the Curiosity rover in 2012. Each vehicle arrived outfitted with increasingly sophisticated cameras, and together they sent back roughly 700,000 images. Now when we see those rover tracks in the soil or we see the robot selfies showing them perched on a colorful crater rim, we can more easily imagine ourselves in their treads.

“Once you land, there’s this whole evocation of what it means to be a human in this place,” says Yale University anthropologist Lisa Messeri, who studies how space-based imagery affects our perception of worlds.

About an eight-hour drive from Istanbul, Lake Salda in southwest Turkey is a local haven. Dark volcanic rocks tumble toward the brilliant white sandy beach ringing the shore. Clear aquamarine waters become a deep abyssal blue near the lake’s center, where the bottom is hundreds of feet down. It’s an almost perfect modern analog for Jezero crater, the spot where NASA’s Perseverance rover is targeting its search for signs of ancient life.

“The locals call it the Maldives of Turkey,” says Brad Garczynski, a graduate student in planetary science at Purdue University who traveled to the site in 2019. “You could imagine yourself as a little microbe tanning yourself on the shoreline of Jezero.”

It’s dry now, but the sculpted terrain suggests that Jezero once was filled with a deep, large crater lake fed by flowing rivers. More than 3.5 billion years ago, water likely rushed into Jezero from the north and west, depositing layers of sediments in fanning deltas near the crater walls. Over time, the crater filled and flooded, eventually sending water back out through a breach to the east.

From orbit, spacecraft have identified clays and carbonate minerals near Jezero’s deltas that require water to form. Lake Salda’s white sands similarly are made of busted-up carbonates called microbialites, rocky structures made when dissolved carbon dioxide forms carbonate ions that react with other elements, such as magnesium, and precipitate rapidly, trapping organic compounds. On Earth this process forms layered structures that preserve the oldest evidence of terrestrial microbial life, dating back 3.5 billion years. Scientists are hoping that Jezero’s carbonates did the same, and that they trapped anything that once inhabited the lake or its ancient shores.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

“It’s one of the reasons we’re excited about Jezero crater,” says Purdue University planetary scientist Briony Horgan. It’s also why Garczynski is practicing being a Mars rover in Turkey: He’s looking for the most likely places for biosignatures to be preserved, and he’s figuring out what they’d look like to Perseverance. To do that, he collected nearly a hundred pounds of samples from Lake Salda and flew them home in a suitcase.

Like Garczynski, Perseverance will be collecting rocks for a return trip, although maybe just 450 grams, at most. As the rover wheels around Jezero, its onboard cameras—which see Mars in multiple wavelengths—will help it identify the most tantalizing rocks to collect. The rover will cache those samples and leave them on Mars, where they’ll wait for a ride home on a future spacecraft. Once they arrive in Earth-based laboratories, scientists will use the best possible instruments to read the record of Mars’s ancient climate and tease out any possible signs of life.

Or maybe, with luck, Perseverance’s advanced cameras will be the first to glimpse evidence of fossilized Martians.

If anything, though, Mars has taught humankind that we often fall prey to wishful thinking about life on its surface. From canals to vegetation to hotly debated hints of fossils in Mars meteorites, the red planet repeatedly has paved over our hopes with bleak, barren realities. So why, then, are we sending yet another spacecraft to look for life on Mars—not even for organisms that are alive today but for traces of organisms that may have flourished billions of years ago?

“We. Haven’t. Looked. For. Life. On. Mars,” Cabrol asserts, getting animated. “If you don’t have a good understanding of the environment, how are you going to be able to decrypt or extract a life signal out of that?!” Even Viking, she says, which was purportedly a life-finding mission, carried an experiment that was designed without enough knowledge of the Martian environment to reasonably succeed.

But those ancient landscapes are still there, preserving a record of the planet’s infancy and a time when life could have thrived in a slightly wetter period, blanketed by a thicker atmosphere.

“We know the canals don’t exist, we know there is no pyramid on Mars, no alien civilization, no Tupperware,” Cabrol says. But if we do find that some prebiotic chemistry littered the Martian surface, we may learn something about how life evolves on any rocky shores—including our own.

What if Perseverance finds no evidence for Martian fossils or even signs that places like Jezero could have been inhabited? Will we ever be able to give up on the idea of life on Mars? Probably not, admits David Grinspoon, senior scientist at the Planetary Science Institute. “It’s very hard to kill the idea that Mars is somehow hiding life from us,” he says. “It’s very, very tenacious.”

In a way, that stubbornness is perhaps the most blatant manifestation of our desire for companionship, a longing for communion, a need to know that we are not alone in the universe. Humans, for the most part, need other humans to survive, and maybe that’s true on a planetary scale as well.

“We are not a solitary people,” Weir says. “At a macroscopic level, we—humanity—we don’t want to be alone.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@National Geographic magazine. This story appears in the February 2021 issue ofmagazine.

Let’s imagine planet Earth without viruses.

We wave a wand, and they all disappear. The rabies virus is suddenly gone. The polio virus is gone. The gruesomely lethal Ebola virus is gone. The measles virus, the mumps virus, and the various influenzas are gone. Vast reductions of human misery and death. HIV is gone, and so the AIDS catastrophe never happened. Nipah and Hendra and Machupo and Sin Nombre are gone—never mind their records of ugly mayhem. Dengue, gone. All the rotaviruses, gone, a great mercy to children in developing countries who die by the hundreds of thousands each year. Zika virus, gone. Yellow fever virus, gone. Herpes B, carried by some monkeys, often fatal when passed to humans, gone. Nobody suffers anymore from chicken pox, hepatitis, shingles, or even the common cold. Variola, the agent of smallpox? That virus was eradicated in the wild by 1977, but now it vanishes from the high-security freezers where the last spooky samples are stored. The SARS virus of 2003, the alarm that we now know signaled the modern pandemic era, gone. And of course the nefarious SARS-CoV-2 virus, cause of COVID-19 and so bewilderingly variable in its effects, so tricky, so dangerous, so very transmissible, is gone. Do you feel better?

Don’t.

This scenario is more equivocal than you think. The fact is, we live in a world of viruses—viruses that are unfathomably diverse, immeasurably abundant. The oceans alone may contain more viral particles than stars in the observable universe. Mammals may carry at least 320,000 different species of viruses. When you add the viruses infecting nonmammalian animals, plants, terrestrial bacteria, and every other possible host, the total comes to … lots. And beyond the big numbers are big consequences: Many of those viruses bring adaptive benefits, not harms, to life on Earth, including human life.

We couldn’t continue without them. We wouldn’t have arisen from the primordial muck without them. There are two lengths of DNA that originated from viruses and now reside in the genomes of humans and other primates, for instance, without which—an astonishing fact—pregnancy would be impossible. There’s viral DNA, nestled among the genes of terrestrial animals, that helps package and store memories—more astonishment—in tiny protein bubbles. Still other genes co-opted from viruses contribute to the growth of embryos, regulate immune systems, resist cancer—important effects only now beginning to be understood. Viruses, it turns out, have played crucial roles in triggering major evolutionary transitions. Eliminate all viruses, as in our thought experiment, and the immense biological diversity gracing our planet would collapse like a beautiful wooden house with every nail abruptly removed.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

A virus is a parasite, yes, but sometimes that parasitism is more like symbiosis, mutual dependence that profits both visitor and host. Like fire, viruses are a phenomenon that’s neither in all cases good nor in all cases bad; they can deliver advantage or destruction. Everything depends: depends on the virus, on the situation, on your point of reference. They are the dark angels of evolution, terrific and terrible. That’s what makes them so interesting.

To appreciate the multifariousness of viruses, you need to start with the basics of what they are and what they are not. It’s easier to say what they are not. They are not living cells. A cell, of the sort assembled in great number to make up your body or mine or the body of an octopus or a primrose, contains elaborate machinery for building proteins, packaging energy, and performing other specialized functions—depending on whether that cell happens to be a muscle cell or a xylem cell or a neuron. A bacterium is also a cell, with similar attributes, though much simpler. A virus is none of this.

Saying just what a virus is has been complicated enough that definitions have changed over the past 120-some years. Martinus Beijerinck, a Dutch botanist who studied tobacco mosaic virus, speculated in 1898 that it was an infectious liquid. For a time a virus was defined mainly by its size—a thing much smaller than a bacterium but that, like bacteria, could cause disease. Still later, a virus was thought to be a submicroscopic agent, bearing only a very small genome, that replicated inside living cells—but that was just a first step toward a better understanding. (See how viruses look up close.)

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

“I shall defend a paradoxical viewpoint,” wrote the French microbiologist André Lwoff in “The Concept of Virus,” an influential essay published in 1957, “namely that viruses are viruses.” Not a very helpful definition but fair warning—another way of saying “unique unto themselves.” He was just clearing his throat before beginning a complex disquisition.

Lwoff knew that viruses are easier to describe than to define. Each viral particle consists of a stretch of genetic instructions (written either in DNA or that other information-bearing molecule, RNA) packaged inside a protein capsule (known as a capsid). The capsid, in some cases, is surrounded by a membranous envelope (like the caramel on a caramel apple), which protects it and helps it catch hold of a cell. A virus can copy itself only by entering a cell and commandeering the 3D-printing machinery that turns genetic information into proteins.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

If the host cell is unlucky, many new viral particles are manufactured, they come busting out, and the cell is left as wreckage. That sort of damage—such as what SARS-CoV-2 causes in the epithelial cells of the human airway—is partly how a virus becomes a pathogen.

But if the host cell is lucky, maybe the virus simply settles into this cozy outpost—either going dormant or back-engineering its little genome into the host’s genome—and bides its time. This second possibility carries many implications for the mixing of genomes, for evolution, even for our sense of identity as humans, a topic to which I’ll return. One hint, for now: In a popular 1983 book the British biologist Peter Medawar and his wife, Jean, an editor, asserted, “No virus is known to do good: It has been well said that a virus is ‘a piece of bad news wrapped up in protein.’ ” They had it wrong. So did a lot of scientists at the time, and it remains a view still embraced, understandably, by anyone whose knowledge of viruses is limited to such bad news as the flu and COVID-19. But today some viruses are known to do good. What’s wrapped up in the protein is a genetic dispatch, and that might turn out to be good news or bad, depending.

Where did the first viruses come from? This requires us to squint back almost four billion years, to the time when life on Earth was just emerging from an inchoate cookery of long molecules, simpler organic compounds, and energy.

Let’s say some of the long molecules (probably RNA) started to replicate. Darwinian natural selection would have begun there, as those molecules—the first genomes—reproduced, mutated, and evolved. Groping for competitive edge, some may have found or created protection within membranes and walls, leading to the first cells. These cells gave rise to offspring by fission, splitting in two. They split in a broader sense too, diverging to become Bacteria and Archaea, two of the three domains of cellular life. The third, Eukarya, arose sometime later. It includes us and all other creatures (animals, plants, fungi, certain microbes) composed of cells with complex internal anatomy. Those are the three great limbs on the tree of life, as presently drawn.

But where do viruses fit? Are they a fourth major limb? Or are they a sort of mistletoe, a parasite wafted in from elsewhere? Most versions of the tree omit viruses entirely.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

One school of thought asserts that viruses shouldn’t be included on the tree of life because they aren’t alive. That’s a lingering argument, hinging on how you define “alive.” More intriguing is to grant viruses inclusion within the big tent called Life, and then wonder about how they got in.

There are three leading hypotheses to explain the evolutionary origins of viruses, known to scientists as viruses-first, escape, and reduction. Viruses-first is the notion that viruses came into existence before cells, somehow assembling themselves directly from that primeval cookery. The escape hypothesis posits that genes or stretches of genomes leaked out of cells, became encased within protein capsids, and went rogue, finding a new niche as parasites. The reduction hypothesis suggests that viruses originated when some cells downsized under competitive pressure (it being easier to replicate if you’re small and simple), shedding genes until they were reduced to such minimalism that only by parasitizing cells could they survive.

There is also a fourth variant, known as the chimeric hypothesis, which takes inspiration from another category of genetic elements: transposons (sometimes called jumping genes). The geneticist Barbara McClintock deduced their existence in 1948, a discovery that earned her a Nobel Prize. These opportunistic elements achieve their Darwinian success simply by bouncing from one part of a genome to another, in rare cases from one cell to another, even one species to another, using cellular resources to get themselves copied, over and over. Self-copying protects them from accidental extinction. They accumulate outlandishly. They constitute, for instance, roughly half of the human genome. The earliest viruses, according to this idea, may have arisen from such elements by borrowing proteins from cells to wrap their nakedness inside protective capsids, a more complex strategy.

Each of these hypotheses has merits. But in 2003 new evidence tipped expert opinion toward reduction: the giant virus.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

It was found within amoebas, which are single-celled eukaryotes. These amoebas had been collected in water taken from a cooling tower in Bradford, England. Inside some of them was this mysterious blob. It was big enough to be seen through a light microscope (viruses supposedly were too small for that, visible only by electron microscope), and it looked like a bacterium. Scientists tried to detect bacterial genes within it but found none.

Finally a team of researchers in Marseille, France, invited the thing to infect other amoebas, sequenced its genome, recognized what it was, and named it Mimivirus, because it mimicked bacteria, at least with regard to size. In diameter it was huge, bigger than the smallest bacteria. Its genome was also huge for a virus, almost 1.2 million letters long, compared to, say, 13,000 for an influenza virus, or even 194,000 for smallpox. (DNA, like RNA, is a long molecule built with four different molecular bases, which scientists abbreviate by their first letters.) It was an “impossible” virus: viral in nature but too big in scale, like a newly discovered Amazon butterfly with a four-foot wingspan.

Jean-Michel Claverie was a senior member of that Marseille team. The discovery of Mimivirus, Claverie told me, “caused a lot of trouble.” Why? Because sequencing the genome revealed four very unexpected genes—genes for coding enzymes presumed to be uniquely cellular and never before seen in a virus. Those enzymes, Claverie explained, are among the components that translate the genetic code to assemble amino acids into proteins.

“So the question was,” Claverie said, “what the hell has a virus the need” for those fancy enzymes, normally active in cells, “when he has the cell at his disposal, OK?”

What need indeed? The logical inference is that Mimivirus has them as holdovers because its lineage originated by genomic reduction from a cell.

Mimivirus was no fluke. Similar giant viruses were soon detected in the Sargasso Sea, and the early name became a genus, Mimivirus, containing several giants. Then the Marseille team discovered two more behemoths—again, both parasites of amoebas—one taken from shallow marine sediments off the coast of Chile, the other from a pond in Australia. Up to twice as big as a Mimivirus, even more anomalous, these were assigned to a separate genus, which Claverie and his colleagues named Pandoravirus, evoking Pandora’s box, as they explained in 2013, because of “the surprises expected from their further study.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Claverie’s senior co-author on that paper was Chantal Abergel, a virologist and structural biologist (and also his wife). Of the Pandoraviruses, Abergel told me, with a weary laugh: “They were highly challenging. They are my babies.” She explained how difficult it had been to tell what they were, these creatures—so different from cells, so different from classical viruses, carrying many genes that resembled nothing ever before seen. “All of that makes them fascinating but also mysterious.” For a while she called them NLF: new life-form. But from observing that they didn’t replicate by fission, she and her colleagues realized they were viruses—the largest and most perplexing ones found so far.

These discoveries suggested to the Marseille group a bold variant of the reduction hypothesis. Maybe viruses did originate by reducing from ancient cells, but cells of a sort no longer present on Earth. This kind of “ancestral protocell” might have been different from—and in competition with—the universal common ancestor of all cells known today. Maybe these protocells lost that competition and were excluded from all the niches available for free-living things. They may have survived as parasites on other cells, downsized their genomes, and become what we call viruses. From that vanished cellular realm, maybe only viruses remain, like the giant stone heads on Easter Island.

Discovery of the giant viruses inspired other scientists, notably Patrick Forterre at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, to formulate novel ideas about what viruses are and what constructive roles they have played, and continue to play, in the evolution and functions of cellular life.

The flow of viral genes into cellular genomes has been “overwhelming,” scientists argue, and may help explain some great evolutionary transitions, such as the origin of DNA, the cell nucleus, and cell walls, and even the divergence of the three great domains of life.

Previous definitions of “virus” were inadequate, Forterre proposed, because scientists were confusing viral particles—the capsid-enclosed bits of genome, properly known as virions—with the totality of a virus. That, he argued, was as wrong as confusing a seed with a plant, or a spore with a mushroom. The virion is just the dispersal mechanism, he argued. The real wholeness of the virus also includes its presence within a cell, once it has seized the cell’s machinery to replicate more virions, more seeds of itself. To see the two phases together is to see that the cell has effectively become part of the virus’s life history.

Forterre bolstered that notion by inventing a new name for the combined entity: the virocell. This idea also cut through the alive-or-not-alive conundrum. A virus is alive when it’s a virocell, according to Forterre, never mind that its virions are inanimate.

“The idea behind the virocell concept,” he told me by Skype from Paris, “was mainly to focus on this intracellular stage.” That’s the delicate stage when the infected cell, like a zombie, is obeying the viral mandate, reading the viral genome and replicating it, but not always without skips, staggers, and mistakes. During that process, Forterre said, “new genes can originate in a viral genome. And this is a major point for me.” Viruses bring innovation, but cells respond with their own defensive innovations, such as the cell wall or the nucleus, and so it’s an arms race toward greater complexity. Many scientists have assumed that viruses achieve their major evolutionary changes by the “virus pickpocket” paradigm, snatching DNA from this infected organism and that one, and then putting the stolen pieces to use within the viral genome. Forterre argues that the pilfering might more often go the other way, cells taking genes from viruses.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

An even more sweeping view, held by Forterre and Claverie and some other scientists in the field, including Gustavo Caetano-Anollés at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, is that viruses are the preeminent font of genetic diversity. According to this thinking, viruses have enriched the evolutionary options of cellular creatures over the past several billion years by depositing new genetic material in their genomes. This bizarre process is one version of a phenomenon known as horizontal gene transfer—genes flowing sideways, across boundaries between different lineages. (Vertical gene transfer is the more familiar form of inheritance: from parents to offspring.) The flow of viral genes into cellular genomes has been “overwhelming,” Forterre and a co-author have argued, and may help explain some great evolutionary transitions, such as the origin of DNA, the origin of the cell nucleus in complex creatures, the origin of cell walls, and maybe even the divergence of those three great limbs on the tree of life.

In the olden days, the days before COVID-19, engrossing discussions with scientists sometimes happened in person, not by Skype. Three years ago, I flew from Montana to Paris because I wanted to talk with a man about a virus and a gene. The man was Thierry Heidmann, and the gene was syncytin-2. He and his group had discovered it by screening the human genome—all 3.1 billion letters of code—to find stretches of DNA that looked like the kind of gene a virus would use to produce its envelope. They found about 20.

“At least two proved to be very important,” Heidmann told me. They were important because they had the capacity to perform functions essential to human pregnancy. Those two were syncytin-1, which was first discovered by other scientists, and syncytin-2, which he and his group found. How these viral genes became part of the human genome, and to what purposes they have become adapted, are aspects of a remarkable story that begins with the concept of human endogenous retroviruses.

A retrovirus is a virus with an RNA genome that operates backward from the usual direction (hence retro). Instead of using DNA to make RNA, which then serves as a messenger sent to the 3D printer to make proteins, these viruses use their RNA to make DNA and then integrate it into the genome of the infected cell. HIV, for instance, is a retrovirus that infects human immune cells, inserting its genome into the cell genome, where it may lie dormant. At some point, the viral DNA gets activated, becoming a template for production of many more HIV virions, which kill the cell as they come exploding out.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Here’s the big twist: Some retroviruses infect reproductive cells—the cells that produce eggs or sperm—and in doing that, they insert their DNA into the heritable genome of the host. Those inserted stretches are “endogenous” (internalized) retroviruses, and when incorporated into human genomes, they are known as human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs). If you remember nothing else from this article, you might want to remember that 8 percent of the human genome consists of such viral DNA, patched into our lineage by retroviruses over the course of evolution. We are each one-twelfth HERV. The gene syncytin-2 is among the more consequential of those patches.

For four hours I sat in Heidmann’s office while he explained to me, with a laptop at his elbow for bringing up graphs and charts, the origin and the functions of this particular gene. The essence is almost simple. A gene that originally helped a virus fuse with host cells found its way into ancient animal genomes. It was then repurposed to generate a similar protein that helps fuse cells to create a special structure around what became the placenta, opening a new possibility in some animals: internal pregnancy. That innovation was vastly consequential in evolutionary history, making it possible for a female to carry her developing offspring from place to place, inside her body, rather than leaving them vulnerable in one place, as eggs in a nest.

The first gene of this sort from an endogenous retrovirus eventually was replaced by others that were similar but better suited for the role. Over time, the design of this new mode of reproduction improved and the placenta evolved. Among these acquired viral genes is syncytin-2, one of two syncytins in humans helping to fuse cells to form a placental layer next to the uterus. That unique structure, mediating between mother and fetus, allows nutrients and oxygen in, carries waste products and carbon dioxide out, and probably protects the fetus from being attacked by the mother’s immune system. It’s a near miracle of efficient design, in which evolution shaped a viral component into a human component.

Heidmann and I broke for lunch and then resumed for another two hours. Finally, my brain buzzing, my notebook full, I asked him: What does it all say about how evolution works? He laughed with delight, and I laughed too, from amazement and fatigue.

“Our genes are not only our genes,” he said. “Our genes are also retroviral genes.”

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

The contribution of that retrovirus, giving us syncytin-2, is only one instance of a grand pattern. Another is the gene ARC, expressed in response to neuronal activity in mammals and flies. It closely resembles a retroviral gene that codes for a protein capsid. Recent research by several teams, including one led by Jason Shepherd at the University of Utah, suggests that ARC plays a key role in storing information within neural networks. Another word for that: memory. ARC seems to do it by packaging information derived from experience (embodied as RNA) into little protein sacs that carry it from one neuron to another.

And at the Stanford University School of Medicine, Joanna Wysocka, along with a group of colleagues, has found evidence that viral fragments produced by another human endogenous retrovirus, known as HERV-K, are present within human embryos at the earliest stage and might play some positive role in protecting the embryo from viral infection, or in helping control fetal development, or both. Further, her group has focused on a particular transposon that seems to have entered the human genome as a sort of prologue section of HERV-K, then found ways of copying itself and bouncing to other parts of the genome, so that it’s now present in 697 scattered copies. Those copies seem to help turn on almost 300 human genes.

“To me what is really mind-boggling,” Wysocka said, “is that HERVs are about 8 percent of the human genome,” a portion of our being that is essentially “the graveyard of previous retroviral infections.” It’s even more boggling to contemplate how, as Wysocka put it, “our history of past retroviral infections is continuing to shape our evolution as a species.”

If 8 percent of your genome and mine is retroviral DNA, and half is transposons, then maybe the very notion of human individuality (let alone human supremacy) is not as solid as we like to believe.

The downside of such evolutionary agility, of course, is that viruses can sometimes switch hosts, tumbling from one kind of creature into another and succeeding as pathogens in the unfamiliar new host. That’s called spillover, and it’s how most new human infectious diseases arise—with viruses acquired from a nonhuman animal host.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A slice of a reconstruction of SARS-CoV-2 from cryo-electron tomography shows that the spikes protrude at odd angles. These spikes have three joints—hip, knee, and ankle—that allow them to flop around, most likely to increase the odds of attaching to a cell. Image of SARS-CoV-2 by BEATA TUROŇOVÁ AND MARTIN BECK, EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY LABORATORY

In the original host—known to science as a reservoir host—a virus may have abided quietly, at low abundance and low impact, for thousands of years. It may have reached an evolutionary accommodation with the reservoir host, accepting security in exchange for causing no trouble. But in a new host, such as a human, the old deal doesn’t necessarily hold. The virus may explode in abundance, causing discomfort or misery in that first victim. If the virus not only replicates but also manages to spread, human to human, among a few dozen other individuals, that’s an outbreak. If it sweeps through a community or a country, that’s an epidemic. If it encircles the world, it’s a pandemic. So now we’re back to SARS-CoV-2.

Some types of viruses are more likely to cause pandemics than others. Near the top of the list of the most worrisome candidates are coronaviruses, because of the nature of their genomes, their capacity to change and evolve, and their history of causing serious human disease. That group includes SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) in 2002-03 and MERS (Middle East respiratory syndrome) in 2012-15. So when the phrase “novel coronavirus” began to be used to describe the new thing causing clusters of illness in Wuhan, China, those two words were enough to make disease scientists around the world shudder. (Take an intimate look at how the virus upended our lives.)

Coronaviruses belong to an infamous category of viruses, the single-stranded RNA viruses, that includes influenzas, Ebola viruses, rabies, measles, Nipah, hantaviruses, and retroviruses. They are infamous partly because a single-stranded RNA genome is subject to frequent mutation as the virus replicates, and such mutation supplies a richness of random genetic variation upon which natural selection can work.

Coronaviruses, though, evolve relatively slowly for RNA viruses. They carry fairly long genomes—the SARS-CoV-2 genome runs to about 30,000 letters—but their genomes change less quickly than some others because they have a proofreading enzyme to correct mutations. Yet they are also capable of a trick called recombination, in which two strains of coronavirus, infecting the same cell, swap sections of their genomes and give rise to a third, hybrid strain of coronavirus. That may be what happened to create the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2.

The ancestral virus probably resided in a bat, possibly a horseshoe bat, belonging to a genus of small, insectivorous creatures with horseshoe-shaped noses, which commonly carry coronaviruses. If recombination did occur, adding some crucial new elements from a different coronavirus, this could have happened in a bat or possibly in another animal. (Pangolins have been suggested; other species could also be candidates.) Scientists are exploring these possibilities and others by sequencing and comparing genomes of the viruses found in various potential hosts. All we know for now is that SARS-CoV-2 as it exists today in humans is a subtle virus capable of further evolution.

So viruses give and viruses take away. Maybe the reason they are difficult to place on the tree of life is that life’s history, after all, isn’t quite shaped like a tree. The arboreal analogy is just our traditional way of illustrating evolution, made canonical by Charles Darwin. But Darwin, great as he was, knew nothing about horizontal gene transfer. In fact, he knew nothing about genes. He knew nothing about viruses. Everything is very complicated, we realize now. Even viruses, which seem so simple at first glance, are very complicated. And if seeing them in all their complexity gives us humans a clearer vision of the tangled connectedness of the natural world, if reflecting upon our own viral contents takes away some of our sublime detachment, then I leave it to you to say whether those are benefits or harms.

David Quammen’s 16 books include Spillover: Animal Infections and the Next Human Pandemic, which foretold COVID-19. Craig Cutler is an artist and photographer who specializes in still life and environmental portraiture, striving to tell a story in each image.



Editor's note: The opening photo of a fetus, the fetus projected behind model Melody Carballo, and the embryo projected behind Joanna Wysocka were taken by Swedish photographer Lennart Nilsson (1922-2017). His groundbreaking work documenting life before birth was first showcased in Life magazine in 1965 and remains unsurpassed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@National Geographic magazine. This story appears in the March 2021 issue ofmagazine.

Jupiter is the king, Uranus is the comedian, Pluto is the underdog. But of all the planetary bodies in our solar system, Mars is clearly the biggest celebrity. Take a visual tour through our evolving fascination with the red planet and see how it has been venerated through the years as a powerful deity, a scientific curiosity, and a pop culture icon.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1570s “Mars and Venus United by Love”

A joining of opposites: Cupid uses a special love knot to bind the Roman god Mars to the goddess Venus in a painting by Paolo Veronese.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1898 The War of the Worlds

A witness recounts an epic battle between Martians and Earthlings in H.G. Wells’s now notorious thriller.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1906 Lowell’s Canals

As he drew on his maps (above) and described in a 1906 book, Percival Lowell believed Mars was a dying world covered in irrigation canals.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1918 A Trip to Mars

Like many early 20th-century depictions, this Danish silent film focused on Mars’s supposed inhabitants—in this case, benevolent vegetarians.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1939 “The Man From Mars”

Drawn by Frank R. Paul for Fantastic Adventures, this Martian is telepathic and can retract his eyes and nose to protect them from freezing.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1948 Project Mars

In 1948 German rocket engineer Wernher von Braun penned speculative fiction about a human mission to Mars. His work was translated into English and reprinted (sans fictional elements) as The Mars Project, a 1953 book with a stunningly prescient mission concept.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1951 Flight to Mars

In this sci-fi drama, scientists arrive on Mars to find a planet populated by a subterranean, dying race similar to humans—who may be plotting a desperate invasion of Earth.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1954 Full Color

Astronomer E.C. Slipher took this image from South Africa; he published his Photographic Story of Mars (1905- 1961) in 1962.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1965 Mariner 4

When this spacecraft flew by Mars, it snapped images of a planet that looked disappointingly like the moon: cratered and sterile, without any signs of alien life.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1967 Sagan’s Vision

For National Geographic, Carl Sagan imagined radiation-resistant Martians shielded by glassy shells, eating cabbage-like plants that fold up at night.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

1976 Mars Vikings

NASA’s Viking mission included two orbiters and two landers, the first to take high-resolution images of Mars from its desolate surface.

1996 Mars Attacks!

Directed by Tim Burton, this film poked fun at 1950s science fiction movies. In it, murderous Martians terrorize Earth until they’re defeated by a country song.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

2015 The Martian

In Andy Weir’s futuristic survival tale, astronaut Mark Watney, played by Matt Damon, is abandoned on Mars after crewmates mistake him for dead.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

2019 Starship

If SpaceX CEO Elon Musk has his way, a version of the retro-looking launch vehicle seen here being built in Texas will one day shuttle humans to the moon, Mars, and beyond.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rae Wynn-Grant wants people to know that bears aren’t bad news. The National Geographic Explorer focuses on ways to eliminate negative interactions between these charismatic carnivores and the humans living near bear habitat. Translating painstakingly collected data, she brings communities information about where bears are, where they’re traveling, and how locals can protect themselves.

In her work as a wildlife ecologist, she has also tracked lions across Tanzania and monitored ring-tailed lemurs in Madagascar. As her career progressed, Wynn-Grant, who is based in Santa Barbara, California, has grown stronger in her advocacy for the necessity of diversity in nature—and in the sciences. (Why combining diversity with STEM is a good thing for kids)

She was the lone Black person among her academic peers when she started studying wildlife ecology. The lack of diversity became only more obvious as she advanced in her field.

But she’s found that her success has inspired a new generation of aspiring ecologists of color. “I feel so much more hopeful about the future,” she says, “the future of wildlife, the future of the environment, the future of equity and justice and opportunity—because I’m seeing more people of color showing up in these spaces where I used to be the only one.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A firefighter and a volunteer try to put out a fire in Afidnes, some 20 miles from the Greek capital of Athens, on Aug. 6, 2021. Greek authorities say arson is partly responsible for some of the wildfires across the country.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The deadly heat waves, floods, and droughts that are upending the lives of thousands of people, from the American West to southern Europe and central China, will likely only get worse as global temperatures continue to rise, according to a sobering new report on the state of the world’s climate.

California's Dixie Fire, currently the second largest in the state's history, has scorched nearly 500,000 acres, leveled over 400 homes to date, and threatens thousands more. The fire's exact cause is unknown, but it's being fueled by extremely dry conditions and strong winds.

Scientists have long theorized that climate change is associated with widespread changes in weather patterns. But the sixth report by the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), published on Monday, makes the strongest case yet that human-caused climate change is to blame. Already, the world has warmed 2 degrees Fahrenheit (1.1 degrees Celsius) since the industrial age, and extreme weather is one of the most prominent ways that warming manifests itself.

“We can link extreme weather to climate change in the same way we can link smoking to cancer,” says Friederike Otto, one of the report’s authors and a climate change researcher at Oxford University.

And, like smoking, the damage is hard to reverse, Otto says. If all greenhouse gas emissions ceased today—a planetary version of quitting smoking—the worsening heat waves and floods occurring now would be locked in for centuries. What’s most important, scientists say, is making sure these events don’t grow even more common and intense than they are now.

What do we know and how do we know it?

The report’s findings on extreme weather are based on hundreds of peer-reviewed scientific papers and represents the scientific community’s latest consensus on the state of climate change. The first report was published in 1990, the most recent in 2013.

In the seven years since, the influence climate change is having on extreme weather has become clearer, scientists say. While the 2013 report mentioned extreme weather only in passing, the latest iteration devotes a chapter to it.

“I feel strongly that the public needs to know that dangerous climate change is here and now,” says Michael Wehner, an extreme weather researcher at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Wehner wrote extreme weather projections for the 2013 report and is a lead author for the report out today.

For the first time, the report details the effects of climate change by region, and shows that nearly every country on the planet will be hit by intensifying heat waves, more rainfall, or worsening drought. In July, parts of China saw 25 inches of rain in a single day—the amount of rain that typically falls in a year.

The report also notes that tropical cyclones (the weather pattern known as hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean) will change character: They’ll become more powerful, move more slowly over land, and drop so much more rain that flooding will often cause more damage than the wind. In the United States, Texas and the Carolinas have already experienced this new type of hurricane—Hurricane Harvey in 2017 and Hurricane Florence in 2018 led to catastrophic floods and billions in damages.

“All regions of the world are affected by some extremes. Changes are happening everywhere,” says Sonia Seneviratne, an environmental scientist at the Institute for Atmosphere and Climate in Zurich and one of the IPCC report’s authors. “They're also multiplying with increasing global warming.”

Many regions around the world are now seeing “compound events,” she says. Wildfires are breaking out in areas suffering from heat waves and drought. Or heavy rainfall in coastal areas exposed to rising seas, for example, compounds the severity of a disaster.

After grappling with drought and record-breaking heat, California is now seeing its second largest wildfire on record. Turkey and Greece, facing one of the worst heat waves on record, also are battling dramatic wildfires.

To determine how much rising temperatures are increasing the odds of an extreme weather event, scientists model how a weather pattern would have evolved in a climate without high levels of planet-warming emissions. Heat waves and extreme rainfall have the clearest influence from climate change because their increase can be directly linked to rising temperatures. Other types of extreme weather, such as dangerous winter storms and tornadoes, are still active areas of research with less conclusive findings.

While raising the global temperature by a degree or two may sound minor, not all regions of the world are warming equally. In the Pacific Northwest, for example, where historic heat waves this summer killed an estimated 800 people, temperatures in 2050 are expected to be 5.8°F hotter than they were before the industrial revolution. That not only raises average temperatures, it also raises the average extreme.

“Climate change is making heat waves orders of magnitude more likely,” says Otto. A study she and her peers from an initiative called World Weather Attribution found that the Pacific Northwest’s heat wave would have been “virtually impossible” without climate change.

“In rainfall, you see maybe a doubling [of the odds]. For heat waves you easily see an increase by a factor of 10 or more, and so I think heat waves are really one of the most striking impacts of climate change,” she says.

Anomalous heat waves that formerly had a chance of occurring once every 10 years are now more than twice as likely to occur. Even rarer heat waves, likely to have hit once every 50 years, are nearly five times more likely, according to the IPCC.

What do we do about it?

The IPCC report comes ahead of a November conference where nearly 200 countries will meet in Glasgow, Scotland to negotiate ways to reduce their emissions. Current policies from countries around th globe have the world on track to reach 3°C of warming by 2100.

To limit global warming to just 2°C , Wehner says, “It’s my feeling we would have to do something rather drastic.” Something drastic, he adds, means completely eliminating consumption of coal, oil, and natural gas.

Even if the world’s nations were to completely stop emitting carbon dioxide, methane, and other emissions warming the planet today, the effect of just the 1.1°C of warming that has happened would linger for a millennia. What’s important now, says Wehner, is trying to prevent further damage.

“If you thought this summer was bad, a summer under a 3°C or 4°C warmer world would make this summer feel relatively normal,” says Wehner. “It’s hard to imagine how bad it would be. Some parts of the world would not be livable. The biggest hurricanes would be just devastating.”

While this IPCC report looked at the physical science of climate change, another iteration will publish in February 2022. That one will examine the effect climate change is having on humans, and how we need to adapt.

From 2000 to 2015, as many as 86 million people moved into regions where flooding is common, according to a study recently published in Nature. The combined effect of rising sea levels and heavier precipitation will mean even more people will be exposed to floods in the future. Without effective adaptation, that means more people will be facing serious risk.

“The term ‘natural disaster’ is used very frequently to describe things like hurricanes. Disaster researchers have for many decades argued that the term is a misnomer,” says Samantha Montano, an emergency management expert at Massachusetts Maritime Academy.

She contends that many disasters happen by design, a result of building vulnerable homes in at-risk locations, and without proper emergency management protocols in place. As the risks grow higher, she says, more funding to help people adapt is urgently needed.

“We have for a long time talked about climate change as something for future generations to deal with. We are already dealing with this. There are already people who have lost their lives,” says Montano.

The most vulnerable members of society will bear the biggest brunt of a more extreme climate—those unable to afford air conditioning or a car to evacuate in, says Montano. “As we watch these disasters unfold, it needs to be front-and-center in our narrative that this is not inevitable.”

Seneviratne cautions that even with action taken to adapt to current climate conditions, reducing emissions to avoid even worse climate extremes will be crucial.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Climate change has already touched every corner of the planet and will continue to reshape the human experience for centuries to come, its impacts intensifying as warming grows, scientists warn.

The 2.0 degrees Fahrenheit (1.1 degrees Celsius) the planet has warmed since the preindustrial period has pushed Earth toward irreversible change, some of which is unavoidable. But decisive action to cut emissions quickly and thoroughly—keeping total temperature rise as low as possible—can greatly reduce the risks of crossing further dangerous thresholds that would put the planet even more at risk, according to a massive new Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report released Monday.

“In order to stabilize climate, we have to stop emitting immediately, full stop,” says Charles Koven, one of the report authors and a climate scientist at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California.

Risk of irreversible change have become clearer

Earth’s temperatures have increased more or less steadily for decades, neatly in tandem with rising greenhouse gases. The basic rule of thumb is simple: the more carbon dioxide emitted, the warmer it gets, and that relationship will continue, the report says.

But scientists have known for over 30 years that there are thresholds in the climate system which, if crossed, could drastically reshape the world as we know it—causing changes that are irreversible on human timescales. Pushing ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica past certain points, for example, can drive them into self-reinforcing declines that would continue even if emissions stopped tomorrow.

"We play Russian roulette with climate [and] no one knows what lies in the active chamber of the gun," groundbreaking climate scientist Wally Broecker wrote in 1987.

Since then, reams of research have shown that many of these outcomes could occur at lower global temperature changes than anyone expected and that some may have already begun. Though the exact thresholds are still uncertain, some could be triggered within the 1.5 to 2°C warming range, the warming limits suggested in the 2015 Paris Agreement.

The new report says the planet could warm by about 2.5°F (1.4°C) above preindustrial temperatures by 2100 under the most ambitious pathway to reduce emissions, or more than 7.2°F (4°C) in the least ambitious.

Even at the low end of that range, shifts that can’t be taken back could occur in all corners of the planet: the icy parts, the oceans, the land, and the atmosphere. But the risks become much greater and harder to escape with more warming.

“The more we push the climate system from the state that it’s been in for the last several thousand years, the greater the odds we pass thresholds we can only poorly project,” says Bob Kopp, an author of the report and climate scientist at Rutgers University.

Some of these changes have very local effects. The loss of local mountain glaciers, for example, can deeply affect communities that depend on them for water. Others, like melting of the major ice sheets, have global impacts. Many are self-reinforcing: For example, wildfires are more likely to burn in dry, hot conditions made common by climate change. As they burn, they release carbon into the atmosphere, exacerbating planetary warming and making future fires more likely—a pattern that is all too familiar today.

What’s scary, says Koven, is that “there are thresholds we can cross and not know we’ve crossed them until they’re passed.” That highlights the importance of doing whatever possible to keep far from the theoretical limits.

Here, we explain some of the potentially irreversible changes that can still be avoided with decisive action.

We can still avoid catastrophic losses in Earth’s biggest ice reserves

Melting ice from both Greenland and Antarctica is already fueling faster sea level rise than at any point in the last 3,000 years, threatening billions of coastal dwellers worldwide. Greenhouse gas emissions have locked us into continued rise for centuries to come, but the speed and seriousness of that lock-in are still well within our control, the report says.

It finds that sea levels could rise by just over 1.6 feet (0.5 meters) by 2100 if emissions are cut aggressively, or two to three feet if emissions continue to increase. But under the worst-case scenarios—and if Antarctica’s tipping points are surpassed—that number could be as high as about six feet.

The scariest forecasts only kick in if the ice sheets cross critical thresholds, after which physics would dictate their continued decline—but “you can definitely reduce the possibility of that happening by reducing emissions,” says Baylor Fox-Kemper, one of the authors of the report and an oceanographer at Brown University.

West Antarctica alone is home to enough ice to raise global sea levels by about 10 feet if it all melted away, and its geology makes that possibility a real concern. The region is shaped like a bowl: The rock deep underneath the massive ice sheet sits below sea level. The ocean is prevented from spilling into the bowl by the ice sheet itself, which drapes over the rim and out into the ocean like a convex lid. But if that lid is broken or even pushed slightly back from the rim, ocean water can spill down the side of the bowl, gnawing away at the ice from below, likely speeding the sheet’s demise.

There is evidence that the inevitable decline could be triggered once Earth has warmed somewhere between 1.5 to 2°C above preindustrial temperatures, and some scientists think there are signs the process is already underway, adding great urgency to reducing emissions.

Ice at the northern pole could flip into a new, dangerous state too. It is particularly vulnerable already, since the Arctic is warming at about twice the world average, the report says.

The Greenland ice sheet, which would raise global sea levels about 24 feet if it disappeared, is shrinking faster than at any time in the past 350 years and is on track to exceed melt rates for the last 12,000 years. In a single super-hot day in late July, enough water slipped from its surface to cover Florida in two inches of water.

One of the key feedback loops that could hasten its demise works like this: Blasting summer sun melts the bright white snow that collects on the ice sheet, exposing denser, darker ice below and sometimes creating meltwater pools. The darker ice and water soaks up more heat, causing more melting, which leads to more meltwater, round and round in a destructive cycle. The summer shrink problem will only get worse as the ice sheet gets smaller and shorter: As it loses height, its surface gets closer to sea level, where the air is substantially warmer, further speeding the demise.

Climate change-warmed ocean waters also gnaw at some of the ice sheet’s edges, causing more big chunks to break off. More ice slides downhill to replace the lost chunks, leading to more chunks falling off, and so on. It’s like pulling a gumball out of a machine: The others rush to be the next to come out.

Greenland’s ice won’t disappear tomorrow. Scientists estimate it would take over 1,000 years to disintegrate completely, and potentially thousands of years longer if we manage to cut emissions quickly. But once the process passes certain thresholds, which some groups estimate could happen at around 2.7°C of warming or maybe even less, the demise is unlikely to be reversible. That means the ice will continue to disappear for centuries, even if temperatures stabilize.

Despite that, “we shouldn’t throw our hands up,” stresses Twila Moon, a climate scientist at the National Snow and Ice Data Center in Colorado. “How much more emissions we put into the atmosphere, how much we let it warm—that will really influence the rate of change.”

Limiting warming to 1.5°C, recent work has found, would cut sea level rise this century in half.

A crucial ocean current could slow down

Dangerous shifts in a major ocean current that controls weather around the Atlantic basin could also become permanent with unchecked climate change, the report finds.

Water constantly pumps through the world’s oceans, ferrying heat, carbon, and much more around the planet. In the Atlantic Ocean, a part of that giant, powerful ocean conveyer belt carries warmth northward as it flows along the western side of the basin. That warmth affects everything from everyday weather in the United States and Europe to sea levels along the East Coast and rainfall patterns in Africa.

But climate change is already slowing the current. The speed of the water is partly controlled by how dense it is when it gets by Greenland, where it usually cools quickly and plunges into the deep ocean like a ball rolling down a hill. But the water hitting that sink point is getting warmer, and Greenland’s melting ice is pouring fresh water into it too—both things that make it less dense and less able to sink, which decelerates the whole conveyer belt. Research suggests it has slowed roughly 15 percent since the middle of the 20th century, and is now moving more sluggishly than at any point in the last 1,000 years.

An even more complete collapse is possible. In the past, the conveyer belt ground to a crawl and maybe even a halt, leading to abrupt chill and wholesale reshaping of weather and rainfall patterns around the Atlantic basin.

The new IPCC report reasserts that such an earth-altering slowdown is very possible, though unlikely before 2100. Continuing decline, which would likely extend for centuries, could move Europe and Africa’s major rainfall patterns south from their present locations, weaken the monsoons that now swing annually through tropical Africa and Asia, drive an extra foot or more of sea level rise along the U.S. East Coast, and more.

No one knows exactly where the current’s dangerous thresholds lie. “All the elements to get it to go the wrong way are there,” says Paola Cessi, an oceanographer at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California. “And if we keep going as we are going, we certainly will get there eventually.” But strong climate action can still reverse the decline, forestalling or even avoiding the worst impacts.

Permafrost could disintegrate

The Arctic is home to 9 million square miles of permafrost, soils that stay frozen year-round. These soils hold huge quantities of dead organic material—safe and inert while it’s frozen. But when permafrost thaws, the dead stuff turns into greenhouse gases—the super-potent greenhouse gas methane, as well as carbon dioxide. More carbon is trapped in these soils than is currently in the atmosphere.

But the Arctic is warming faster than the rest of the planet, destabilizing permafrost and slowly leaking its carbon into the atmosphere, which contributes to further warming and more melting. A special interim IPCC report published in 2019 suggested that the feedbacks could intensify around 5.4°F (3°C) of warming, but the process will continue no matter what if temperatures rise further, says Koven.

“We expect these processes to operate as a kind of positive feedback—destabilizing the climate system and make it that much harder to meet our climate goals,” he says. But strong emissions cuts could slow or even reverse the carbon emissions from the permafrost ecosystem, preventing the worst of the feedback effects.

Amazon forest could tip into savannah

Today, the Amazon rainforest does something remarkable: It makes its own water.

Rain sweeps into the eastern part of the forest from the Atlantic Ocean. Trees use it and breathe it back out, where it recondenses into new clouds, which move along with the westward breeze, raining as they go and continuing the cycle. A single water molecule can be recycled five times along the width of the rainforest.

But deforestation, forest degradation, and climate change itself interrupt that process, says David Lapola, a researcher at the University of Campina in Brazil, spurring a transition from rainforest plants to ones that prefer drier conditions and triggering a lasting change in the entire ecosystem.

Dry-adapted species protect their water more, breathing out and returning less to the air above, disrupting the rain cycle and leading to further drying. Already, dryland species are taking over parts of the southeastern Amazon.

The Amazon holds about 150 to 200 billion tons of carbon, about 15 percent of the remaining carbon budget suggested by this IPCC report in order to have a 50 percent chance of staying below 2°C of warming. Losing water would mean losing much of that stored carbon, Lapola explains.

It’s still not clear exactly where the critical threshold lies. One study suggests losing 40 percent of the forest or crossing 7.2°F (4°C) of warming, could cause permanent, irreversible change. Others think it could take even less. Rampant deforestation—estimates suggest almost 20 percent of the forest has been cleared—and inexorable warming are bringing the prospect too close for comfort.

“20 years ago we were expecting this would happen, but we originally thought it would happen in 2050 or after,” says Lapola. But now, when he looks at the reality, it’s clear that “we may have been conservative compared to what we are observing.”

The list goes on. It's time for action.

These are only a few of the irrevocable changes that we can expect if the planet’s climate warms much further, the report says. Major shifts in monsoons; amplifying ocean warming, acidification, and loss of oxygen; increases in extreme heat at the limit of human habitability—climate change leaves no corner of the planet untouched.

And because each extra bit of warming will have much bigger impacts than the bit before, the worst impacts can be avoided with strong action. For example, today a heat wave that would have historically occurred once every 50 years is now about five times as likely; at 2°C warming it will be 14 times as likely; but in a 4°C warmer world, it would be 40 times as likely, the report finds.

It is now a moral imperative to prevent those extra risks, says Tim Lenton, a climate scientist at the University of Exeter who has been warning of irreversible climate change for years.

“We need to act like we are in a climate emergency,” says Lenton. “People have now woken up and said, ‘Damn, the scientist weren’t bluffing,’ but now 30 years later here we are. It’s the action that counts now.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Extreme heat often brings extreme wildfires, and this year is no exception, with unprecedented heat waves fueling enormous outbreaks of fires in the western United States and Canada, as well as across the Mediterranean and in Siberia. But paradoxically, the most intense wildfires can have the opposite effect on temperatures, cooling Earth’s surface both regionally and globally.

Dense wildfire smoke can temporarily block sunlight near the ground, causing regional temperatures to drop by several degrees. Wildfire smoke can also have global cooling effects by making clouds in the lower atmosphere more reflective or blocking sunlight in the upper atmosphere, similar to what a volcanic eruption does.

Scientists have only recently begun studying these effects, with Australia’s record 2019-2020 bushfire season marking the first time researchers detected wildfire smoke-induced global cooling. The effect is far too small to counteract human-caused global warming, but beyond that, researchers say it’s too early to predict what it means for the broader climate system.

But with fire seasons growing more intense around the world and this summer triggering a spate of extreme fire weather in North America and elsewhere, the search for answers is growing increasingly urgent.

“It’s absolutely clear that research related to the effect of wildfires on climate is very topical,” says Sergey Khaykin, a fire weather expert at Sorbonne University in France.

Dimmer skies, brighter clouds

As wildfires burn across the land, they emit a cocktail of tiny particles, water vapor, and gases into the air. Swept around by winds, this wildfire smoke can pollute the air hundreds to thousands of miles away. Residents of the northeastern U.S. experienced this firsthand in mid-July, when a pulse of smoke from a wildfire outbreak in southern Canada wafted over New York City, Philadelphia, and Washington D.C., reddening sunsets and triggering air quality alerts. In late July, smoke from Canadian wildfires spread across Minnesota, leading to “unprecedented” levels of air pollution. This week, Athens is choking on smoke as wildfires rage across nearby forests. The Dixie Fire is currently California's largest blaze, destroying over 100 homes and leveling a historic town.

In addition to creating a health hazard, dense wildfire smoke near the ground sometimes blocks enough light to reduce surface temperatures. As far back as 1950, scientists have measured this effect by comparing temperatures on heavy smoke days with temperatures forecast to have occurred in its absence.

“The effect ranges, depending how far you are from the source, how big the fire was and how much smoke it injected,” says Robert Field, a research scientist at NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies. But when wildfire smoke is thick enough, Field says, “you could get a brief 5 degree Celsius [9°F] cooling effect.”

Field describes these cooling effects as “episodic” and “almost an academic curiosity” compared with the public health impacts of wildfire smoke. But new research on Australia’s 2019-2020 bushfire season points to another, potentially far more significant, way that wildfire smoke can cool Earth’s surface.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Writing in the journal Geophysical Research Letters last week, scientists at the National Center for Atmospheric Research reported that those Australian fires poured so much smoke into the Southern Hemisphere’s atmosphere it triggered a “strong and rapid” global cooling effect of about 0.06°C ( 0.01°F). According to lead study author John Fasullo, this was largely due to how smoke particles interact with clouds in the lower atmosphere, or troposphere.

Smoke particles act as seeds for water vapor to form droplets, resulting in clouds with additional droplets of water that are smaller and reflect more sunlight. While smoke tends to rain out of clouds fairly quickly, the Australian bushfires raged for months, pumping more and more cloud-brightening smoke into the atmosphere.

“It’s not a big effect, but when you integrate over the entire Southern Ocean, it adds up,” Fasullo says.

Indeed, the impact seems to have rippled across the climate system. The researchers’ models showed that smoke-induced cooling in the Southern Hemisphere shifted a critical belt of tropical thunderstorms, the Intertropical Convergence Zone, further north. Fasullo says that this shift might have contributed to the emergence of La Niña conditions last year, which cooled ocean surface temperatures in the eastern equatorial Pacific, although more research is needed to confirm that hypothesis.

But according to Fasullo, there’s no longer any question that “wildfires can create their own climate, or instigate a climate response.”

Fire-fueled weather

While Fasullo’s research highlights the cooling effects of smoke in the lower atmosphere, on occasion, wildfire smoke punches through the troposphere and into the stratosphere, the atmospheric layer that starts about 10 miles up. There, it can have additional effects on the climate.

Smoke reaches the stratosphere when heat from a powerful wildfire creates an updraft that combines with moisture in the atmosphere to generate towering thunderclouds. Known as pyrocumulonimbus clouds, or pyroCbs, these fire-fueled thunderclouds can act like chimneys, funneling smoke into the upper atmosphere where it can circle the globe and linger for months.

This happened in late 2019 and early 2020 in Australia, when an unprecedented “super outbreak” of 38 pyroCbs blew roughly a million metric tons of smoke into the lower stratosphere. Research led by Khaykin and published last September showed that the smoke shaded Earth’s surface for several months, likely producing an additional, small global cooling effect on top of the effect of cloud brightening.

Something similar could happen this year.

Western North America’s fire season is off to a raging start, with June and July bringing exceptionally hot weather and numerous wildfires to California, the Pacific Northwest and British Columbia. Alongside the fires, scientists have witnessed a rash of pyroCbs, beginning with a massive fire-fueled thundercloud in British Columbia on June 30 that blew smoke about ten miles overhead. That event kicked off “what became a multi-day pyroCB wave,” says David Peterson, a scientist at the Naval Research Laboratory who studies pyroCbs.

Between late May and August 2, Canada has seen 49 pyroCb events, including an outbreak of 10 pyroCbs on July 15 that ranks second to the Australian super-outbreak in terms of the number of firestorms that occurred in a single outbreak. Another 21 pyroCbs have formed over the continental U.S. this summer. Taken together, Peterson says, this is the largest number of pyroCbs observed in North America since scientists began keeping detailed records of the phenomenon in 2013.

Khaykin, who is tracking these pyroCbs, as well as others in Siberia, says that so far, they have pumped considerably less smoke into the stratosphere than last year’s Australian outbreak did. But with several months left in the wildfire season and hot, dry conditions persisting across much of the West, that could change.

Khaykin adds that while the Australian pyroCb outbreak blasted smoke to unusually high altitudes, this year, smoke is being injected into a lower part of the stratosphere near where cirrus clouds form. This, he says, might lead to “enhanced aerosol cloud interaction” in the stratosphere, “which is something that is really poorly known.”

“We might still be in the infancy of understanding how large and how important the effects of these wildfires are,” he says.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When Rebecca Sunenshine moved to Phoenix, Arizona, her first electric bill shocked her. “I called the utility and said, ‘You must have made a mistake.’ Because I think it was a $400 or $500 bill,” says Sunenshine, who is the medical director for Disease Control with the Maricopa County Health Department. “And they said, ‘Did you just move here?’”

The utility hadn’t erred. Air-conditioning accounts for about a quarter of Arizonans’ energy use, more than four times the national average. And it’s not a luxury. Without air conditioning, summer heat in Phoenix can be fatal. Last year, Maricopa County recorded 323 heat-related deaths—a record for the county. “We've had the highest number we've ever seen several years in a row,” says Sunenshine. The county is currently on track to exceed last year’s toll.

Extreme temperatures haven’t been confined to the Southwest. June was the hottest month ever recorded in North America. Early in July, an unprecedented heat wave claimed nearly 200 lives in Oregon and Washington, and another 600 people or more are thought to have died in British Columbia from the heat.

As global temperatures continue to climb, demand for air conditioning will soar. Within 20 years the electricity needed to power the world’s air conditioners is expected to triple. The fossil fuels burned to run them already add about 117 million metric tons of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere each year in the United States alone. The very devices that keep us cool are helping to bake the planet.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Even aside from their carbon footprint, air conditioners have a more direct impact on their surroundings, says Aaswath Raman, a professor of engineering at the University of California Los Angeles. “When you think about what an air conditioner does, it dumps hot air back into its environment. So every air conditioner is actually making its environment slightly hotter.”

Finding a more environmentally friendly alternative to conventional air conditioning systems has been the focus of Raman’s work for nearly a decade. He is at the forefront of a small global community of researchers who have been developing a variety of materials, including paints, thin films, and wood, all with a singular property: Using wavelengths of light, they can cool the surrounding air without any external power source, in some cases by 10 degrees Fahrenheit or more. These new materials could help mitigate some of the effects of the climate crisis, especially in cities, where the urban heat island effect can raise temperatures by more than 17 degrees.

“The neighborhoods that suffer most from the urban heat island effect tend to be lower income neighborhoods,” says Raman. “So it’s an issue of equity.”

A better way to cool

Raman is generally acknowledged to be the founder of this nascent field of research. The idea that there might be better ways to keep things cool came to him in 2012, when he was finishing his Ph.D. at Stanford University. While digging through some old scientific articles, he became intrigued by a concept that a few scientists had toyed with decades before, but then almost immediately dismissed as unworkable.

The idea was to harness a natural phenomenon known as radiative cooling to lower the temperature of objects. Radiative cooling is physics-speak for a process that happens all around us: Anything that has been warmed by some heat source eventually cools down when the heat source is removed. The most familiar example is the rather large object beneath our feet: the Earth itself, which warms during the day and cools after sunset, shedding heat out into space.

A few researchers had wondered if there might be some way to tinker with materials to make them radiate heat even in broad daylight, but the effort seemed futile. As long as the sun is out, objects don’t become any cooler than the ambient air temperature. “We came across references saying that this is impossible to do during the daytime,” says Raman.

For a young postdoc, an impossible project offered two possibilities: running into a dead end at the start of one’s career or discovering something that others had missed.

“It's really hard to find topics that no one is working on,” says Raman. “And usually there's a good reason—because it's completely pointless.”

Raman had trained in the physics of optics, studying how light of different wavelengths interacts with various materials. He had tools and technology at his disposal that weren’t available to the researchers who had abandoned their radiative cooling work years earlier. So in 2012 he submitted a proposal to the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy, or ARPA-E, a branch of the Department of Energy.

“Every three years they have this open funding call where any crazy idea can be submitted,” says Raman. “And I think they end up picking like one percent of submissions for funding. I was told that Steve Chu, who was the energy secretary at the time, said that this doesn't sound plausible.” Nevertheless, the agency gave Raman $400,000 and a one-year deadline to develop a material that would stay cool even on the hottest days. “It was probably one of the smallest grants they made,” he says.

A specific wavelength

Raman teamed up with Shanhui Fan, his mentor at Stanford. They planned to construct a thin but multilayered film that would take advantage of the way Earth’s atmosphere allows heat to escape into space. All the solar energy absorbed by the Earth’s surface is constantly being reemitted as infrared radiation, a form of light with a longer wavelength than visible light. Some of that infrared radiation is absorbed by water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other greenhouse gases, warming the atmosphere. That process had kept the world’s climate relatively stable and livable—until humans started burning fossil fuels and loading the atmosphere with billions of tons of carbon dioxide.

Not all infrared radiation, however, is absorbed by the atmosphere; some of it escapes into space. Earth’s atmosphere, it turns out, is transparent to certain infrared wavelengths—specifically, wavelengths between 8 and 13 micrometers. Think of the atmosphere as a blanket, with a few holes in it. Raman and Fan realized that if they could engineer their film to emit infrared radiation within that range, the radiation would flow through the atmosphere’s holes and leak out into space; the film would naturally cool down, dropping below ambient temperatures even during the daytime.

Their film consists of alternating layers of silica—glass—and hafnium dioxide, a compound used in the optics industry to coat lenses and mirrors. By fine-tuning the thickness of the individual layers, Raman and Fan created a film that was both highly reflective of visible light—so it wouldn’t warm up in the sun—and an excellent emitter of infrared radiation at just the right wavelengths to pass through the atmosphere unimpeded. If the film covered, say, the hood of a car, it would conduct heat away from the hood, cooling it without using any electricity.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Raman and Fan knew their experiment was working within six or seven months. They were on the roof of an engineering building on the Stanford campus with a sample of their film exposed to the sun. Rooftops can get exceedingly hot in the summer, reaching temperatures as high as 140°F. As a spot check, they tried a simple test: They shaded the film. Normally, when something is shaded it will cool off. But the film became warm, because the infrared radiation was no longer escaping into the atmosphere—it was hitting the shading material and warming it, which in turn heated the air around the film.

“It's super counterintuitive,” says Raman. “It's warmer in the shade because you're blocking its view of the sky.” Placed back in the sunlight, the film became noticeably cool to the touch, about 10° below the air’s temperature.

Following that early success, Raman, Fan, and their Stanford colleague Eli Goldstein cofounded a company called SkyCool and worked with 3M to further develop and commercialize the technology. In the spring of 2020, SkyCool installed film-coated panels on the roof of a California supermarket. Water flowing through the panels is cooled by the film and then pumped into the building’s conventional air conditioners and refrigerators, cooling their components and lowering the amount of electricity used to power them. Says Raman, “That adds up to around 15 to 20 percent in energy savings.”

A question of durability

Since Raman and Fan published the results of their rooftop experiment in 2014, a dozen or so research groups have designed paints, gels, and even blocks of wood that can remain cool in broad daylight. Many of the materials are so new that their durability remains a question, especially considering the places where most of them would be used: on rooftops, exposed to the elements and grime that would inhibit the infrared radiation.

“We've evaluated some of them,” says Tim Hebrink, a staff scientist with 3M, “and they can degrade or get soiled quickly.” But Raman and Fan’s film seems easier to maintain and clean than a coat of bright white paint, and the technology is ready to be scaled up. “We can make this film in rolls that are a mile long,” says Hebrink, “and a meter or two wide.”

For now, the film will most likely be used as a supplement to conventional cooling technologies, as it is at the California supermarket. Paradoxically, most buildings are so well insulated that heat from within can’t pass up into the film to be radiated away. But the film could help cool other sorts of structures. The city of Tempe, Arizona, is now field-testing 3M’s film on the roofs of a few of its bus shelters. Some preliminary results show that the roofs can be 30° cooler than the surrounding air.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

And the technology could help reduce heat-related deaths. Raman is involved in a UCLA project called Heat Resistant Los Angeles. “The idea is, can we go beyond shade?” he says. Historically, cities have focused on providing shade trees, parks, and green belts to help cool urban environments, but such projects often bypass low-income communities and take years to establish. Raman envisions using canopies coated with his film to cool large outdoor spaces; these could be set up quickly at relatively low cost.

“It's very early days for the project,” he says, “so it's still kind of speculative. But I'm hoping in a year or two we'll have some cool results and demos to share.”

Cooling the planet?

At least one scientist imagines an even more ambitious scheme: erecting large-scale arrays of panels coated with a film like Raman and Fan’s to cool the entire planet and maybe slow or reverse global warming. Jeremy Munday, an electrical engineer at the University of California Davis, estimates that covering one to 2 percent of Earth’s surface with the panels would offset the warming caused by greenhouse gases. The required area would be a bit more than half the size of the Sahara Desert.

His rough calculation of the cost: $2.5 trillion, or about 10 percent of the gross domestic product of the United States. But when weighed against the calamitous effects of the climate crisis, it would be money well spent, he says.

“You have to be thinking about stuff that's kind of outside the box,” Munday says. “It's a cliché, I know, but we've been kind of marching along the same route for a long time. And I think sometimes you need to punctuate things by going to big changes.”

It’s an appealing idea—a solution to a crisis that threatens every nation on Earth. But is it remotely practical? “Radiative cooling may indeed help significantly with the urban heat island effect, but I think it’s very, very doubtful that [it] would have a significant role in global cooling,” says Mark Lawrence, a climate scientist at the Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies in Potsdam, Germany.

A large-scale project of the sort imagined by Munday, he says, would take decades to construct—and arrive far too late to help us avoid the most catastrophic effects of climate change. In addition, Lawrence says, artificial cooling on such a scale might disrupt the world’s precipitation patterns, since rainfall and atmospheric circulation are driven by temperature differences between the land and sea. Some climate models, for example, show that artificial cooling schemes might weaken the monsoon rains that sustain India and Africa.

The World Health Organization estimates that between 1998 and 2017, heat waves killed at least 166,000 people around the world. If we continue to emit greenhouse gases at the current rate, deadly heat will put more than a billion people at risk by the end of the century.

The technology, then, may ultimately help cool our cities, and it may be able to prevent tens or hundreds of thousands of deaths from the brutal heat waves to come, which would be no small feat. But to cool the whole world, we’ve known for decades what needs to be done: Leave fossil fuels in the ground.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Photos show why cheetahs are at risk—and how people are working to protect them

Photos show why cheetahs are at risk—and how people are working to protect them
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When U.S. Interior Secretary Deb Haaland recommended last month that full protections be restored to three national monuments in the wilderness of Utah’s red rock country and off the New England coast, conservationists expected quick action. No drawn-out negotiations with Congress were needed; President Joe Biden could undo former President Donald Trump’s actions reducing the size of the protected lands and opening them up to development with the stroke of a pen.

Turns out, bringing back environmental protections takes time.

“It’s easy to tear things down, but takes longer to put them back together,” says Steve Bloch, the legal director for the Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance. “I expect the administration is doing its due diligence to make sure the restoration is as durable as possible.”

Biden is expected to return the boundaries of Utah’s Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante national monuments to their original size, and restore safeguards to a large marine reserve off the coast of New England. But even if he does, controversy over the size of protected lands designated as national monuments is likely to persist.

Utah Governor Spencer Cox suggested last spring that his state might sue if Biden decides to restore the monuments. And the Utah congressional delegation, which supported shrinking the size of the protected lands, has urged Biden to leave the decision to Congress.

Bears Ears was established by President Barack Obama in 2016 at 1.3 million acres; Trump reduced its size by 85 percent in 2016. The Grand Staircase-Escalante was created by President Bill Clinton in 1996; Trump shrunk it by almost half. Trump also opened the Northeast Canyons and Seamounts monument created by Obama, to commercial fishing.

In Trump’s view, some federal protections went too far. After reviewing 27 national monuments—all but one of them 100,000 acres or more—he ordered that the Utah monuments be downsized.

Presidential powers to create monuments

The 1906 Antiquities Act vested presidents with the authority to create national monuments and determine their size. Five Native American tribes whose lands are included in the monuments and a consortium of environmental groups challenged in federal court Trump’s orders to reduce the size of monuments. The litigation was halted after Biden took office.

The Supreme Court declined to hear a separate court challenge brought by New England lobstermen against the creation of the Northeast Seamounts marine monument.

Still, conservatives who question the size of large monuments have not missed the significance of a four-page statement by Chief Justice John Roberts last March regarding the lobstermen’s suit. The power to set aside areas to protect artifacts and items of historical importance, Roberts noted, “must be confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected.”

Haaland’s recommendations to restore the three monuments to their original size are included in a confidential report she submitted to Biden.

The administration is considering including the monuments in Biden’s pledge to conserve 30 percent of land and water in the United States as part of a global campaign to set aside 30 percent of the world for conservation. The so-called 30x30 plan, released last spring by the Biden administration, contains few details of which lands and waters would be protected.

Bloch thinks the prospect of further litigation may be the reason for Biden’s delay in announcing his decision. Chief Justice Roberts’s statement, Bloch adds, “leaves a trail of breadcrumbs for others to follow. He set out a marker that the state of Utah and other opponents are well aware of now.”

Bloch suspects the administration’s “due diligence” to future-proof any restoration from litigation may include strengthening the language of the proclamations that created the monuments and the description of the objects that deserve protection.

“We’re eager to have the monuments restored,” he says. “But I chalk it up to their working hard to do it right.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Using a drip torch, a forest manager lights a prescribed burn in the Modoc National Forest in the northeast corner of California. Experts suggest the state should burn about one million acres a year to help control its wildfire challenges, but currently it is only burning about 100,000.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From his uptown Manhattan home in Morningside Heights, Samir Kumar can usually see skyscrapers downtown. But this week, as smoke from wildfires raging in the western United States and Canada rode the jet stream to the East Coast, the city skyline was blurred out.

“To see wildfires have an actual effect on this coast…I was in disbelief,” says Kumar.

The 29-year-old is asthmatic, and as he ran errands in his neighborhood, he says the air felt thick. He experienced shortness of breath, tightness in his chest, and had to take bigger breaths, but he managed to stave off an asthma attack.

Kumar, whose family is from India, says he’s seen air quality that bad in New Delhi, but never in the United States.

Currently, nearly 300 wildfires are burning in British Columbia and about 80 are blazing through states in the U.S. West. The fires are exacerbated by heat waves and prolonged drought in the west, two weather patterns made more extreme by climate change.

The largest fire now is Oregon’s Bootleg Fire, which as of Friday had burned more than 400,000 acres—an area nine times the size of Washington, D.C., where air quality alerts were also issued. Hazy skies reached from Boston to North Carolina. The far-flung impacts highlight that this is no longer just a problem for states like California, where wildfires have been more common.

Research published last January in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences shows that, during a large fire event, wildfire smoke can account for 25 percent of dangerous air pollution in the U.S.

“What they’re experiencing on the East Coast from our West Coast fires shows it’s a nationwide and a global problem,” says Mary Prunicki, the director of air pollution and health research at Stanford University.

What we know about wildfire smoke

Each plume of smoke resulting from a wildfire is a unique mixture, from the types of trees burned to buildings or other objects that may have been incinerated by the blaze.

About 80 percent of the smoke is made of fine particulate matter composed of solid and liquid droplets from burned material, says Prunicki.

Because small particles penetrate a person’s lungs and lead to respiratory illnesses, scientists track particles of 2.5 microns in diameter, known as PM2.5, which are more dangerous than large sizes of particulate matter because they can pass into the bloodstream.

At that microscopically small size, a particle can lodge deep inside the body. Then the immune system kicks in with a response, releasing the same cells it would deploy to fight off a virus. The sustained immune reaction from regularly inhaling air pollution can affect everything from lungs to the liver or brain.

(Read more about how particulate matter in wildfire smoke affects the human body.)

For an otherwise healthy person exposed to such levels of smoke only briefly every year, the short-term threats beyond a scratchy throat or irritated eyes are relatively low, says Sarah Henderson, an environmental health scientist at the University of British Columbia.

5:55

But as the smoke spreads across the country and exposes millions of people, the health impact becomes more widespread among the most vulnerable. In addition to causing respiratory issues, air pollution can lead to poor heart health.

“I’ll often make the comparison to someone using cocaine,” says Henderson. “The risk of having a heart attack for someone who’s a cocaine user is high, but not many people use cocaine. Everybody is breathing the air,” and the health risks skyrocket when a greater number of people are exposed.

Those most at risk from wildfire smoke are people with respiratory conditions like asthma or COPD, a chronic lung disease, and pregnant women whose developing fetuses could be affected.

Levels of PM2.5 are measured by the Air Quality Index (AQI) on a five-tier scale. In New York City, the Tuesday AQI reached 154, a level at which it's unsafe for vulnerable people to breathe.

What’s more, smoke from wildfires could make it harder for people to fight off COVID-19 infections and the emerging variants because their immune systems are already battling pollution. Studies have shown that people exposed to air pollution are more likely to die from COVID-19.

“Any type of respiratory disorder or infection is going to impair your ability to fight other infections,” says Prunicki. “So if smoke causes a reaction now, when you’re hit with an infection, your body won’t be prepared to fight it.”

What we don’t know

There’s even more we don’t know about how airborne smoke affects the body. Last April, scientists detected traces of bacteria and fungi traveling in smoke. Wildfire smoke has been linked to Valley fever, a type of fungal infection, but it’s unclear which other disease-causing microbes may be present in smoke and how far they can travel.

A study published in Nature Communications in March found that exposure to wildfire PM2.5 drove up hospitalizations by as much as 10 percent from 1999 to 2012. Exposure to other sources of PM2.5, however, drove hospital visits by just over one percent.

“Our study is one indication that wildfire PM2.5 might be more toxic” than other sources of PM2.5 from sources such as cars, says Rosana Aguilera, an atmospheric scientist at the University of California San Diego and one of the study’s authors.

Exactly why it might be more toxic is unclear.

Earlier this month, the California Air Resources Board (CARB) published an analysis of the thick smoke produced from the state’s 2018 Camp Fire, which burned 150,000 acres, torched 19,000 buildings, killed 85 people, and destroyed the town of Paradise.

Smoke lingered for nearly two weeks in northern California and reached San Jose and Modesta, about 150 miles away. In the smoke were dangerous levels of metals like manganese, zinc, and, most worryingly—lead.

The high levels of lead persisted for 24 hours, making it difficult to link to specific ailments, but lead exposure has been linked to cancer and reproductive issues in adults and developmental problems in children.

“We can’t tie this short-term exposure to a specific health effect, but we can say lead is very dangerous, and there’s no safe exposure,” says Bonnie Holmes-Gen, the Health and Exposure Assessment branch chief at CARB.

Even more toxins may be lurking in wildfire smoke from fires that burn through neighborhoods, consuming homes containing manufactured items such as electronics, insulation, and plastic.

In March, scientists at the University of California, Davis identified toxic molecules in ash left behind from 2017 California wildfires. There were also many molecules they couldn’t identify, says Irva Hertz-Picciotto, an epidemiologist and director of the university's health science center.

In an ongoing study, Hertz-Picciotto has found that in addition to respiratory symptoms such as coughing, wheezing, or asthmatic episodes, people affected by smoke report high rates of stress and anxiety.

“Evacuations, seeing your home burn down—there’s a lot of trauma,” she says. “Mental health aspects can include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). People can suffer from flashbacks.”

For the first time in its history as a state, California’s population is declining. Falling birth rates, high housing prices, and high taxes have been factors for years, and COVID-19 has exacerbated the trend, delaying planned moves into the state. Many survivors of wildfires have also chosen to rebuild in different states.

“If I was starting to raise children... I probably would leave this state,” says Hertz-Picciotto. She plans to spend several weeks during the height of wildfire season in August away from her home in northern California, where wildfires have become common.

Reducing air pollution from wildfire smoke in California and the rest of the country will require reducing the number and size of wildfires themselves. Lawmakers have introduced legislation aimed at better managing forests, training more firefighters, and making infrastructure more fire resistant.

“Ultimately until we stop burning fossil fuels, I don't see why it’s not going to get worse. It certainly can’t get better,” says Hertz-Picciotto.

Without addressing climate change, extreme heat and drought will create conditions for wildfires and the unhealthy smoke now stretching across the country, affecting people like Samir Kumar in New York City.

“I used to think about working in India, and one of the main deterrents was air quality. I might have to make a similar decision here,” he says.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s more than just the Amazon.

Rainforests across the tropics, from Indonesia to Central America and from Madagascar to the jungles around the Mekong River, are being cut or burned—to make way for ranches, farms, and palm oil plantations, to be logged for wood or cleared for roads and other human development. Across the globe, up to 20 percent of tropical rainforests has been cleared just since the 1990s, while another 10 percent has been damaged as climate change brings higher temperatures, longer dry seasons, and more frequent droughts.

Now, an analysis by a team of more than 50 top scientists and conservationists suggests that all this change is hitting the damp, rich forests hard. In most corners of the tropics, forests are losing their capacity to store carbon and recycle water and are more vulnerable to collapse than previously thought. At the projected rate of climate change and escalating land-use activities, the forests may even become a source of carbon to the atmosphere.

Some areas are changing faster than others. This team of experts, brought together by the National Geographic Society, with the support of Rolex, combined 40 years of satellite data with other forest observations to create a “vulnerability index,” which scientists plan to use in coming years to track which stretches of tropical rainforest need help the most urgently. The research was published today in the journal One Earth.

If pushed too far, vast stretches of tropical rainforest could see widespread tree deaths, or could transition to a new state, becoming drier, savanna-like woodlands. That would devastate some of the most wildlife-rich regions on earth and potentially worsen climate change because intact rainforests slurp large volumes of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. While such a shift, in general, would likely happen gradually, scientists worry that some forests, particularly the Amazon, could transform rapidly into something new.

“I think we all have this view that things are bad out there,” says Kristofer Covey, an ecologist and biochemist at Skidmore College and co-author of the study. “The goal here is to understand. Which things are how bad? And where and to what extent, and can we then use that information to make better decisions going forward?”

They hope this approach can provide an early warning system to direct conservation resources, which are limited, to the forests most at risk.

“The public should understand that it’s not just deforestation,” says lead author Sassan Saatchi, a forest carbon expert at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. “The way forests function is changing. Since about 2000, we're seeing a new phenomenon. The impact from climate change has accelerated.”

Physicals for tropical forests

The state of tropical rainforests differs from one continent to the next. African forests are seeing more fire than other places, while the Amazon is seeing more water loss than Asian forests. Forest productivity is declining significantly across the Amazon, while productivity remains stable in the Congo and is even increasing in the tropical forests of China, thanks in part to recovery from past abuses and significant efforts to replant trees.

Vulnerability of rainforests can be measured in many different ways, and previous research often focused on small areas. That, Saatchi says, often confused researchers and conservationists trying to prioritize forest restoration.

These researchers used satellites and other models and measurements to track land temperature, above-ground photosynthesis and production, and shifts in the overall abundance and diversity of wild species. They also examined loss of tree cover from deforestation and fire, as well as changes in how much carbon and water are transferred between plants and the atmosphere.

That massive collection of information allowed them to establish a finely detailed, uniform system for evaluating forest health, much as a doctor might check weight, heart rate, blood pressure, and cholesterol during an annual physical.

And much as some people struggle with heart issues while others have lung troubles, all these forests “are all going through different stressors at different time scales,” says co-author Katia Fernandes, a University of Arkansas expert on fire and drought in the Amazon.

For instance, in Asia, land use changes currently cause more damage than climate change. In central Africa, meanwhile, forests are seeing greater water loss and higher temperature increases than Asia. But the Congo as a whole, for the moment, remains mostly intact. While it is seeing some consequences from climate change—many trees in Gabon, for example, are producing less fruit, which means less food for some wildlife—it has avoided widespread tree deaths and its vegetation, in many other ways, is increasing. Scientists suspect Africa’s long history of water stress may actually have left forests better adapted to droughts.

So far, it seems, “the Congo likely looks OK because humans have cleared less intensively, and the drying of the atmosphere isn’t enough to hurt the trees and may even make them grow faster because it clears the clouds, letting more sun through,” Covey says.

It came as little surprise to the team that the region facing the most stress in the most ways was the Amazon.

The Amazon remains at the greatest risk

“The Amazon stands out as at particular risk even when considering it alongside other global rainforest challenges,” Covey says. “Widespread deforestation paired with a rapidly changing climate are notably impacting ecosystem function across a whole suite of metrics.”

With its golden lion tamarins, colorful birds, and giant stinging wasps, the Amazon’s richness and biodiversity is unparalleled. It’s home to 10 percent of the world’s species and more than two million types of insects. Its trees and soils store the equivalent of four or five years of human carbon emissions, and the forest creates much of its own water as moisture moves in off the Atlantic Ocean, gets sucked up by plant roots, and then is returned to the atmosphere through leaves. A single water molecule can cycle through the forest four or five times.

But deforestation, which has been rising under Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro, hit a 12-year high last year. Fast-growing, drought-tolerant trees are outcompeting short species that do well in wet conditions. Rains come in pounding bursts, causing floods. Droughts last longer and occur more often—three major droughts have hit in 16 years. Fires are burning more explosively. The rate of tree deaths is increasing.

All this prompted two researchers in 2017 to conclude that if deforestation weren’t stopped and fossil-fuel burning weren’t curbed, a change in the moisture cycle in parts of the Amazon could ignite a self-reinforcing spiral that kills millions of trees or turns the forest into a dry woodland. They believed such a tipping point could come if as little as 20 percent of the Amazon were cleared, which is roughly how much already has been lost.

Both of those authors—Thomas Lovejoy, a George Mason University professor and senior fellow at the United Nations Foundation, and Carlos Nobre, a senior researcher at the University of São Paulo—are co-authors on the new study.

Saatchi says it’s imperative that deforestation stop—a challenge that comes with its own set of complications. But even with that, it’s not enough to stop the damage. Active reforestation is desperately needed. “We still don’t know as much as we want to know about how the system is going to react,” Saatchi says. Or how quickly. “We need to restore these systems.”

By simply putting all these measurements together for the first time, the scientists have been able to paint a much clearer, if more troubling, picture in the Amazon and elsewhere. And while it largely backs what other scientists have predicted, “it’s more concerning because it’s even more believable,” says Nate McDowell, a forest expert and earth scientist with the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, who was not part of the research team.

“These people, especially the lead authors, are known for being very, very careful,” McDowell says. “And they’re suggesting something very alarming: As we have warmed the planet, some areas of forest are approaching threshold-like behavior.

“The system is slowing down,” he says.

It is not, however, too late to change course. Saatchi’s team hopes this rigorous analysis will convince people that we are significantly altering these important landscapes. But they also hope their new tool will be used to help monitor further changes—and help direct resources toward recovery.

The National Geographic Society, committed to illuminating and protecting the wonder of our world, funded this work. Learn more about the Society’s support of Explorers researching and documenting our planet’s critical and diverse landscapes.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The heat wave that scorched the Pacific Northwestern United States in late June rewrote the record books in ways that were both shocking and difficult to comprehend. Scientists are unsure how best to explain the temperatures, so extreme compared with what meteorologists expect to see in that typically cool, wet region of the world.

In Seattle, Washington, temperatures hit 108 degrees Fahrenheit, 9 degrees hotter than it’s ever been in steamy Tampa, Florida. Portland, Oregon’s 116°F eclipsed Dallas, Texas’s heat record by 3 degrees. Hundreds of miles north of Portland, the British Columbia village of Lytton set a new temperature record for Canada—a Death Valley-like 121 degrees. The next day, the town was engulfed and largely destroyed by a wildfire.

It’s possible the Pacific Northwest simply experienced a very unlucky combination of weather and climate change. But in recent days, some researchers have begun to consider an alternative explanation: Perhaps climate change has set in motion new, as yet poorly understood, processes that are making heat waves that once seemed statistically impossible far more likely.

More work needs to be done to determine if that hypothesis is correct and if so, what the underlying mechanisms are. But if climate feedbacks beyond the warming of the atmosphere have loaded the meteorological dice in favor of events like the Pacific Northwest heat wave, the consequences for human life could be profound, considering that extreme heat is one of the deadliest forms of extreme weather.

In British Columbia, officials reported nearly 500 “sudden and unexpected deaths” around the time of the heat wave. On Friday, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control reported that from June 25-30, hospitals in the Northwest saw nearly 3,000 heat-related visits.

That’s why the scientists who proposed this idea are racing to find answers.

“All of us are slightly shocked” by the Pacific Northwest heat wave, says Geert Jan van Oldenborgh, an extreme weather and climate researcher at the Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute who is one of those scientists. “We thought we understood heat waves reasonably well. This shows that our understanding is lacking.”

A 1,000-year heat wave

The immediate explanation for the brutal heat that gripped the Northwest in June was a summertime weather pattern known as a heat dome. Within a heat dome, sunshine warms the surface, causing hot air to rise. Eventually, that rising air encounters high pressure that forces it back toward the ground. As the air sinks, it compresses and heats up even further. This process of rising and sinking is repeated over and over, causing the air inside the heat dome to become hotter and hotter.

At mid-latitudes in the summer, heat domes are “the normal way to get a heat wave,” says van Oldenborgh. And while this heat dome was exceptionally strong for the Pacific Northwest, it wasn’t off-the-charts extreme.

The temperatures within the heat dome were another story.

“I think the word for that is astonishment,” says Michael Wehner, an extreme weather researcher at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, when asked for his reaction to new temperature records. “I don’t think anybody believed it could get so hot there.”

It is well established that climate change is making heat waves hotter and more frequent. But to determine how much of an influence the warming climate had on the Pacific Northwest heat wave, scientists needed to conduct a rigorous statistical analysis known as a weather attribution study.

That’s exactly what Wehner, van Oldenborgh, and about two dozen other extreme weather and climate researchers did. Using a published, peer-reviewed protocol, the researchers combined data from long-term weather stations in Portland, Seattle, and Vancouver along with about 20 climate models to explore how the likelihood and intensity of the heat wave were impacted by climate change.

Their analysis, released online earlier this month, shows that a heat wave of this strength would have been “virtually impossible” without climate change. This was not a surprise. “For heat waves that’s pretty standard nowadays,” van Oldenborgh says.

What was surprising is just how hot this heat wave was compared with anything the region had seen before—about 9°F hotter, averaged across the study area. Even considering global warming, the authors determined that a heat wave of this intensity was at most a 1-in-1,000 year event.

“We said it is virtually impossible without climate change,” Wehner says. “But I would have said beforehand it is virtually impossible with climate change.”

Bad luck, or a new normal?

While the heat wave could have been a disastrously unlucky confluence of weather effects and climate change, van Oldenbergh and his colleagues are now exploring the possibility that atmospheric warming made the event far more likely because of “nonlinear” processes that aren’t being captured by today’s climate models.

What those processes might be is an open question. One possibility, van Oldenbergh says, is that the summertime drought zone centered in the southwestern U.S. is expanding north. This would allow more intense heat waves further north, since places with less soil moisture experience less cooling through evaporation as the sun heats the ground.

However, while much of the Pacific Northwest is very dry right now and this likely had an amplifying effect on the heat wave, the most intense heat extremes occurred in parts of British Columbia that received ample rainfall in June. The role of drought “is not clear cut,” van Oldenbergh says. “There are a lot of details that don’t fit the hypothesis.”

Climate change could also be impacting the jet stream in ways that make extreme summer heat waves more likely. A recent modeling paper found that as global warming progresses, heat waves will become more persistent over North America and elsewhere —perhaps due to a more sluggish jet stream that could slow down weather systems. Slower moving heat waves can dry out soils and vegetation more, exacerbating the effects of drought.

This jet stream connection is still a matter of scientific debate, and tying atmospheric circulation changes to any one event like the Pacific Northwest heat wave will be very difficult, says Kai Kornhuber, a postdoctoral researcher at the Columbia University Earth Institute who led the recent modeling study.

“In the long run, a weakened [jet stream] circulation will lead to more persistent summer heat waves,” Kornhuber says. “So in that sense, it’s in line with that expected outcome, but it’s really hard to attribute a certain fraction.”

Various authors on the recent attribution study will be exploring different hypotheses in the weeks and months to come. That includes seeing if the Pacific Northwest heat wave was “compatible with bad luck,” van Oldenbergh says. “You can do that by looking at all the [biggest] heat waves throughout the world and making a statistics distribution.”

Whether or not the recent heat wave was a sign that human carbon emissions have tipped off new heat-amplifying processes in the atmosphere, the severity of the event should be a wake-up call about the climate we’re creating, says Jessica Tierney, a paleoclimatologist at the University of Arizona.

“Knowing what we know about how much warmer the Earth system can get, the fact that we’re seeing these severe events and we’ve only warmed a little over a degree is scary,” Tierney says. “If it’s this bad already, do we really want to go to 3 or 4 degrees above pre-industrial?”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On his first day in office, President Joe Biden rejoined the Paris Agreement, temporarily banned all new oil and gas leases on federal land, and canceled permits for the controversial Keystone XL pipeline. In April, the president held a virtual climate conference in which he went even further than the Paris climate commitments, pledging that the world’s second largest economy would cut greenhouse gas emissions in half by 2030, relative to 2005, and reach net-zero carbon emissions by 2050.

“The signs are unmistakable, the science is undeniable, and the cost of inaction keeps mounting,” Biden told world leaders on Earth Day. “The countries that take decisive actions now will be the ones that reap the clean-energy benefits of the boom that’s coming.”

Then a funny thing happened on the way to decarbonization. Shortly after Biden’s bold climate announcement, his administration approved ConocoPhillips’ massive new Willow project in the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska (NPR-A), which the oil giant estimates at its peak will pump up to 160,000 barrels of oil a day out of some 250 wells, producing nearly 600 million barrels of oil over the next 30 years. Secretary of the Interior Deb Haaland had strongly opposed the project while a member of Congress just last year.

Though it killed the Keystone XL pipeline, in April Biden’s administration argued in court against shutting down the controversial Dakota Access pipeline that carries a half-million barrels of oil a day between South Dakota and Illinois. That pipeline is also opposed by the Standing Rock Sioux tribe, which sees it as a threat to its water supply and sacred sites. Shortly thereafter, Biden’s Justice Department defended more than 400 oil and gas leases on public land in Wyoming issued in late 2020 by the Trump administration, even though environmental groups had successfully sued to stop the leases in a lower court because of the potential impact on sage grouse and other wildlife. A federal judge eventually blocked the leases in June.

Biden’s State Department in May dropped U.S. sanctions against the developers of Nordstream 2, a massive gas pipeline from the Russian Arctic to Germany beneath the Baltic Sea, which carries both climate and political ramifications. The pipeline would increase Europe’s dependence on Russian gas, while bypassing a current pipeline that runs through Ukraine, an economic bombshell to its war-torn economy. The administration has given tacit support to several liquid natural gas projects and initiatives that could be a source of emissions for decades. U.S. LNG exports soared to record heights in the spring.

“Many of us had high hopes for the new administration,” says Sergey Paltsev at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a lead author of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Fifth Assessment Report (AR5). “We need to be at net zero as fast as possible. And we are showing that current efforts are not enough.“

Horse trading?

Though the administration has been mum about its perceived climate backtracking, Department of Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm minced no words about her support for LNG exports during her confirmation hearings in February. “I believe U.S. LNG exports can have an important role to play in reducing international consumption of fuels that have greater contribution to greenhouse gas emissions,” Granholm told senators.

Biden's climate czar John Kerry angered numerous environmental groups when he told the head of the International Monetary Fund in April that "In Europe, no bank or financial institution or even private source will fund a coal-fired power plant, but we have to move away from coal faster... . Gas, to some degree, will be a bridge fuel."

Political observers believe the support for big projects in Alaska and Wyoming is likely political horse trading to win favors with unions and those states’ moderate Republican senators—Lisa Murkowski (R-AK) and Liz Cheney (R-WY)—whose votes Biden will need to pass his larger agenda.

"If you approve a pipeline you have thousands of jobs right there. It's hard for politicians to turn down," says Drew Shindell of Duke University.

But, says Paltsev, “You cannot sit on two chairs at the same time.”

The stakes are high. The International Energy Agency, the staid economic watchdog of the world’s energy sector, issued an alarming report in May warning that all new investment in oil and gas infrastructure must end this summer in order to have any hope of staying below the 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit (1.5 degrees Celsius) increase in global temperatures that have been identified as our best hope for avoiding devastating climate change.

Which bridge to the future?

Many, if not most, of Biden’s fossil fuel moves involve natural gas, long touted as a “bridge fuel” between coal and a zero-carbon future. But that’s no longer the case, says Paltsev, who is deputy director of the Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change at MIT.

“Five to 10 years ago there were several reports from MIT and others that thought it was a bridge fuel,” says Paltsev. “At that time we were mostly comparing coal and natural gas.”

“But now the story has changed dramatically,” says Paltsev. “Now it’s renewables, because the cost of wind and solar dropped so fast it is competitive.”

Methane, which makes up 70 to 90 percent of natural gas, has turned out to be both a blessing and a curse for the climate. When burned, it emits less than half the CO2 of coal. When leaked, however, it has more than 80 times the global warming potential of CO2 in its first 20 years in the atmosphere. And numerous reports over the last few years have revealed that it leaks virtually everywhere it is pumped, piped, and produced. As a result, methane emissions have skyrocketed over the last 20 years.

“Methane is a leaky system, just like the irrigation system in your yard,” says Riley Duren, a research scientist at the University of Arizona who has spent the last decade tracking and quantifying methane emissions for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. “Wherever humans produce methane, it’s going to leak.”

In a recent study of the Permian Basin, the nation’s largest oil and gas reservoir that lies beneath West Texas and southeastern New Mexico, Duren and colleagues flew over the region at 30,000 feet with a hyperspectral imaging camera that could not only see but accurately measure invisible methane leaks with a resolution of 10 square meters or less on the ground. What they saw was astounding—more than a thousand “super emitters” generating plumes from wells, pipelines, compressors, gathering stations, and unlit flares—with enough accuracy to actually identify the leaking equipment. Nearly 150 of those persistent leaks amounted to almost 10 percent of all estimated methane emissions from the entire U.S. oil and gas industry.

“When you are looking at the Permian through the camera at 30,000 feet you see plumes of smoke all going in the same direction with the prevailing wind, one after another across this landscape,” says Duren. “It was like watching wildfires up and down the coast of California.” The similarity is particularly poignant since the recent wildfires were fueled in part by climate change.

The average leakage at natural gas production facilities in the U.S. is 2 percent, says Duren, and around 3 percent for those in the Permian Basin. “That’s ten times higher than what would constitute a low-carbon bridge fuel,” he says, “So if that’s the goal, leak rates have to come down a lot.”

The good news

Most methane leaks are easy and relatively inexpensive to plug, especially in oil and gas equipment, coal mines, and landfills, says Duke University’s Drew Shindell, lead author of the UN Environmental Program’s recent Global Methane Assessment. “It’s not even low-hanging fruit,” Shindell says. “It’s just lying on the ground for us to pick up. And unlike CO2, methane is intrinsically valuable. Industries can make money capturing methane. Towns can make money converting landfill gas to energy.”

The Global Methane Assessment found that available targeted methane reduction measures could reduce methane emissions by 45 percent by 2030, avoiding 0.5°F (0.3°C) of global warming by the 2040s.

The best policy on natural gas, however, may just be to keep most of it in the ground, according to MIT’s Paltsev. His group’s latest report calls for a major course correction for the planet and a far more rapid transition to renewable energy. Natural gas is still a fossil fuel, he points out.

“By pushing natural gas—which is indeed cleaner than coal, but it’s still a fossil fuel that releases a lot of CO2 and more importantly, a lot of methane—we are actually hurting renewables. Cheap natural gas in the long run is actually going to hurt emissions reductions efforts,” Paltsev says.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As the American West endures another record-breaking fire season, fueled in part by a historic drought, some scientists are urging Americans to rethink a few traditions they hold dear. Campfires and fireworks are two big ones. Smokey Bear is another.

Three-quarters of a century after the blue-jeans-clad bear first pointed a finger at us— “Only YOU can prevent forest fires,” he proclaimed—more than 80 percent of all wildfires in the U.S. are still ignited, accidentally or intentionally, by humans. Humans spark 97 percent of all wildfires that actually threaten homes, according to fire ecologist Jennifer Balch of the University of Colorado, Boulder, and Nathan Mietkiewicz of the National Ecological Observatory Network.

The risks are mounting.

“The main reason for these increased ignitions is people are moving into areas in close proximity to potential fuels,” says Megan Cattau, an ecologist at Boise State University. More than 46 million residences now border wildlands, and another two million acres of the “wildland-urban interface” get developed each year—at a time when climate change is making fire season longer, hotter, and more severe. In the Rocky Mountains, for example, subalpine forests are burning more than at any point in the past 2,000 years.

Fire officials are still investigating how California’s Dixie Fire, the state’s second largest wildfire ever, started, while Oregon’s Bootleg Fire is attributed to lightning.

All this has led to a renewed interest among land managers and scientists in figuring out how to keep humans from sparking wildfires in the first place. “People start most fires that threaten homes and threaten lives—that means we have some control over these ignitions, and the way to control them is to affect human behavior,” Cattau says.

That’s easier said than done, of course. In a recent article in The Conversation, Balch and Mietkiewicz suggested that perhaps Smokey’s slogan should be revised: “Only you can prevent wildfires that threaten your home.”

Significant shifts needed

Some scientists blame Smokey Bear for being too successful already, albeit not in the way he was intended: By helping persuade Americans that all fire is bad, they say, he contributed to the decades of reflexive fire suppression that have left much of the nation’s forests overgrown and more flammable than ever. Smokey must redirect his messaging, they say, to let people know that there is such a thing as “good fire”—prescribed burns that will remove excess fuel in a controlled way.

Smokey’s handlers say this suggestion mistakes the purpose of the icon.

“Smokey Bear is talking specifically about human-caused fire—he’s not anti-fire,” says Whitney Forman-Cook, communications director at the National Association of State Foresters, which runs the Smokey campaign along with the U.S. Forest Service and the Ad Council. “He just doesn’t want you to start one accidentally.”

Yet Smokey’s handlers agree that the campaign must constantly refocus its message to reach diverse and younger audiences and avoid disappearing into the media landscape.

“Focus groups over the last four years say they recognize Smokey’s face and his name, and they can even hear his voice,” says Forman-Cook. “But they don’t really listen to him and they don’t know what they can do to prevent a wildfire. We take this information and do everything we can to make Smokey relevant.”

The feedback informed an effort that targets 18- to-34-year-olds with announcements playing on screens in gas station pumps and airplane seats, on social media, and elsewhere. In the ads, Smokey’s animated head—topped with a tan ranger’s hat bearing his name in bold, black capital letters—channels celebrities’ voices.

Betty White exhorts viewers not to park on tall, dry grass where a hot exhaust pipe can start a wildfire; Al Roker urges homeowners to refrain from burning yard waste when it’s windy; and Isabella Gomez cautions picnickers not to dump hot coals or ashes on the ground.

Some state foresters use Smokey to supplement their own public service announcements. For example, the Texas A&M Forest Service (in Texas the state forest agency is part of the land-grant university) created a video featuring Chet Garner, host of the travel show “The Daytripper.” The spot appeared on gas station pump screens and encouraged drivers to “never burn leaves or debris on windy days” and “never leave a fire unattended.” Embers that escape burning debris are the top cause of wildfires in the state.

“We wanted to get the public used to understanding they have a responsibility to protect themselves and to protect firefighters and there are simple things they can do that make a big difference,” says Karen Stafford, a program coordinator with the Texas A&M Forest Service. Monitoring data show that the $88,000 campaign “prevented nearly 1,000 fires for a third of the state for six months -- that’s a huge impact,” she says.

Removing the threat

In Oregon, where the Bootleg Fire (which was ignited by lightning) has burned 646 square miles so far this summer and sent smoke on the jet stream to the East Coast, park officials banned some campfires as of July 22 “to protect life and property in what is already a very challenging and dangerous fire season.” Washington State went further, prohibiting through September 30 all outdoor fires on state, city, county, and private land under Department of Natural Resources fire protection. Such restrictions are more widespread and in place for far longer periods than they’ve been in the past.

Camp fires are the number one source of human-caused fire on about 240 million acres of forest land managed by the U.S. government. A blaze started by an unattended camp fire forced widespread evacuations and road closures in Utah’s Manti-La Sal National Forest about 14 miles southeast of Moab in June.

Fire prevention patrols discovered 30 abandoned campfires in New Mexico’s Santa Fe National Forest over Mother’s Day weekend. Forest officials said in a statement that inexperienced campers failed to properly douse the flames.

“Several of the campfires they found were not still-smoldering ash but actually flaming, burning logs which no one had even attempted to extinguish,” said the release posted on a website operated by federal and state agencies.

To curb the risk presented by abandoned campfires, burn bans are likely to become more commonplace, particularly as the West grows more arid and crowded. In some fire-prone areas, they may need to be permanent, says Paige Fischer, a social scientist and associate professor at the University of Michigan who conducts research on how people perceive wildfire risk and what motivates them to act. She recently hiked by an untended campfire in Oregon’s Deschutes National Forest, where the forest service banned open fires as of July 12.

“There are going to be more changes around the design of campsites,” she adds, saying pits that are essentially an invitation to have a fire will need to be removed in vulnerable regions. “People are going to have to get used to camping experiences that don’t involve campfires.”

To better predict when stringent restrictions on open burning are necessary, scientists in 2016 incorporated fuel moisture indices derived from a network of weather stations into a fire danger rating system. The system is used by federal, state, and local land managers to more accurately identify dry areas where embers might easily ignite new blazes. Agencies alert the public to these risks in part with signs at the entrance to many parks where Smokey Bear’s arm points to a word designating the fire danger.

“No one really understands there is science behind where Smokey’s arm points,” says W. Matt Jolly, a research ecologist at the U.S. Forest Service’s Rocky Mountain Research Station. “We are seeing more extreme days and more severe fire conditions and that’s lengthening the time period we’re likely to be in restrictions.”

Taking the fire out of fireworks?

It’s not only campfires that Americans may need to rethink. Fireworks should also be prohibited in much of the West, particularly in regions gripped by a prolonged drought that’s created an abundance of tinder-dry fuel, scientists say. Sparks from explosive devices are credited with starting deadly and destructive blazes in recent years. In 2020, a pyrotechnic device set off during a gender reveal party in California sparked a blaze that killed a firefighter and injured 13 others. A teenager threw fireworks into a canyon in Oregon in 2018, igniting a fire in the Columbia River Gorge that burned almost 47,000 acres.

About 150 scientists signed a letter in June that was published on The Conversation urging people to forego the pyrotechnics, citing extreme heat and a record-setting drought that set “the stage for widespread fire activity.”

The missive was prompted in part by research showing that more fires are accidentally started on July 4—about 7,000 between 1992 and 2015—than any other day of the year.

Indeed, towns across the west, including popular Colorado mountain communities such as Vail, Beaver Creek, Aspen, Telluride, and Breckenridge, canceled fireworks displays this year, citing dry, windy, and hot conditions.

“As our climate conditions make vegetation more flammable, we have to look to the future and recognize the context of fire is different,” says Philip Higuera, a professor of fire ecology at the University of Montana, who came up with the idea for the letter after he and a colleague drove by a fireworks stand on the way to a mountain bike ride on a day that dozens of wildfires raged across the American West.

“What made sense in recent decades, or in the 20th century, does not make sense now,” he adds.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Smoke from last year’s wildfires in California, Oregon, and Washington, contributed to a significant increase in COVID-19 cases and deaths in those states, according to a new study.

“The wildfires exacerbated the pandemic substantially,” says Francesca Dominici, a Harvard biostatistician and author of the study published Friday in Science Advances. Without the smoke from the fires, there might have been 19,742 fewer COVID-19 cases and 748 fewer deaths from COVID-19, the study found.

Wildfire smoke contains thousands of different compounds, but one of the most prevalent is particulate matter measuring 2.5 micrometers across—PM2.5. A well-established health threat, PM2.5 is closely monitored by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), providing enough data to examine its population impact.

While PM2.5 emissions from traffic and industry have been reduced in recent years in the U.S., wildfire smoke has become a major source. Recently published research shows that, during a wildfire event, smoke can account for nearly half the particulate pollution in the U.S. West and a quarter of national levels as it blows across the country.

Scientists are still learning the full extent to which wildfires can threaten human health, but early research suggests the smoke may be more toxic than previously realized.

How smoke from this year’s fires in California, the Pacific Northwest, and Canada will affect COVID-19 case rates, as the deadlier and more contagious Delta variant leads to a resurgence the pandemic, remains unclear. While 2020’s wildfires broke records for size, this year the Dixie Fire—California’s second largest wildfire on record—has burned over half a million acres to date. Historic wildfires are also raging in Turkey and Greece.

“Inhalation of PM2.5 is compromising our ability to fight the virus,” says Dominici. “Right now what’s really scary is that the Delta variant is even more contagious. People who are unvaccinated would be very susceptible [to COVID-19].”

The dangers of PM2.5

When PM2.5 enters your body, it causes problems in two ways.

First, says Sarah Henderson, the scientific director of environmental health services at the British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, “It gunks up your upper respiratory system.”

Like the legs of a caterpillar, certain cells in the body have little hairs that are constantly pushing invaders up and out through mucus. “That’s why you have to blow your nose,” says Henderson.

PM2.5 may inhibit that expulsion process by destroying and blocking some of those cells, she says, potentially making it easier for the coronavirus to get in.

Second, says Henderson, wildfire smoke distracts your immune system.

Unlike larger pieces of particulate matter, PM2.5 is small enough to penetrate deep into human lungs, prompting an immune attack from the body. With the immune system thus occupied, the body is vulnerable and the COVID-19 virus may be more likely to generate an infection.

At the individual level, the best way to protect yourself is to be vaccinated, wear masks that offer protection against both viruses and PM2.5, use air filters at home, or evacuate when too much smoke pollution makes it necessary.

Following the smoke

For their new study, Dominici and her colleagues gathered data from 92 counties in California, Oregon, and Washington, where most of last year’s fires took place. Because COVID-19 can take weeks to emerge after an individual is exposed to the virus, the study looked at positive cases up to 28 days after wildfire smoke exposure. More than half of the counties—52—saw an increasedr incidence of COVID-19.

Across all counties studied, wildfire PM2.5 was associated with 11 percent more COVID-19 cases and 8 percent more deaths. However, that increase varied widely by county. In Butte County, California, and Whitman County, Washington, for example, cases rose by 17 and 18 percent respectively. (See a county-by-county breakdown here.)

To determine which types of particulate matter were coming from wildfire smoke and which from other sources of pollution such as cars, Dominici enlisted Harvard’s Loretta Mickley, who studies air pollution and climate change.

Using satellite data, Mickley and her team could see where plumes of wildfire smoke emerged and where they were headed. EPA air quality monitors told them how those plumes were increasing pollution at ground level.

Essentially, she says, the satellites told her where to look, while the sensors told her what was there.

Using publicly available health data and estimating what PM2.5 levels would have been without wildfires, the researchers were able to model the likely percentage by which COVID-19 cases increased. They took into account other factors that might influence case rates: temperature, the pre-fire local prevalence of the disease, a county’s population, and the mobility of the population, which they gleaned from Facebook data.

Dominici says they can’t be completely certain any particular COVID-19 case resulted from wildfire smoke exposure. There were other potentially influential measures the study didn’t examine: a person’s willingness to wear a mask; a family gathering with a positive individual; socioeconomic status; a positive individual’s preexisting health conditions; or whether other historical sources of PM2.5 had already predisposed a community to health risks, which would raise its risk for infection. That may account for some cases, but overall, says Dominici, that doesn’t negate the strong association they found between spikes in dirty air and ensuing COVID-19 case rates.

Other research supports the link. In Reno, Nevada, wildfire smoke exposure in 2020 led to an 18-percent increase in COVID-19 cases, according to a study published last month by Daniel Kiser, a data scientist at the Desert Research Institute. “The levels of air pollution we see during a wildfire smoke event are astronomical,” Kiser says.

Dominici says the numbers in her study are likely an underestimate because she and her team only looked at counties where wildfires actually occurred—whereas smoke can travel for hundreds of miles.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Following the fall of Tenochtitlan, an Aztec poet composed a searing account of the capture of the capital city. Written in the Nahuatl language, using the Latin alphabet of the Spanish invaders, it is the earliest native account of the sufferings of the Aztec people and their defeat 500 years ago in 1521: Our inheritance, our city, is lost and dead. The shields of our warriors could not save it. We have chewed dry twigs and salt grasses; we have eaten lizards, rats and worms…

Today what remains of Tenochtitlan lies underneath Mexico’s thriving capital, Mexico City, one of the most populous cities in the world. Surrounded by modern architecture, the archaeological site of Templo Mayor is revealing more and more about the Aztec city and its inhabitants—a reminder of the people and culture who were subdued and absorbed by the colony of New Spain.

Many European chroniclers focused attention on the conquistador Hernán Cortés, but renewed focus on the events of 1521 is placing more attention on the Aztec themselves. What has unfolded is a compelling, complex story of how an alliance among Mesoamerican city-states quickly rose to power, only to lose it.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: A feathered serpent bares its teeth at the site of the Great Temple of Tenochtitlan, in Mexico City. The massive temple complex was dedicated to Tlaloc, god of rain, and to Huitzilopochtli, god of war. Photograph by Kenneth Garrett

Colorful chronicles

The name Aztec was first coined by an outsider—the Aztec called themselves the Mexica (also Culhua-Mexica). In the early 1800s, German scientist and explorer Alexander von Humboldt coined the term for the people of Tenochtitlan based on the word “Aztlán,” the traditional name of the Mexica’s ancestral homeland. Archaeologists have not been able to identify the exact location of Aztlán, but most place it in northern Mexico.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Much of what is understood about Mesoamerica during the time of the Aztec comes from either sources written by the Mexica themselves or by the Spanish after 1519. The region was rich with other cultures and city-states, but more is specifically known about Aztec culture because of these plentiful sources. The Mexica portray themselves in their records as a people predestined for power, who, after overcoming numerous obstacles, eventually control a wide-ranging empire.

These accounts were created by the Mexica in recorded histories known as codices. They took note of their ancestors, their deeds, their faith, and their practices in these documents.

Many were destroyed during the Spanish invasion, but five survived. These were pillaged by the Spanish and sent to Europe, where they are now held in several museums.

Production of such works resumed after Tenochtitlan’s fall. Some were commissioned by Spanish colonists as a means to better understand and control the Mesoamerican peoples. One of the most famous is the Mendoza Codex, which was created in 1542 for Charles V, King of Spain and Holy Roman Emperor. The document features Aztec glyphs accompanied by texts written in Spanish, allowing for translation. The first part of the codex lists a series of wars or conquests grouped by each Aztec leader. The second part lists the tributes received.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: The Codex Mendoza, preserved today in the Bodleian Library in Oxford, England, was commissioned by Antonio de Mendoza, first viceroy of New Spain, after the conquest. Mendoza ordered the creation of the codex to inform Charles V, King of Spain and Holy Roman Emperor, about the people living there. The codex is the work of an Aztec tlacuilo, or scribe, and uses pictograms. To make it comprehensible to Charles V, a Spanish priest familiar with Nahuatl wrote an explanation in Spanish. The first part of the codex is a list of the Tenochtitlan tlatoanis, or rulers, with the cities that they had conquered. The two pages pictured here correspond to the sixth tlatoani, Axayacatl (r. 1469-1481), and include representations of the 37 cities he captured. Right: The Codex Mendoza contains a section that details the tributes received by Moctezuma II, who ruled Tenochtitlan between 1502 and 1520. From the 400 cities under his control, he received a plethora of gifts. In the codex, pictograms correspond to city names and the images next to them show their tributes to Moctezuma. Above each object is a translation in Spanish.

In addition to tributes, the Aztec state enriched itself through trade. Much of what historians know about the Triple Alliance is drawn from the tributary codices of Tenochtitlan.

(Who built the great city of Teotihuacan?)

Although the picture is incomplete—no record of this type has been found concerning Texcoco and Tlacopan—the sources provide a fascinating window into how the huge population (between 150,000 and 300,000) of Tenochtitlan was provisioned. Food, raw materials, and fabrics came from areas close to the city, while luxuries such as gold, sweet gum resin, cocoa, and precious feathers came from distant corners of the sprawling empire.

Centers of power

The people of Aztlán were originally nomadic and had migrated to several locations before settling on the islands of Lake Texcoco, in the Valley of Mexico, which was controlled by the nearby city of Azcapotzalco. The Mexica served as mercenaries and built a reputation for ferocity in combat. They spoke Nahuatl, the same tongue of the mighty Toltec civilization who dominated the region between the 10th and 12th centuries, and sought to connect to their illustrious ancestors.

Around 1325, the Mexica founded Tenochtitlan and made it their capital. Although the new city prospered, along with other cities, including Texcoco, it remained subject to Azcapotzalco until the lord of Azcapotzalco died in the early 15th century. As disputes arose over his successor, the dominion of Azcapotzalco ended. In 1428 a new power emerged, formed by the cities of Tenochtitlan, Texcoco, and Tlacopan. It was called the Triple Alliance.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

At first, Texcoco and Tenochtitlan occupied the top of the hierarchy, with Tlacopan subordinate to both of them. Over time, Tenochtitlan became the most powerful, and its ruler Motecuhzoma Xocoyotzin (Moctezuma II) was the most powerful member of the federation in the 1500s when the Spanish arrived. They observed that Moctezuma’s people were the most powerful of the Triple Alliance and put forth the idea of an empire centered around the Mexica, one which later became widely known as the Aztec Empire.

(Rare Aztec map reveals a glimpse of life in 1500s Mexico.)

In the early 1400s, the Triple Alliance took control of Azcapotzalco and other subject peoples. Some willingly accepted this transition of power, but others had to be convinced by force. There was no major expansion of territory until a great famine occurred in the Valley of Mexico between 1450 and 1454. The alliance needed more land for food production and began conquests of city-states.

This process accelerated under Axayacatl, the tlatoani (ruler) of Tenochtitlan, the de facto ruler of the alliance. Although often translated as “king” or “emperor,” the role of tlatoani was less absolute in nature and required multifaceted leadership. He actively intervened in the army, state religion, and governing, as a kind of commander in chief and head priest rolled into one.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Other powerful city-states remained independent from, though not necessarily hostile to, Tenochtitlan’s domination. Tlaxcala, which lay fairly close to Tenochtitlan, was a major center of active resistance. Historians are divided as to whether the Tlaxcallán people remained independent through military strength or convenience: Mexica sources justified leaving it alone because it left a nearby state available for important ritual warfare contests known as the “flower wars,” in which inconclusive battles provided a source of prisoners to sacrifice to the gods. The fact that the Tlaxcallán allied with the Spanish against Tenochtitlan, however, seems to contradict that account. In 1521 the city-state became Hernán Cortés’ local ally in his campaign against Moctezuma.

Building an empire

In 1481 Axayacatl was succeeded as tlatoani by his brother Tizoc, whose reign is celebrated on the huge sacrificial Stone of Tizoc. Carved reliefs show him subduing 15 cities. His short reign saw revolts against his regime, and gained limited territory. Even so, power was still dramatically proclaimed through such impressive monuments.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Left: An imposing disk of basalt, three feet high and more than eight feet wide, is known as the Stone of Tizoc—an Aztec monument to one of its leaders. A priest saved the stone from destruction after it was unearthed in Mexico City in the late 1700s. Scholars found that it was carved during the short reign of Tizoc, the seventh Aztec tlatoani (1481-86). On the top, arrows point to the cardinal directions of the compass around a representation of the sun. Today the altar can be seen in the National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City. Right: As well as commemorating Tizoc’s exploits, the stone may also have functioned as a temalácatl, a platform on which gladiatorial victims fought to the death. An image of gladiatorial sacrifice in the Codex Florentine shows a temalácatl similar to the Stone of Tizoc. A channel carved into these kinds of altars may have collected the victims’ blood, which then flowed into a carving of the mouth of the god Tlaltecuhtili.

Ahuitzotl, probably the greatest of all the Aztec rulers, came to power next. He expanded the empire’s borders as far as present-day Guatemala, coming into contact with Maya lands. When Ahuitzotl died in 1502, Moctezuma II became tlatoani and expanded the alliance’s influence significantly into the Zapotec areas toward the Pacific. He was still ruling when Cortés made his fateful landing and founded the colony of Veracruz on April 22, 1519.

(After Cortés conquered the Aztecs, his ships were lost at sea. But a new clue has surfaced.)

War was not the only means by which the alliance expanded. City-states and their lands could be gained through diplomacy and inheritance. The death of a lord of a dominion within the alliance’s territory was an opportunity. A tense succession process would often follow. If a candidate resisted the alliance’s power, he could be replaced by a close relative more amenable to the Mexica. Putting him in control of a local territory allowed the Aztec to accumulate more power.

This system led to the creation of complex power networks within the alliance: One local lord might be subject to the overlord of Tenochtitlan, while others might be subject to those of Texcoco or Tlacopan. Despite these complexities, the Triple Alliance was able to grow quickly over the course of a few decades; however, it was these kinds of struggles that contributed to Tenochtitlan’s downfall.

Please be respectful of copyright. Unauthorized use is prohibited.

Problems arose when several candidates had the same relationship with the overlord and he had to choose among them. This happened shortly before the arrival of Cortés, when Nezahualpilli, lord of the second most important city of the Texcoco empire, died. Three potential successors all had mothers who belonged to the aristocracy of Tenochtitlan. Moctezuma, therefore, had to reject two factions and risk alienating them, which is exactly what happened. One of the rejected candidates, Ixtlilxochitl, later formed an alliance with the Spanish.

Alienation and local rivalries were factors in the fall of Tenochtitlan. In the face of the invading Spanish, the city-states of Mesoamerica chose different paths to survival. Some, like Tlaxcala, chose to ally with Spain, while others, like the Mexica, chose to fight. As the world revisits the events of 1521, much remains to be explored about the story of the Mexica and their fate when Spain came to the Americas.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@