The people here are not Hollywood stars or billionaire tech entrepreneurs who might own Ferraris and private jets. But they are well off. The median household income in the area exceeds $165,000, and half the homes are valued at more than $1 million. Eight in 10 residents have at least an undergraduate degree. As early buyers with high incomes, they can easily take advantage of the federal E.V. tax credit.

The incentives are, in effect, “subsidizing my luxury,” said Mr. Teglia, who also has solar panels on his home. The Model 3s he owns sell for about $40,000 before government incentives.

Dr. Jack Hsiao, an obstetrician-gynecologist, had avoided buying an electric vehicle for fear that he wouldn’t be able to drive very far before having to plug in — a phenomenon known as range anxiety. But his sister, who moved to California from Texas and bought solar panels and a Tesla, persuaded their father, who lives with Dr. Hsiao, 54, to buy one, too. Following his family, Dr. Hsiao bought a Tesla and solar panels.

“Gas prices have just gone through the roof, and so, given that I’ve got the solar panels, it cost me next to nothing to charge,” he said. “For me, it was just a perfect fit.”

Elaine Borseth, a retired chiropractor, is another convert. Before she bought a Model S, she had never spent more than $20,000 on a car. But after seeing several of the big, sporty sedans on the road, she drove one about seven years ago. “I thought they were sleek and sexy,” said Ms. Borseth, who now runs the Electric Vehicle Association of San Diego.

“It’s almost one of those cases where the more you see, it just kind of breeds upon itself,” she said to explain why her neighborhood has so many electric cars.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The apartment was just what Chanque Jones needed: four bedrooms, and $500 cheaper than the run-down house she had been renting back in Chicago. It was a fresh start for her three sons, as well as for her mobile manicure business.

Then an old eviction case turned up on a routine background check prepared for her landlord. It didn’t matter that she had gone to court and won. The fact that the case was filed at all was enough to mark her as a risk: what tenant advocates call a Scarlet E — the E standing for eviction.

“I didn’t even know about the eviction record,” Ms. Jones said.

Eviction cases are a stubborn blot on any renter’s history. They are nearly impossible to scrub away, even if the tenant made good on obligations or it was only a scare tactic by an aggressive landlord. The pandemic has given the problem new urgency: Although the Biden administration has announced a new eviction moratorium for much of the country through Oct. 3, millions of renters are behind on their payments after more than a year of economic upheaval and could face eventual eviction.

Aware of the enormous consequences for renters who lost jobs or work hours because of the pandemic, a handful of states and cities have passed laws to make it easier for tenants to seal their eviction cases — a crucial step that can mean the difference between having a roof over their heads or not.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SAN FRANCISCO — On a recent Wednesday evening, 60 people gathered in a virtual conference room to discuss start-up investments. Among them were a professional poker player from Arizona, an allergist in California and a kombucha maker from Tennessee. All were members of Angel Squad, a six-month $2,500 program that aims to help people break into the clubby world of venture capital as individual investors, known as “angels.”

The group listened as Eric Bahn, the instructor, rattled off anecdotes and advice from the front lines of start-up investing. “The most important question when you are an early stage investor is: What happens if things go right?” he said, stepping back from his desk and raising his hands for emphasis.

Caroline Howard, 29, one of the founders of Walker Brothers Beverage, a kombucha company in Nashville, said the class taught her how to better evaluate deals. “I think it’s so fun to see companies when they’re so young and have a germ of an idea and back them,” she said.

Founded in January, Angel Squad is one of several ways that people from outside Silicon Valley’s investing elite are now joining the ranks of angel investors. The influx — which includes art curators, dentists, influencers and retirees — is transforming the way that start-ups raise money, upending the pecking order in venture capital and pushing a niche corner of the investing world toward mass adoption.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Or as Christopher J. Nassetta, the president and chief executive of Hilton, put it on an earnings call last month, “People have to meet.”

Leisure travel has come roaring back this summer. But the airline and hotel industries long depended on business travel for a substantial portion of their revenues because those customers, who often made their plans at the last minute, could be counted on to pay more for seats and rooms. Now that the pandemic has upended the notion that travel is necessary to do business, the question is how much it will resume, even when Covid is brought under control.

Even the experts who were most optimistic about the prospects for business travel a month or so ago have begun to temper their forecasts. The quick change was captured by a survey of 1,200 American travelers that Destination Analysts, a market research firm in San Francisco, conducted from July 21 to 23. Among business travelers, it found, nearly 25 percent expected the “coronavirus situation” to worsen in the next month, a jump from under 14 percent two weeks earlier. Conventiongoers’ personal health concerns also rose, while their confidence in their ability to travel safely fell.

The U.S. Travel Association said in late July that it continued to forecast “a modest return of business travel over the coming months, so the increase in cases has not materially affected our view.” It said it now expected that business travel would “only achieve 50 percent of 2019 levels in the fourth quarter of 2021.”

Scott Graf, global president of BCD Meetings & Events, said that in light of the spread of the Delta variant, “we’ll likely see some cancellations or certainly meetings being pushed out by weeks or months.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Follow our latest coverage of business, markets and economy.

Job openings set new highs in June, but employers made progress in filling them. Employers once again posted a record number of job openings in June as they scrambled to meet surging demand. But hiring also picked up, a sign that businesses are beginning to find a way through the labor-market logjam. There were 10.1 million jobs available at the end of June, the Labor Department said Monday. That was up from 9.5 million in May and marked a record high for the fourth consecutive month. (The government began collecting job openings data in late 2000.) Employers have struggled to recruit workers to fill all those jobs. But they made progress in June: They hired 6.7 million people, up nearly 700,000 from May and the most since the initial flood of post-lockdown hiring last year. Still, hiring remains challenging for many businesses, giving workers a rare moment of leverage. There were more job openings than unemployed workers in June, a benchmark that took years to reach after the last recession. (The count of unemployed workers does not include people who are not actively searching for work, a category that has swelled in the pandemic because of child care responsibilities and other factors.) Nearly 3.9 million employees quit their jobs voluntarily in June, close to a record. That suggests that workers are shopping around for better opportunities. Some industries are having a particularly difficult time finding and retaining workers. Employers in the leisure and hospitality sector, which have been struggling to staff back up after last year’s mass layoffs, posted 1.7 million jobs in June, a record. But they filled only 1.4 million jobs, little changed from April and May. And nearly 800,000 people quit jobs in the industry. The data released Monday came from the Labor Department’s Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, which is distinct from the better-known monthly employment report. That report, released last week, showed that job growth further accelerated in July. Read more

Consumers are on the lookout for higher prices, a Federal Reserve survey shows. Orlando International Airport in May. Much of the recent increase in inflation is tied to reopening-related quirks — like a snap back in airline ticket prices. Credit... Scott McIntyre for The New York Times Expectations for long-term inflation rose slightly in July, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said on Monday, and consumers continued to foresee rapid price gains in the near term as the economy reopens from pandemic-related lockdowns. The move in the Survey of Consumer Expectations’ longer-term price gauge was small, but it could prove meaningful at a time when central bank officials are closely watching such measures. Economic policymakers want to make sure that long-term inflation expectations remain low and stable. If consumers come to expect that goods and services will cost more over time, they might become more willing to accept price jumps, which could itself lock in quicker inflation. Long-term inflation expectations have been relatively stable this year even as price gains have taken off. That has been good new for Fed officials, because it supports the idea that today’s strong readings should fade with time, as the economy moves through an unusual reopening period. The move in the New York Fed gauge is probably not enough to shift that narrative, but it will bear watching as the central bank keeps an eye on a range of price measures. The survey’s estimate of price gains over three years moved up to 3.7 percent from 3.6 percent, the highest reading since August 2013. Consumer expectations for prices over the next year, which have moved up sharply this year, held steady at an elevated level. Central bankers will get a chance to see how consumer prices are shaping up when the Bureau of Labor Statistics on Wednesday releases July inflation data known as the Consumer Price Index. The Fed officially targets a different price gauge, but the C.P.I. comes out earlier and its data feeds into the Fed’s preferred measure, making it a key data point. Economists in a Bloomberg survey expect the C.P.I. to pick up at a 0.5 percent pace compared with the prior month, slightly slower than the 0.9 percent pace in June but still a rapid increase. (By way of context, the average monthly increase over the past 20 years has been 0.2 percent.) Prices are expected to have climbed by 5.3 percent over the prior year, down slightly from 5.4 percent in the year through June. Much of the recent increase in inflation is tied to reopening-related quirks — like a snap back in airline ticket prices, or a shortage of computer chips that has pushed up used-car prices — and policymakers expect those situations to resolve themselves with time. But there are big questions about how quickly supply-chain issues will fade, and Fed policymakers are closely monitoring the faster price gains to make sure they do not turn into a lasting trend. “The longer this goes on, the harder it’s going to be for regular families and small businesses and others to not adjust,” Raphael Bostic, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, said on a call with reporters Monday. He noted that watching business, family and household expectations was important “to make sure that the length of this more turbulent time is not shifting expectations.” “I’m not seeing that right now,” he added. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Education Department ends its effort to stop states from suing federal student loan servicers. In its latest move to undo Trump-era policies, the Education Department said on Monday that states are free to police federal student loan servicers that run afoul of local consumer protection laws, reversing its previous legal stance. “Effective collaboration among the states and federal government is the best way to ensure that student loan borrowers get the best possible service,” Education Secretary Miguel A. Cardona said in a statement announcing the change. The federal government pays seven vendors to collect payments from nearly 43 million borrowers on $1.4 trillion in federal student loans. Government auditors and other watchdogs have repeatedly criticized the companies for shoddy practices and mistakes that they say have harmed struggling borrowers and raised the repayment costs for many people. Multiple state attorneys general have sued federal loan servicers over their missteps. In 2018, Betsy DeVos, the education secretary under President Donald J. Trump, sought to block those lawsuits by arguing that only the federal government had the authority to oversee and punish its federal loan servicers. Several federal judges viewed that stance skeptically. In at least four cases, federal district or appellate courts ruled against the department and found that states retained some enforcement rights over servicers’ actions toward their state’s residents. The Education Department cited those rulings in new guidance explaining its reversal and said working collaboratively with the states instead of fighting them “could produce a more robust system of supervision and enforcement to monitor and improve performance under this far-flung system.” Maura Healey, the attorney general of Massachusetts, praised the new stance. Her office sued, and later settled with, the government’s largest loan servicer over errors that she said had hobbled public service workers seeking to use a loan-forgiveness program. (That servicer, the Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Agency, known to most borrowers as FedLoan, plans to terminate its contract with the government at the end of this year.) “States have long played an integral role in higher education oversight and have been on the front lines of protecting student borrowers from fraud and abuse,” Ms. Healey said. “My office looks forward to collaborating with the department to ensure servicer accountability and borrower rights.” Read more

Elizabeth Warren will propose a minimum tax on the nation’s richest companies. Senator Elizabeth Warren will introduce legislation that would require the most profitable U.S. companies to pay a 7 percent tax on earnings reported to investors. Credit... Stefani Reynolds for The New York Times Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and her allies will propose a minimum tax on the profits of the nation’s richest companies, regardless of what they say they owe the government, as part of Democrats’ $3.5 trillion economic and social-policy package. Ms. Warren’s so-called “real corporate profits tax” was a key part of her presidential campaign, and she has enlisted Senator Angus King, the Maine independent, to help press her case that profitable companies should be taxed, regardless of loopholes and maneuvers that have allowed many of them to avoid federal corporate income taxes altogether. The measure would require the most profitable companies to pay a 7 percent tax on the earnings they report to investors — known as their annual book value — above $100 million. By taxing the earnings reported to investors, not to the Internal Revenue Service, Democrats would be hitting earnings that companies like to maximize, not the earnings they try hard to diminish for tax purposes. “During the presidential campaign, Joe Biden and I disagreed on some tax policies, but there was one thing we strongly agreed on: corporations shouldn’t be able to tell shareholders they were making huge profits, then tell the I.R.S. they made nothing in profits,” Ms. Warren said in an interview. After the passage of a $1 trillion bipartisan infrastructure bill, which is expected this week, Democrats will turn to a budget blueprint that will set the terms of a sprawling multi-trillion-dollar package intended to carry the remainder of their ambitions to shore up the nation’s social safety net and to pay for it by increasing taxes on wealthy individuals and corporations. If it clears the Senate, it is all but guaranteed to do so with votes coming only from the 50 senators who caucus with Democrats. That package won’t fully materialize until the fall, but the unveiling of the bare-bones blueprint has spurred Democrats like Ms. Warren to offer their proposed contributions. Although proposals on items like free pre-K, community college and family leave have attracted much of the attention, how to pay for it, including proposed tax increases on the wealthy and corporations, will generate at least as much controversy. The campaign to further scrutinize wealthy corporations has been boosted by reporting from ProPublica that showed how the richest Americans pay very little taxes. “Now is the time to put the revenues on the table to pay for our infrastructure plans — this is the moment,” Ms. Warren said. In a separate interview, Mr. King answered the expected Republican criticism, saying, “It’s not socialism — it’s an attempt to have a fair tax at a pretty low level for companies that would otherwise pay zero.” An economic analysis from Gabriel Zucman and Emmanuel Saez, economic professors at the University of California, Berkeley, who advised Ms. Warren during the presidential campaign, estimated that about 1,300 public corporations would be impacted by the policy, generating close to $700 billion between 2023 and 2032. “We understand that responsible legislation includes showing how it will be paid for and making those payments come from the billionaires and giant corporations who have evaded paying their fair share for so long,” Ms. Warren said. “Getting the tax revenue part of the reconciliation package right is about making the playing field just a little more level for everyone.” Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Janet Yellen made another call on Congress to act on the debt limit. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen reminded lawmakers on Monday that raising the debt limit does not authorize or increase government spending. Credit... Stefani Reynolds for The New York Times WASHINGTON — Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen reiterated her call for Congress to raise or suspend the nation’s borrowing cap on Monday, urging lawmakers to act on a bipartisan basis and warning that a default would cause “irreparable harm” to the economy. In a letter to Congress, Ms. Yellen reminded lawmakers that raising the debt limit does not authorize or increase government spending. In fact, she said, it allows the Treasury Department to pay for expenditures that have already been enacted. “Failure to meet those obligations would cause irreparable harm to the U.S. economy and the livelihoods of all Americans,” Ms. Yellen said. Top Republicans, including Senator Mitch McConnell, the minority leader, have suggested that Democrats will have to lift the debt ceiling on their own using a budgetary procedure known as reconciliation. Republicans and Democrats in the Senate are pressing ahead this week on the final stages of an infrastructure bill. Separately, Democrats in the Senate are also moving forward with a $3.5 trillion budget measure that would allow them to enact huge federal investments to expand social and environmental programs. Ms. Yellen’s letter to Congress was her third such warning in recent weeks. Last week, she told lawmakers that she was already beginning to employ extraordinary measures, such as curbing investments in government retirement programs, to delay a default. Because of the various relief programs that are in place, it is more difficult for the Treasury Department to predict how long Ms. Yellen can use such tools. The Congressional Budget Office said last month that Treasury Department would most likely run out of cash sometime in October or November. Ms. Yellen, in her letter, noted that during the Trump administration, Congress lifted the debt ceiling on a bipartisan basis three times. “Congress should do so again now by increasing or suspending the debt limit on a bipartisan basis,” Ms. Yellen said. “The vast majority of the debt subject to the debt limit was accrued prior to the administration taking office.” Read more

Samsung’s de facto leader, imprisoned for bribery, will be paroled. Lee Jae-yong, vice chairman of Samsung, was serving a two-and-a-half-year prison term for bribing the former South Korean president. Credit... Chung Sung-Jun/Getty Images SEOUL — Lee Jae-yong, the de facto leader of the Samsung conglomerate, who was imprisoned for bribery, will be released on parole on Friday, the Ministry of Justice of South Korea said on Monday. The ministry’s parole committee met on Monday and decided to free Mr. Lee and 800 other prisoners ahead of the Aug. 15 National Liberation Day, which commemorates the end of Japanese colonial rule of Korea at the end of World War II. South Korea often paroles or pardons prisoners to mark major national holidays. Mr. Lee, also known as Jay Y. Lee, was serving a two-and-a-half-year prison term for bribing the former South Korean president Park Geun-hye, who was impeached and ousted from office for corruption and abuse of power. As vice chairman of Samsung, Mr. Lee has been running the conglomerate since a heart attack incapacitated his father, Lee Kun-hee, Samsung’s chairman, in 2014. His father died in October, and Mr. Lee is his only son. Samsung is the biggest and most lucrative of a handful of family-controlled conglomerates, or chaebol, that helped South Korea transform from a war-torn agrarian economy into a global export powerhouse. The group’s electronics unit, Samsung Electronics, alone accounts for nearly one-fifth of the country’s total exports. But South Koreans have also grown weary of recurring corruption scandals among the chaebol. Mr. Lee’s father was twice convicted of bribery and other corruption charges, but never spent a day in jail, leading many to believe that Samsung was untouchable. South Koreans have been divided over whether Mr. Lee was worth paroling. Outside the Justice Ministry, where the parole committee met on Monday, activists opposed Mr. Lee’s parole, holding signs that said letting him walk without serving out his prison term would be another example of excessive leniency toward business tycoons convicted of corruption. Ahead of Mr. Lee’s parole, the Justice Ministry had said it would make it easier for prisoners with good behavior to apply for parole. Until now, it was rare for the ministry to parole inmates who had served less than 70 percent of their terms. Mr. Lee has finished serving 60 percent of the term, and critics accused the ministry of amending its parole guidelines in his favor. But a majority of South Koreans supported Mr. Lee’s early release from prison, according to recent surveys. Other business tycoons, pro-business lobbies and even some of the politicians campaigning for the presidential election next March have called for Mr. Lee’s release. “We included Vice Chairman Lee in the list of people who would be paroled, taking into account the national and global economic condition amid the prolonged Covid-19 pandemic,” the justice minister, Park Beom-kye, said on Monday. Samsung is run by an army of professional managers. But those who supported Mr. Lee’s parole argued that his imprisonment had created uncertainty when the South Korean tech giant needed to make bold investments and acquisitions amid a global chip shortage. Local media has added to public anxiety by reporting that with Mr. Lee locked away, Samsung was postponing key strategic decisions, including the location of a $17 billion chip plant in the United States, while rival chip makers like TSMC and Intel were making large investments. But it was unclear how actively Mr. Lee could be involved in Samsung management after he was paroled. He had been barred from returning to work for five years, and the Justice Ministry did not lift that ban. Mr. Lee also faces other legal trouble. He is on trial on separate criminal charges of stock price manipulation and unfair trading. Mr. Lee has said he is innocent. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

After wrangling, the infrastructure bill nears the finish line in the Senate. The Capitol Building in Washington. The final vote on President Biden’s infrastructure plan is expected to come Monday or Tuesday. Credit... Mandel Ngan/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images Senators spent a second weekend in a row wrangling over the details of a $1 trillion bipartisan infrastructure proposal, putting off a planned summer break. “We’re doing it the old-fashioned way,” Senator Mitt Romney, Republican of Utah, told reporters on Sunday about the many days of debate. Republicans joined Democrats on Saturday and Sunday in two procedural votes supporting the plan to fund repairs of roads, bridges, ports and more, and to make American commutes more green with projects related to electric vehicles, biking and pedestrian access. Last night, they cleared the last hurdle before a final vote in the chamber, possibly late Monday or Tuesday. What’s the holdup? About a dozen proposed amendments were bandied about. Some senators want states to have more leeway over how to repurpose pandemic relief funds. Others are demanding more money for public transit, which has been allotted about $40 billion, less than originally envisioned. In a rare moment of unity, the chamber broke out into spontaneous applause when Ted Cruz, a staunchly conservative Republican from Texas, and Raphael Warnock, a progressive Democrat from Georgia, made a joint highway proposal that got unanimous support. ​ But differences over how to regulate cryptocurrency threatened to derail the process. Two competing crypto amendments have caused an unexpected stir, with lawmakers advancing dueling changes to how the bill defines a “broker” in a provision intended to raise more tax revenue from crypto transactions. There is no agreement over whether the amendments will get considered for inclusion before a final vote is called, with a 30-hour deadline set to expire in the wee hours of Tuesday morning. Former President Donald Trump threatened senators supporting the infrastructure proposal, saying they will pay in primaries. But few appear moved and many perceive a chance to distance themselves from Mr. Trump. The minority leader, Mitch McConnell, said the legislation had “an excellent chance” of becoming “a bipartisan success story for the country.” But Senator Todd Young, the Republican from Indiana who was part of the group that drafted the bill, said Sunday that he would not vote to pass it because of concerns about its cost. Read more

Judge allows cruise line to temporarily require proof of vaccination in Florida. Norwegian Cruise’s Gem cruise ship was docked at the Port of Miami on Monday. A federal judge has temporarily blocked a Florida law that prevents cruise lines from requiring proof of vaccination from passengers. Credit... Wilfredo Lee/Associated Press A federal judge on Sunday granted Norwegian Cruise Line’s request for a preliminary injunction, temporarily allowing the company to require proof of vaccination from passengers despite a Florida law that bans businesses from doing so. Gov. Ron DeSantis’s office said in an emailed statement on Monday that it plans to appeal the ruling. Mr. DeSantis signed a state law in May that set fines for businesses requiring customers to provide proof of vaccination. Norwegian’s next cruise ship to sail from Florida is set for Aug. 15, out of Miami. In a statement on Sunday, the company said the ruling would allow it to “operate in the safest way possible.” “We welcome today’s ruling that allows us to sail with 100 percent fully vaccinated guests and crew, which we believe is the safest and most prudent way to resume cruise operations amid this global pandemic,” said Frank Del Rio, the president and chief executive. In the order, Judge Kathleen Williams of U.S. District Court noted that scientific research shows that “cruise lines are hotbeds for Covid-19 transmission.” She also cited the potential for the cruise line to suffer financially if Norwegian was forced to cancel trips or reroute around Florida. Judge Williams wrote that the “defendant fails to articulate or provide any evidence of harms that the state would suffer if an injunction was entered,” and added that Norwegian “has demonstrated that public health will be jeopardized if it is required to suspend its vaccination requirement.” A preliminary injunction generally will stay in effect until there is a final ruling in a lawsuit. The judge’s order came as coronavirus cases have risen sharply in Florida. Over the past two weeks, cases have increased 84 percent and hospitalizations have doubled, according to New York Times data. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Crude oil drops as China grapples with Delta variant outbreak. Crude oil futures fell on Monday, adding to sharp losses last week that came amid concerns that the Delta variant could threaten the global economic recovery. West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. crude benchmark, fell as much as 4 percent before recovering some of those losses and settling 2.2 percent lower. It fell 7.7 percent last week, its sharpest weekly decline since last October. The highly contagious Delta variant of the coronavirus has already led to new lockdowns in parts of Asia. Monday’s decline in oil prices came as China, the world’s second-largest economy, imposed new restrictions to try to contain its worst outbreak in more than a year. The outbreak has grown to hundreds of cases and spread to more than half of mainland China’s 31 provinces, challenging the government’s zero-tolerance approach toward the virus. “The concern is that China is a very large demand base and, if there are lockdowns and shutdowns because of the Delta variant, you might see a pullback on the demand side,” said Subadra Rajappa, head of rates strategy at Société Générale. The S&P 500 was down about 0.1 percent by the end of the trading session Monday. Shares of oil producers fell, with Occidental Petroleum down 3 percent and Devon Oil down 1.4 percent.

The Stoxx 600 Europe rose slightly, closing with a 0.2 percent gain, and Asian markets ended the day mixed, with China’s Shanghai Composite Index up 1 percent. Read more

Democrats unveil $3.5 trillion budget blueprint, without a measure to raise the debt limit. Video transcript Back bars 0:00 / 1:27 - 0:00 transcript ‘Big, Bold Change’: Democrats Unveil $3.5 Trillion Budget Blueprint Senate Democrats hope to pass the budget blueprint by the end of the week. It would boost spending on health care, child and elder care, education and climate change, while bypassing an expected Republican filibuster. Senate Democrats unveiled our budget resolution with reconciliation instructions, which is the first step in unlocking the legislative process for a budget reconciliation bill later this year. The Democratic budget will be the most significant legislation for American families since the era of the New Deal and the Great Society. It is big, bold change, the kind of change America thirsts for. It will lower costs for Americans. It will cut taxes for American families. It will create millions of jobs while tackling the climate crisis, and it will be paid for by wealthy paying their fair share. The divisions in our country and our politics today have their roots in the decline of economic mobility. Now, the American people don’t expect one piece of legislation to solve all our nation’s ills. No single law can do that. But we have to start in a bold, strong way, rebuilding the basic social contract for middle-class American families and for everyone struggling to get there, a promise of equal opportunity and equality, helping middle-class Americans stay in the middle class, building ladders to help others climb into that middle class. And at its core, that’s what this budget is all about. Senate Democrats hope to pass the budget blueprint by the end of the week. It would boost spending on health care, child and elder care, education and climate change, while bypassing an expected Republican filibuster. Credit Credit... T.J. Kirkpatrick for The New York Times Democrats formally began their push on Monday for the most significant expansion of the nation’s social safety net since the Great Society of the 1960s, unveiling a budget blueprint that would spend $3.5 trillion on health care, child and elder care, education and climate change. The budget resolution, which Senate Democrats hope to pass by the end of this week, would allow the caucus to piece together social policy legislation this fall, paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy, large inheritances and corporations. And if Democrats and their two independent allies can hold together, that measure could pass the Senate without a Republican vote, nullifying the filibuster threat. That measure would pass after a separate $1 trillion bipartisan infrastructure bill likely clears the Senate on Tuesday. Together, they would secure the remainder of President Biden’s $4 trillion economic agenda, but the two-step effort will test Mr. Biden’s ability to both work with Republicans and maneuver around them. But the two-pronged effort will test the president’s ability to keep the razor-thin Democratic majorities in both chambers united as his party’s leaders both work with Republicans and maneuver around them. “It is big, bold change — the kind of change America thirsts for,” said Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, in a speech on the Senate floor. Republicans have made it clear that they have no intention of supporting the measure. Though many in the conference support the $1 trillion infrastructure bill, they have railed against the Democrat’s wider budget plan as a “reckless tax and spending spree.” “Democrats are about to tell Republicans to go take a hike and start teeing up trillions more dollars in borrowing and spending without a single Republican vote,” said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the minority leader. “But at the same time they’re extolling the virtues of their latest socialist shopping list, they are afraid to up the limit on their credit card.” . Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The economic rescue plan that Mr. Biden signed in March sent hundreds of billions of dollars in aid to state and local governments, which public sector unions, increasingly the face of the labor movement, considered a lifeline.

But the cornerstone of Mr. Trumka’s plan to revive labor was a bill still awaiting enactment: the Protecting the Right to Organize Act, or PRO Act. The legislation would make unionizing easier by forbidding employers from requiring workers to attend anti-union meetings and would create financial penalties for employers that flout labor law. The federation invested heavily in helping to elect public officials who could help pass the measure.

During an interview with The New York Times in March, Mr. Trumka characterized the PRO Act as, in effect, labor’s last best hope. “Because of growing inequality, our economy is on a trajectory to implosion,” he said. “We have to have a way for workers to have more power and employers to have less. And the best way do that is to have the PRO Act.”

Ms. Shuler echoed that point, arguing that labor will be primed for a resurgence if the measure becomes law. “We have everything in alignment,” she said. “The only thing left is the PRO Act to unleash what I would say is the potential for unprecedented organizing.”

But so far, placing most of labor’s hopes on a piece of legislation strongly opposed by Republicans and the business community has proved to be a dubious bet. While the House passed the bill in March and Mr. Biden strongly supports it, the odds are long in a divided Senate.

When asked whether the A.F.L.-C.I.O. could support Mr. Biden’s multitrillion-dollar jobs plan if it came to a vote with no prospect of passing the PRO Act as well, Mr. Trumka refused to entertain the possibility that he would have to make such a decision.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The vaccines have been shown to be vigorously effective against severe illness and death after infection, including the highly contagious Delta variant, and public health officials, doctors and political leaders are urging inoculation. The Kaiser Family Foundation reported in late July that more than 90 percent of Covid-19 cases, hospitalizations and deaths have occurred among people who are unvaccinated or not yet fully vaccinated.

“The more people who are out there without the vaccine, the more Covid will spread,” said Luisa Borrell, distinguished professor at the CUNY Graduate School of Public Health & Health Policy.

A growing number of companies are mandating vaccines as a condition of employment, leaving unvaccinated workers at risk of being fired. CNN, which has required full vaccinations for all employees working in its offices and in the field, said on Thursday that it had fired three people who went into the office unvaccinated. Many others are adopting less sweeping — but perhaps more conspicuous — approaches, including mask mandates for unvaccinated workers or the requirement that they work remotely.

For employers, keeping workers safe while being equitable is one of the thorniest workplace challenges of the pandemic to date. In addition to potential legal ramifications if any of their policies are viewed as discriminatory, many companies are concerned that implementing separate protocols for unvaccinated workers could lead some of them to quit amid an already tight labor market. As of Aug. 5, roughly 39 percent of Americans ages 18 and over were not fully vaccinated, representing a large pool of people who could be in close contact with others at their jobs.

“If you’re going to treat vaccinated and unvaccinated employees differently, it needs to have a well-reasoned basis and not be done in a sort of harsh and derogatory way,” said Todd Logsdon, an employment attorney in Louisville, Ky., who is co-chairman of his firm’s workplace safety practice group. From a non-legal standpoint, he added, “the fact that you have some real morale issues — yeah, that employee is going to feel left out so you may have more turnover.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Over the last decade, Dr. Mercola has built a vast operation to push natural health cures, disseminate anti-vaccination content and profit from all of it, said researchers who have studied his network. In 2017, he filed an affidavit claiming his net worth was “in excess of $100 million.”

And rather than directly stating online that vaccines don’t work, Dr. Mercola’s posts often ask pointed questions about their safety and discuss studies that other doctors have refuted. Facebook and Twitter have allowed some of his posts to remain up with caution labels, and the companies have struggled to create rules to pull down posts that have nuance.

“He has been given new life by social media, which he exploits skillfully and ruthlessly to bring people into his thrall,” said Imran Ahmed, director of the Center for Countering Digital Hate, which studies misinformation and hate speech. Its “Disinformation Dozen” report has been cited in congressional hearings and by the White House.

In an email, Dr. Mercola said it was “quite peculiar to me that I am named as the #1 superspreader of misinformation.” Some of his Facebook posts were only liked by hundreds of people, he said, so he didn’t understand “how the relatively small number of shares could possibly cause such calamity to Biden’s multibillion dollar vaccination campaign.”

The efforts against him are political, Dr. Mercola added, and he accused the White House of “illegal censorship by colluding with social media companies.”

He did not address whether his coronavirus claims were factual. “I am the lead author of a peer reviewed publication regarding vitamin D and the risk of Covid-19 and I have every right to inform the public by sharing my medical research,” he said. The Times was unable to verify the claims in the study, which was published by Nutrients, a monthly journal from Molecular Diversity Preservation International, a nonprofit in Basel, Switzerland.

A native of Chicago, Dr. Mercola started a small private practice in 1985 in Schaumburg, Ill. In the 1990s, he began shifting to natural health medicine and opened his main website, Mercola.com, to share his treatments, cures and advice. The site urges people to “take control of your health.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tesla, founded in 2003, and its chief executive, Elon Musk, have been bold in challenging the auto industry, attracting devoted fans and customers and creating a new standard for electric vehicles that other established carmakers are reckoning with. The company is worth more than several large automakers combined.

But the accidents involving Autopilot could threaten Tesla’s standing and force regulators to take action against the company. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has about two dozen active investigations into crashes involving Autopilot.

At least three Tesla drivers have died since 2016 in crashes in which Autopilot was engaged and failed to detect obstacles in the road. In two instances, the system did not brake for tractor-trailers crossing highways. In the third, it failed to recognize a concrete barrier. In June, the federal traffic safety agency released a list showing that at least 10 people have been killed in eight accidents involving Autopilot since 2016. That list does not include the crash that killed Jovani Maldonado.

Tesla’s credibility has taken a hit, and some experts on autonomous driving say that it is hard not to question other claims made by Mr. Musk and the company. He has, for example, said several times that Tesla was close to perfecting Full Self Driving, a technology that would allow cars to drive autonomously in most circumstances — something other auto and technology companies have said is years away.

Mr. Musk and Tesla did not respond to several requests for comment.

Autopilot is not an autonomous driving system. Rather, it is a suite of software, cameras and sensors intended to assist drivers and prevent accidents by taking over many aspects of driving a car — even the changing of lanes. Tesla executives have claimed that handing off these functions to computers will make driving safer because human drivers are prone to mistakes and distractions, and cause most of the roughly 40,000 traffic fatalities that occur each year in the United States.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@We soon discovered a secret, hidden behind a smokescreen of fake companies and false identities. The people facilitating slander and the self-proclaimed good guys who help remove it are often one and the same.

To get slander removed, many people hire a “reputation management” company. In my case, it was going to cost roughly $20,000.

My colleague Kashmir Hill and I were trying to learn who is responsible for — and profiting from — the growing ecosystem of websites whose primary purpose is destroying reputations.

1: The Stain

At first glance, the websites appear amateurish.

They have names like BadGirlReports.date, BustedCheaters.com and WorstHomeWrecker.com. Photos are badly cropped. Grammar and spelling are afterthoughts. They are clunky and text-heavy, as if they’re intended to be read by machines, not humans.

But do not underestimate their power. When someone attacks you on these so-called gripe sites, the results can be devastating. Earlier this year, we wrote about a woman in Toronto who poisoned the reputations of dozens of her perceived enemies by posting lies about them.

To assess the slander’s impact, we wrote a software program to download every post from a dozen of the most active complaint sites: more than 150,000 posts about some 47,000 people. Then we set up a web crawler that searched Google and Bing for thousands of the people who had been attacked.

For about one-third of the people, the nasty posts appeared on the first pages of their results. For more than half, the gripe sites showed up at the top of their image results.

These were the Google image results for “aaron krolik nyc.”

Note: Some image results have been blurred for privacy reasons.

Sometimes search engines go a step further than simply listing links; they display what they consider the most relevant phrases about whatever you’re searching for.

One woman in Ohio was the subject of so many negative posts that Bing declared in bold at the top of her search results that she “is a liar and a cheater” — the same way it states that Barack Obama was the 44th president of the United States. For roughly 500 of the 6,000 people we searched for, Google suggested adding the phrase “cheater” to a search of their names.

The unverified claims are on obscure, ridiculous-looking sites, but search engines give them a veneer of credibility. Posts from Cheaterboard.com appear in Google results alongside Facebook pages and LinkedIn profiles — or, in my case, articles in The New York Times.

That would be bad enough for people whose reputations have been savaged. But the problem is all the worse because it’s so hard to fix. And that is largely because of the secret, symbiotic relationship between those facilitating slander and those getting paid to remove it.

2: The Spread

The posts I created featured an awkward selfie and described me as a “loser who will do anything for attention.” We posted a version of the same insult on five gripe sites. Each selfie included a unique watermark that allowed us to track it if it showed up somewhere new. For an image posted to Cheaterboard.com, for example, we hid the domain name and the date in the file code.

# Aaron Krolik | New York | NYC ## Aaron Krolik is a complete loser. Will do ANYTHING for attention. ANYTHING. Aaron Krolik. New York. NYC watermark text:cheaterboard.com 1.29.21 --- convert -size 450x200 -background none -fill white -gravity center caption:"BUSTED" -shade 600x100 WATERMARK_FILE.png composite -dissolve 50% -gravity center WATERMARK_FILE.png aaron.jpg aaronbusted.jpg convert aaronbusted.jpg -strip aaronbusted.jpg exiftool aaronbusted.jpg posted: 2:40pm east

The posts spread quickly. Inside two hours, the Cheaterboard one had popped up on FoulSpeakers.com. Within a month, the original five posts had spawned 21 copies on 15 sites.

What was the point of copying the posts? A big clue were the ads that appeared next to them, offering help removing reputation-tarnishing content.

The post on FoulSpeakers.com featured this ad for reputation management.

Note: Some identifying information and profanity have been redacted.

We contacted all of the sites that copied the original posts. Only two responded, and only one person consented to an interview: Cyrus Sullivan, who runs FoulSpeakers.com.

Mr. Sullivan, 37, of Portland, Ore., has been in the complaint-site business since 2008, when he started STDCarriers.com. It was inspired by his own experience; in his senior year at the University of Oregon, he said, he had sex with a woman who belatedly told him that she had herpes.

“I thought there needs to be a way to warn people about something like that,” Mr. Sullivan said. STDCarriers.com let people anonymously post unverified information about people who they said had sexually transmitted diseases.

Mr. Sullivan said he hadn’t made much money until 2012, when STDCarriers.com attracted national media attention. Anderson Cooper had a daytime talk show at the time, and he did a segment dressing down Mr. Sullivan and others who ran complaint sites. Mr. Sullivan’s web traffic soared, and posts soon flooded the site.

Cyrus Sullivan The New York Times

After a couple of stints in jail — among other things, he was convicted of sending death threats to a woman and of throwing Sriracha Doritos into the face of police officers, “using the spicy dust as a weapon, like pepper spray,” according to a court filing — he started FoulSpeakers.com in 2018. It billed itself as “a foul speech search engine and web archive” that captured awful things written about people on other sites, such as my post on Cheaterboard.com.

Mr. Sullivan told us that copying content was a great way to lure people to his sites. (He said he didn’t feel bad about spreading unverified slander. “Teach children not to talk to strangers, then teach them not to believe what they read on the internet,” he said.)

But there was a financial incentive as well. Mr. Sullivan had started a reputation-management service to help people get “undesirable information” about themselves removed from their search engine results. The “gold package” cost $699.99. For those customers, Mr. Sullivan would alter the computer code underlying the offending posts, instructing search engines to ignore them.

3: The Safecracker

Some reputation-management firms use adversarial tactics to get posts taken down. But cozier relationships are the norm.

For example, ads for 247Removal.com appear on a dozen prominent gripe websites, and were attached to some of the posts about me. 247Removal’s owner is Heidi Glosser, 38. She said she didn’t know how her ads had ended up on those sites.

Heidi Glosser The New York Times

Ms. Glosser charges $750 or more per post removal, which adds up to thousands of dollars for most of her clients. To get posts removed, she said, she often pays an “administrative fee” to the gripe site’s webmaster. We asked her whether this was extortion. “I can’t really give you a direct answer,” she said.

On the first page of Ms. Glosser’s own Google search results is a link to a court ruling related to her 2003 conviction for burglary and safecracking. “It’s not related to me,” she said. She urged us to do a background check on her, which confirmed her involvement.

Ms. Glosser said she had decided to try to help people improve their online reputations in 2018, after she watched an 11-minute documentary about revenge porn. The film focused on Scott Breitenstein, a former plumber who ran sites hosting nude photos of people posted without their consent.

Sites controlled by Mr. Breitenstein also were venues for unverified allegations about cheaters, scams, predators, deadbeats and “potential johns.” After the documentary came out, Mr. Breitenstein told business partners that he had sold his websites. He didn’t respond to requests for comment.

Ms. Glosser said her goal was to assist victims of Mr. Breitenstein and his ilk.

Ms. Glosser used to live near Mr. Breitenstein in Dayton, Ohio. She said that was a coincidence. “Dayton is not as small as everyone thinks it is,” she said. She said she doesn’t know Mr. Breitenstein.

Why, then, were Ms. Glosser and her deceased wife friendly with members of the Breitenstein family on Facebook?

Ms. Glosser wouldn’t say.

4. Marilyn Monroe’s Autograph

We noticed that the same ad kept appearing on the proliferating posts about me being a loser. It was a simple text ad for something called RepZe.com: “Remove Cheaters Sites Contents.”

Most sidebar ads are programmatic. That means they are served up by an ad network with no involvement by the people who run a site, and they change every time you visit. That wasn’t the case here. The RepZe ads were permanent fixtures, written into the websites’ coding.

When Kashmir called RepZe, a woman identifying herself as Sofia refused to answer questions and said to email the company instead. Nobody responded to the emails.

When I reached out to RepZe via a form on its site to ask about removing one of the posts about me, Sofia called me. She said that for $1,500 the post would be removed within 24 hours. The removal would come with a “lifetime guarantee,” she said.

She encouraged me to act quickly. “I don’t want to scare you, but these posts can spread,” she warned.

At this point, we figured that when someone paid a company like RepZe to get a post removed, RepZe then paid the complaint site to delete it. But our understanding turned out to be incomplete at best.

RepZe claims to be based in a Denver suburb. But the company isn’t registered for business in Colorado.

The address on its website belongs to Anytime Mailbox, which charges $9.99 per month to create the appearance of an office, accepting mail on someone’s behalf and then scanning it and uploading it to a secure app. (Anytime’s chief executive, Matt Going, said he couldn’t answer questions about RepZe, except to say it was no longer a customer.)

The three people listed as RepZe employees have scant online presences and do not seem to exist. One page on the website includes a message from RepZe’s chief executive, identified as “Mr. M. Moore.” At the bottom of the message is what appears to be his signature. Upon closer inspection, it is Marilyn Monroe’s autograph.

RepZe has promotional videos on YouTube. The people in the videos, including those who claimed to be employees or customers, are paid actors. (We identified them on a freelancing site, Fiverr, where they charged as little as $25 to appear in videos.)

This video featured “Matt from RepZe.”

This is the promotional reel for the actor who played “Matt.”

We tracked down actual customers of RepZe. All relayed the same basic story. They had hired the company to remove negative posts about them, which it quickly did. But then RepZe would threaten that, absent swift payment of the thousands of dollars the customers had agreed to pay, the posts would reappear and multiply.

“The content will be restored,” a RepZe representative wrote in a text to one customer, who posted screenshots of the exchange on Facebook. “We are trying to help. You are trying to piss my ass off.”

Then, months later, the posts would reappear.

One disgruntled customer created RepZeFraud.com under the pseudonym Greg Saint. He said he had paid RepZe $4,000 in 2019 to remove two negative posts. Months later, he said, copies of the posts began reappearing online, and he suspected RepZe was responsible. He created RepZeFraud.com to expose the person he thought was really behind the service: a 28-year-old web developer in India, Vikram Parmar.

5. A Clue in the Metadata

We had first heard Mr. Parmar’s name months earlier, from a California software developer, Aaron Greenspan.

Mr. Greenspan runs PlainSite.org, which posts court documents and thus makes people’s criminal records easier to find. He said one of those people, a convicted murderer, had tried to destroy his and his family’s online reputations.

Mr. Greenspan could have paid to get the posts removed, but he didn’t like the idea of ransom. Instead, he set out to unmask whoever was behind the sites and the reputation-management companies. This was easier said than done.

“You don’t know where it is, who runs it, who hosts it,” he said. “That’s how they evade any accountability.”

The websites use what are known as privacy proxy services to hide who owns them and where they’re hosted. Mr. Greenspan combed through digital clues and tracked down lawsuits involving the sites — which he began cataloging on PlainSite — to map out the industry. He concluded that many sites appeared to be owned by a small handful of people. Every time he got in touch with one of them, that person would point him to other people and say they were the true bad actors.

Mr. Greenspan got in touch with RepZe, which had ads next to many of the posts attacking him. He pretended to be an interested customer. RepZe gave him a quote of $14,800 to remove 17 posts. The company sent a contract. Mr. Greenspan looked at the document’s metadata and found “Vikram Parmar” listed as the author.

Category Info File name: Negative Content Removal Contract with Aaron.docx.pdf Document type: PDF document File size: 400 KB (400,325 bytes) PDF version: 1.7 Page count: 4 Page size: 8.5 x 14 inches Title: - Author: Vikram Parmar Subject: - PDF Producer: Microsoft® Word for Office 365 Content creator: Microsoft® Word for Office 365 Creation date: Apr 2, 2019 at 1:25 PM Modification date: Apr 2, 2019 at 1:25 PM

A quick Google search revealed that Mr. Parmar faced criminal charges. In 2014, he had created a fake website that charged people money to apply for nonexistent jobs with India’s Central Bureau of Investigation. Prosecutors in New Delhi charged him and a collaborator with criminal conspiracy. (Mr. Parmar claimed that an “unscrupulous client” had hired him to create what he thought was a legitimate website. The case is pending.)

Mr. Greenspan sent Mr. Parmar a message on Skype in September 2019. They began to chat. (Mr. Greenspan showed us screenshots of the chats.) He demanded that Mr. Parmar delete posts about him for free. Mr. Parmar removed one, on DirtyScam.com, and then their conversation became friendlier.

Mr. Parmar complained to Mr. Greenspan about the greediness of the owners of other complaint sites. One of them was a guy in Ohio named Scott Breitenstein, who Mr. Parmar said owned hundreds of sites that stole original content from “legitimate” ones.

Mr. Parmar told Mr. Greenspan that he’d had to pay Mr. Breitenstein to get copycat posts taken down. He said Mr. Breitenstein had instructed him to send checks to another person. Her name was Heidi Glosser.

6. One of the Gentlemen

We reached Mr. Parmar via Skype in February. He was on vacation in the Indian seaside town of Goa. We said we were working on an article about the reputation-management industry. He denied involvement, saying he was “a real estate builder and also working on some government projects.”

Then we laid out what we knew.

We had linked Mr. Parmar not just to RepZe but also to another cleanup service, RemoveReports.com. In addition, we had found that he was involved with ReportCheater.com, WebActivism.com, WtfCheater.com, RealtorScam.com and DirtyScam.com. All were listed by RepZe or RemoveReports as places from which they could remove content.

At least one of the sites had been registered under Mr. Parmar’s name. Others were linked to him in different ways. Some have the same Google ad account; some share IP addresses; some had been registered to Mr. Parmar’s email address.

Category Info Domain Name: REALTORSCAM.COM Registry Domain ID: 2094816991_DOMAIN_COM-VRSN Registrar WHOIS Server: Whois.bigrock.com Registrar URL: www.bigrock.com Updated Date: 2019-03-10T12:57:06Z Creation Date: 2017-02-02T04:02:28Z Registrar Registration Expiration Date: 2021-02-02T04:02:28Z Registrar: BigRock Solutions Ltd. Registrar IANA ID: 1495 Domain Status: clientTransferProhibited https://icann.org/epp #clientTransferProhibited Registry Registrant ID: Not Available From Registry Registrant Name: vikram parmar Registrant Organization: - Registrant Street: ahmedabad Registrant City: Ahmedabad Registrant State/Province: Other Registrant Postal Code: 382424 Registrant Country: IN

In other words, Mr. Parmar seemed to be running sites that produced slander and running sites that made money by removing that slander.

Mr. Parmar sounded uneasy. He said anyone could use anyone else’s email address to register a site. Then he admitted to doing some reputation-management work. Then he asked that his name not be used in this article. Then he suggested other people in the industry whom we should investigate instead of him. (The list included Mr. Breitenstein and Ms. Glosser.)

“You are pretty much accurate but targeting a wrong guy,” he wrote in a Skype message. “I am just mediator,” he added. “I am one of the gentleman.”

Mr. Parmar resurfaced in April, about 20 minutes after we emailed RepZe seeking comment for this article. In messages over Skype, he said he didn’t own the complaint sites but was providing them services, including helping them improve their performance on search engines.

Why were his email address and Google ad accounts linked to the complaint sites? Mr. Parmar didn’t have a coherent explanation.

7. My Experiment Ends

Three months after my experiment started, my search results were suffering the consequences. Bing helpfully recommended adding “loser” to a search for “Aaron Krolik.” When you Googled my name, Cheaters.news was at the top of the image results.

Note: Some identifying information has been redacted.

There’s no way for me to delete the posts that I wrote; the slander sites don’t allow that. Based on estimates provided by removal services, it would cost me about $20,000 to get the posts taken down — and even then, more posts might appear in their place.

There is another way to lessen the posts’ impact. In certain circumstances, Google will remove harmful content from individuals’ search results, including links to “sites with exploitative removal practices.” If a site charges to remove posts, you can ask Google not to list it.

Google didn’t advertise this policy widely, and few victims of online slander seem aware that it’s an option. That’s in part because when you Google ways to clean up your search results, Google’s solution is buried under ads for reputation-management services like RepZe.

I eventually found the Google form. I submitted a claim to have one URL removed. “Your email has been sent to our team,” Google told me.

Three days later, I received an email from Google saying the URL would be removed from my search results. Later that day, it was gone. I submitted the 25 other links. They were removed, too, but images from gripe sites kept reappearing in my search results.

Other people who have used Google’s form reported similar experiences: It mostly works, but is less effective for images. And if you have an attacker who won’t stop writing posts about you, it’s almost useless. The slander remains.

Mr. Parmar, a self-described expert in how to influence search results, has recently taken steps to burnish his own reputation. Around the time that we started trying to reach him, articles began appearing online casting him in glowing terms.

One piece gushed about his “rags-to-riches story.” Another, on Freelancer.com, said his web-marketing business generated $2 million a year in revenue. Mr. Parmar was quoted as saying he had bought cars for himself and his family.

“I live like a BOSS,” he said.

If you’ve had experiences with the gripe sites, clean-up services or Google’s removal tool, please tell us about them: kashmir.hill@nytimes.com and aaron.krolik@nytimes.com.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Before the widespread availability of this kind of computing, organizations built expensive prototypes to test their designs. “We actually went and built a full-scale prototype, and ran it to the end of life before we deployed it in the field,” said Brandon Haugh, a core-design engineer, referring to a nuclear reactor he worked on with the U.S. Navy. “That was a 20-year, multibillion dollar test.”

Today, Mr. Haugh is the director of modeling and simulation at the California-based nuclear engineering start-up Kairos Power, where he hones the design for affordable and safe reactors that Kairos hopes will help speed the world’s transition to clean energy.

Nuclear energy has long been regarded as one of the best options for zero-carbon electricity production — except for its prohibitive cost. But Kairos Power’s advanced reactors are being designed to produce power at costs that are competitive with natural gas.

“The democratization of high-performance computing has now come all the way down to the start-up, enabling companies like ours to rapidly iterate and move from concept to field deployment in record time,” Mr. Haugh said.

But high-performance computing in the cloud also has created new challenges.

In the last few years, there has been a proliferation of custom computer chips purposely built for specific types of mathematical problems. Similarly, there are now different types of memory and networking configurations within high-performance computing. And the different cloud providers have different specializations; one may be better at computational fluid dynamics while another is better at structural analysis.

The challenge, then, is picking the right configuration and getting the capacity when you need it — because demand has risen sharply. And while scientists and engineers are experts in their domains, they aren’t necessarily in server configurations, processors and the like.

This has given rise to a new kind of specialization — experts in high-performance cloud computing — and new cross-cloud platforms that act as one-stop shops where companies can pick the right combination of software and hardware. Rescale, which works closely with all the major cloud providers, is the dominant company in this field. It matches computing problems for businesses, like Firefly and Kairos, with the right cloud provider to deliver computing that scientists and engineers can use to solve problems faster or at lowest possible cost.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This article is part of our new series, Currents, which examines how rapid advances in technology are transforming our lives.

Technology has always played a major role in superhero comics. Sometimes the tech makes the hero, like the often upgraded suits of armor worn by Iron Man. Other times it can benefit a team of do-gooders, like the rings used by the Legion of Super-Heroes that give its members, whose adventures are set in the future, the ability to fly.

While most technology in comic books is of the fantastical kind, there are some examples that either exist in the real world or are extensions of real-world inventions. The DC hero Mr. Terrific uses dronelike devices he calls T-Spheres that assist him on his adventures with aerial reconnaissance (they can also deploy lasers, holograms and more).

Iron Man uses an artificial intelligence system light years ahead of Alexa or Siri. In the Marvel Cinematic Universe he had J.A.R.V.I.S., but he (it?) was replaced by a virtual assistant named F.R.I.D.A.Y., who is also featured in the comics. These days he uses an A.I. named B.O.S.S., which alerts him to threats, monitors his power levels and, in its first comic book appearance, managed his investments while he battled an extraterrestrial threat.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Tokyo Olympics pulled in the smallest audience since NBCUniversal began covering the Summer Games in 1988, pulling in an average of 15.5 million viewers for its prime-time broadcast and digital presentations each night, the company said on Monday.

From the sparsely attended opening ceremony on July 23 through Sunday’s quiet closing event, NBCUniversal’s coverage of the Games was weighed down by the absence of spectators kept away by coronavirus protocols, as well as by the shift toward cord-cutting and streaming by viewers in the United States. Also not helping was the 13-hour difference from New York and, according to many viewers, the 7,000 hours of footage spread over several channels and platforms.

Although NBCUniversal was able to showcase dramatic and triumphant moments, such as the American gymnast Sunisa Lee’s victory in the all-around event, powerful ratings drivers like the gymnast Simone Biles and the tennis player Naomi Osaka either were absent or bowed out early.

The final audience number was down 42 percent from the 2016 Summer Olympics, in Rio de Janeiro, which averaged 26.7 million viewers. It was less than half that of the 2012 London Games, which drew an average of 31.1 million.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Among performers who are intent on seeing the institution change, it is crucial to diversify the audience as well, which tends to skew older and whiter. These performers aren’t thrilled with the new ticket pricing system, which Second City started testing shortly before the pandemic.

The system, called dynamic ticket pricing, calculates prices based on the time of the show and number of tickets left. The cheapest tickets cost $25 each, but with growing interest in the return of live theater and lower-than-usual ticket inventory because of the pandemic, they can run much higher. This Saturday, tickets for the 7 p.m. shows are about $90 each.

Some performers worry that raising ticket prices will help maintain the status quo.

“How can I make this a show that makes people feel included and have an audience that reflects how we look?” asked Terrence Carey, a Second City performer who is Black.

A spokeswoman for Second City, Colleen Fahey, said the ticket pricing model is helpful in allowing the company to recoup revenue after a 14-month shutdown. She added that customers still have access to cheaper tickets.

At iO, Olivia Jackson, one of the creators of the petition, said she was eager to meet with the new owners to discuss the issues her group raised. After that, she would determine whether to return to iO. If she decided against it, she could always turn to one of the newer, scrappier operations.

“There are so many insanely talented people in Chicago who really love improv,” she said. “Chicago improv will be OK.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The move in the New York Fed gauge is probably not enough to shift that narrative, but it will bear watching as the central bank keeps an eye on a range of price measures. The survey’s estimate of price gains over three years moved up to 3.7 percent from 3.6 percent, the highest reading since August 2013. Consumer expectations for prices over the next year, which have moved up sharply this year, held steady at an elevated level.

Central bankers will get a chance to see how consumer prices are shaping up when the Bureau of Labor Statistics on Wednesday releases July inflation data known as the Consumer Price Index. The Fed officially targets a different price gauge, but the C.P.I. comes out earlier and its data feeds into the Fed’s preferred measure, making it a key data point.

Economists in a Bloomberg survey expect the C.P.I. to pick up at a 0.5 percent pace compared with the prior month, slightly slower than the 0.9 percent pace in June but still a rapid increase. (By way of context, the average monthly increase over the past 20 years has been 0.2 percent.) Prices are expected to have climbed by 5.3 percent over the prior year, down slightly from 5.4 percent in the year through June.

Much of the recent increase in inflation is tied to reopening-related quirks — like a snap back in airline ticket prices, or a shortage of computer chips that has pushed up used-car prices — and policymakers expect those situations to resolve themselves with time. But there are big questions about how quickly supply-chain issues will fade, and Fed policymakers are closely monitoring the faster price gains to make sure they do not turn into a lasting trend.

“The longer this goes on, the harder it’s going to be for regular families and small businesses and others to not adjust,” Raphael Bostic, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, said on a call with reporters Monday. He noted that watching business, family and household expectations was important “to make sure that the length of this more turbulent time is not shifting expectations.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In its latest move to undo Trump-era policies, the Education Department said on Monday that states are free to police federal student loan servicers that run afoul of local consumer protection laws, reversing its previous legal stance.

“Effective collaboration among the states and federal government is the best way to ensure that student loan borrowers get the best possible service,” Education Secretary Miguel A. Cardona said in a statement announcing the change.

The federal government pays seven vendors to collect payments from nearly 43 million borrowers on $1.4 trillion in federal student loans. Government auditors and other watchdogs have repeatedly criticized the companies for shoddy practices and mistakes that they say have harmed struggling borrowers and raised the repayment costs for many people.

Multiple state attorneys general have sued federal loan servicers over their missteps. In 2018, Betsy DeVos, the education secretary under President Donald J. Trump, sought to block those lawsuits by arguing that only the federal government had the authority to oversee and punish its federal loan servicers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In recent years, dozens of top journalists, historians and essayists have tried their luck as solo practitioners on Substack, the digital newsletter platform that has built an audience of more than 500,000 subscribers since it started in 2017. Now, a number of comic book creators have decided to do the same.

Nick Spencer, a comic book writer best known for his work for Marvel Entertainment, was the liaison between Substack and a group of creators who, starting Monday, will publish new comic book stories, essays and how-to guides on the platform.

He said he approached Chris Best, a Substack founder, with the idea last year, when the pandemic was keeping many fans out of the comic book shops and the creators were looking for new ways to connect with readers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@SEOUL — Lee Jae-yong, the de facto leader of the Samsung conglomerate, who was imprisoned for bribery, will be released on parole on Friday, the Ministry of Justice of South Korea said on Monday.

The ministry’s parole committee met on Monday and decided to free Mr. Lee and 800 other prisoners ahead of the Aug. 15 National Liberation Day, which commemorates the end of Japanese colonial rule of Korea at the end of World War II. South Korea often paroles or pardons prisoners to mark major national holidays.

Mr. Lee, also known as Jay Y. Lee, was serving a two-and-a-half-year prison term for bribing the former South Korean president Park Geun-hye, who was impeached and ousted from office for corruption and abuse of power.

As vice chairman of Samsung, Mr. Lee has been running the conglomerate since a heart attack incapacitated his father, Lee Kun-hee, Samsung’s chairman, in 2014. His father died in October, and Mr. Lee is his only son.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The fund created by the estate of Jeffrey E. Epstein to compensate victims of sexual assault by the financier has wrapped up its work by paying out just over $121 million to more than 135 people — far more than expected, according to the fund’s administrator.

Jordana Feldman, the administrator of the fund, which began its work in earnest last August, said she had wanted to get money to eligible victims as quickly as possible because so many of them had been waiting for years. She said she had wanted to approve the final awards before Tuesday — the second anniversary of Mr. Epstein’s death in federal custody of an apparent suicide.

“I really wanted this process to move quickly and in a meaningful and purposeful way,” said Ms. Feldman, a lawyer who also worked on the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund. “I really believe these programs are as much about validation as compensation.”

The money handed out to Mr. Epstein’s victims is considerable when compared with the roughly $17 million that dozens of sexual abuse victims of the former movie mogul Harvey Weinstein were awarded in a settlement approved this year by a bankruptcy judge.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The infrastructure endgame

Senators spent a second weekend in a row wrangling over the details of a $1 trillion bipartisan infrastructure proposal, putting off a planned summer break. “We’re doing it the old-fashioned way,” Senator Mitt Romney, Republican of Utah, told reporters yesterday about the many days of debate.

Slow rolling to votes, the proposal survived. Republicans joined Democrats on Saturday and Sunday in two procedural votes supporting the plan to fund repairs of roads, bridges, ports and more, and to make American commutes more green with projects related to electric vehicles, biking and pedestrian access. Last night, they cleared the last hurdle before a final vote in the chamber, possibly late today or tomorrow.

What’s the holdup? About a dozen proposed amendments were bandied about. Some senators want states to have more leeway over how to repurpose coronavirus relief funds. Others are demanding more money for public transit, which has been allotted about $40 billion, less than originally envisioned. In a rare moment of unity, the chamber broke out into spontaneous applause when Ted Cruz, a staunchly conservative Republican from Texas, and Raphael Warnock, a progressive Democrat from Georgia, made a joint highway proposal that got unanimous support. ​​

Cryptocurrency threatened to derail the process. Two competing crypto amendments have caused an unexpected stir, with lawmakers advancing dueling changes to how the bill defines a “broker” in a provision intended to raise more tax revenue from crypto transactions. There is no agreement over whether the amendments will get considered for inclusion before a final vote is called, with a 30-hour deadline set to expire in the wee hours of Tuesday morning.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Senators spent a second weekend in a row wrangling over the details of a $1 trillion bipartisan infrastructure proposal, putting off a planned summer break. “We’re doing it the old-fashioned way,” Senator Mitt Romney, Republican of Utah, told reporters on Sunday about the many days of debate.

Republicans joined Democrats on Saturday and Sunday in two procedural votes supporting the plan to fund repairs of roads, bridges, ports and more, and to make American commutes more green with projects related to electric vehicles, biking and pedestrian access. Last night, they cleared the last hurdle before a final vote in the chamber, possibly late Monday or Tuesday.

What’s the holdup? About a dozen proposed amendments were bandied about. Some senators want states to have more leeway over how to repurpose pandemic relief funds. Others are demanding more money for public transit, which has been allotted about $40 billion, less than originally envisioned. In a rare moment of unity, the chamber broke out into spontaneous applause when Ted Cruz, a staunchly conservative Republican from Texas, and Raphael Warnock, a progressive Democrat from Georgia, made a joint highway proposal that got unanimous support. ​

But differences over how to regulate cryptocurrency threatened to derail the process. Two competing crypto amendments have caused an unexpected stir, with lawmakers advancing dueling changes to how the bill defines a “broker” in a provision intended to raise more tax revenue from crypto transactions. There is no agreement over whether the amendments will get considered for inclusion before a final vote is called, with a 30-hour deadline set to expire in the wee hours of Tuesday morning.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There she reconnected with an old friend, Jason Strauss, who was opening an outpost of Tao, a popular New York club, and hired her as the director of V.I.P. operations. Ms. Uchitel displayed an immediate zest for the job: taking the high-wattage contacts accumulating in her phone to New York, Miami, Los Angeles, the Hamptons; connecting clubs with the elite clientele who oxygenate nightlife.

“To me, the word ‘hostess’ does not describe what she did,” said Ron Berkowitz, the president of Berk Communications, who represented the Tao Group at the time. “She was the liaison between the club and big money. People trusted her and people called her to get into these clubs. She was the queen of it. She was the best. She had the Rolodex, she knew how to negotiate. And she also was very sweet. But then she got caught up in something that was not good for her business.”

Ms. Uchitel and Mr. Woods met in 2008 through a mutual friend, Derek Jeter, and began their relationship a year later. “I knew him to be cheating on his wife from the first time I met him, well before we got together,” she said. But Ms. Uchitel believed she had special status. Mr. Woods would fly her around the world to tournaments and events, and, she said, told her he would invest in a restaurant she dreamed of opening.

As tabloids began looking into rumors of Mr. Woods’s infidelities, Ms. Uchitel was in frequent communication with his handlers, even helping with crisis management. But the representatives stopped returning her calls after their star client’s car collision with a fire hydrant near his home in Windermere, Fla., following a dispute on Thanksgiving night with Elin Nordegren, then his wife.

As paparazzi swarmed outside Ms. Uchitel’s apartment in Chelsea, she realized she needed a lawyer of her own. She contacted three she had seen on “Nancy Grace,” a favorite show, including Ms. Allred, who called her the next morning and told her to get on a plane to Los Angeles.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In the past few weeks, the vast majority of the most highly engaged social media posts containing coronavirus misinformation were from people who had risen to prominence by questioning the vaccines in the past year.

In July, the right-wing commentator Candace Owens jumped on the misstatement from Britain’s scientific adviser. “This is shocking!” she wrote. “60% of people being admitted to the hospital with #COVID19 in England have had two doses of a coronavirus vaccine, according to the government’s chief scientific adviser.”

After the scientific adviser, Patrick Vallance, corrected himself, Ms. Owens added the correct information at the bottom of her Facebook post. But the post was liked or shared over 62,000 times — two-thirds of its total interactions — in the three hours before her update, a New York Times analysis found. In all, the rumor collected 142,000 likes and shares on Facebook, most of them coming from Ms. Owens’s post, according to a report by the Virality Project, a consortium of misinformation researchers from outfits like the Stanford Internet Observatory and Graphika.

When reached for comment, Ms. Owens said in an email: “Unfortunately, I’m not interested in The New York Times. The people that follow me don’t take your hit pieces seriously.”

Also in July, Thomas Renz, a lawyer, appeared in a video claiming that 45,000 people had died from coronavirus vaccines. The claim, since debunked, relies on unverified information from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System, a government database. The baseless claim had been included in a lawsuit that Mr. Renz filed on behalf of an anonymous “whistle-blower,” in coordination with America’s Frontline Doctors — a right-wing group that spread misinformation about the pandemic in the past.

Mr. Renz’s video got more than 19,000 views on Bitchute. The unfounded claim was repeated by the top Spanish-language Telegram channels, Facebook groups and the conspiracy website Infowars, collecting over 120,000 views across the platforms, according to the Virality Project.

In an email, Mr. Renz said his practice had “performed the due diligence necessary” to believe in the accuracy of the allegations in the lawsuit he had filed. “We actually do not believe that the Biden administration is responsible for this, rather we believe that President Biden, like President Trump before him, was misled by the same group of conflicted bureaucrats,” Mr. Renz said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“We’ve engaged with Facebook since the transition on this issue,” said Mike Gwin, a White House spokesman, “and we’ve made clear to them when they haven’t lived up to our, or their own, standards and have actively elevated content on their platforms that misleads the American people.”

Facebook has pushed back strongly against the White House’s criticism, accusing the administration in public of scapegoating the company for the administration’s failure to reach its vaccination goals. Andy Stone, a spokesman for Facebook, said the White House hadn’t given the company enough credit for promoting the vaccine. He said the social network had been working with the White House for “many months” to get people vaccinated, introducing features like prominent links to vaccine clinics.

“We remove Covid-related content that breaks our rules and continue to link to authoritative health information on all Covid-related posts,” Mr. Stone said.

Mr. Gwin said the administration needed the help of not just Facebook but also other tech platforms, elected leaders and media outlets to spread accurate information about the vaccine. But aggressively condemning prominent TV personalities on certain outlets, such as Fox News, could risk alienating some viewers and making them less likely to get vaccinated, administration officials say.

The White House believes that Facebook, which also owns Instagram and WhatsApp, emerged as particularly problematic, some people close to the administration said. Human rights advocates and election officials have had similar complaints about the company’s handling of misinformation in recent years, saying executives point to steps taken to share factual information but avoid responsibility for the falsehoods spread widely on its services.

Mr. Biden’s frustrations with Facebook began before the pandemic. His team sparred with the company during his presidential campaign over its decision not to fact-check political ads, especially after groups supporting Donald J. Trump ran ads with false claims about Mr. Biden’s interactions with Ukrainian officials. At one point during the campaign, Mr. Biden described the company’s chief executive as a “real problem,” and added that “I’ve never been a big Zuckerberg fan.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Vacant office space in Midtown reached a record 47.4 million square feet in the second quarter of this year, or 19 percent of total space, according to the brokerage firm Cushman & Wakefield. And space available for subleasing swelled, peaking at 11.7 million square feet in early 2021, according to Savills, a real estate advisory firm.

After some tenants did an about-face, the square feet available for subleasing dropped to 11.3 million in the second quarter, said Jeffrey Peck, a vice chairman at Savills.

“We represent several tenants that had put space on the market — they thought they were never coming back or wouldn’t need as much,” Mr. Peck added. “They have since said: ‘Don’t sublet. We’re coming back.’”

In another sign that Midtown is beginning to turn around, there has been a marked increase in prospective tenants touring available office space, brokers say. Touring tends to be slow in June and July, when many people go on vacation, but not this year, said Paul J. Amrich, a vice chairman at CBRE, a commercial real estate firm. He has noticed a slight falloff in August but attributes that more to vacations than to Delta

The shopping spree is not expected to result in a surge in signed leases until later this year. And the completion of development projects over the next couple of years will add even more space to the office inventory. But already there has been a drumbeat of lease-signing announcements.

“It is a little surprising how fast it’s happened,” said David A. Falk, president for the New York tristate region at Newmark, a commercial real estate services firm.

The tech industry did much of the leasing in Midtown in 2020, but financial services have regained their traditional position as the district’s leasing leader this year, accounting for 38 percent of all new deals, according to CBRE.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Twitter on Tuesday suspended Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene, Republican of Georgia, from its service for seven days after she posted that the Food and Drug Administration should not give the coronavirus vaccines full approval and that the vaccines were “failing.”

The company said this was Ms. Greene’s fourth “strike,” which means that under its rules she can be permanently barred if she violates Twitter’s coronavirus misinformation policy again. The company issued her third strike less than a month ago.

On Monday evening, Ms. Greene said on Twitter, “The FDA should not approve the covid vaccines.” She said there were too many reports of infection and spread of the coronavirus among vaccinated people, and that the vaccines were “failing” and “do not reduce the spread of the virus & neither do masks.”

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s current guidance states, “Covid-19 vaccines are effective at protecting you from getting sick.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Some of the start-ups and consortia are building powerful lasers to generate fusion reactions, and others are exploring new kinds of fuels. Most of them are professing a similar vision — that they will be able to prove that their technology can produce competitively priced electricity this decade and build commercial plants to feed electricity into power grids soon after 2030.

Commonwealth’s new magnet, which will be one of the world’s most powerful, will be a crucial component in a compact nuclear fusion reactor known as a Tokamak, a design that uses magnetic forces to compress plasma until it is hotter than the sun. The reactor looks like a doughnut-shaped jar surrounded by magnets. Soviet physicists originally envisioned it in the 1950s.

Commonwealth Fusion executives claim that the magnet is a significant technology breakthrough that will make Tokamak designs commercially viable for the first time. They say they are not yet ready to test their reactor prototype, but the researchers are finishing the magnet and hope it will be workable by 2025.

The scientists in Massachusetts hope that this month they will demonstrate a magnetic field that is almost twice the strength of the magnets planned for use by a global consortium of the European Union and six other countries that is assembling a reactor in Cadarache, France. The consortium hopes to begin generating electricity at the site in 2035.

“If you go to a much higher magnetic field, you can go to a much smaller size,” said Bob Mumgaard, a plasma physicist who is chief executive of Commonwealth. He said that if it was possible to build a device just one-fiftieth the size of the planned reactor in France — which will be roughly as big as a soccer field — it would be able to generate almost as much power.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Follow our latest coverage of business, markets and economy.

Coinbase rides cryptomania to a $1.6 billion quarterly profit. Coinbase, the cryptocurrency exchange, said on Tuesday that its quarterly revenue soared by more than 1,000 percent and profits skyrocketed nearly 4,900 percent from a year earlier, in its second earnings report as a publicly traded company. Revenue totaled $2.2 billion in the three months ending in June, up from $186 million a year ago. Profit was $1.6 billion, compared with $32 million a year earlier. Coinbase went public in April, around the time the price of a single Bitcoin topped a record $60,000. The digital currency has since slumped and now hovers at around $45,337. In its earnings report, Coinbase warned of volatility and said it expected trades, its main source of revenue, to fall in the coming months. Coinbase’s listing served as a validating moment for cryptocurrencies, which have often been dismissed as a tool for criminals and speculators. But the company, which trades on the Nasdaq stock exchange and is valued at $70 billion, has shown that a large, profitable and legal business can be built to service the growing groups of people who want to use the digital currencies. Alongside Coinbase’s public listing, the run-up in the price of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies sparked a wave of mainstream interest in the digital assets. Tesla and Square have bought a stockpile of the tokens. Wall Street banks have expanded their crypto offerings. El Salvador has even said it will accept Bitcoin as legal tender. That also has prompted more regulatory scrutiny. China has cracked down on cryptocurrency mining operations. U.S. regulators are investigating ways to tax and control the assets. This week, the Senate approved an infrastructure spending bill that included new taxes for digital assets, which industry leaders opposed for being too vague and broad. In a letter to shareholders, Coinbase cited data that said 13 percent of Americans have traded cryptocurrencies in the last year, compared with 24 percent who have traded stocks. “These adoption trends paired with recent government attention on crypto as a revenue source suggests we have reached an inflection point,” the company said. “Crypto has arrived.” Read more

On CNN, covering one Cuomo while another is on vacation. CNN has barred Chris Cuomo from engaging in strategy sessions with the governor’s aides. Credit... Mike Coppola/Getty Images for Turner CNN went into red-alert mode on Tuesday to cover the stunning resignation of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, carrying his remarks live and patching in Empire State political veterans by phone. A different Cuomo was glaringly absent: Chris Cuomo, the governor’s brother and CNN’s top-rated anchor, whose family link to a national scandal has proved increasingly tricky for the cable network to navigate. He is off this week on what he described as a planned vacation for his birthday. Chris Cuomo has regularly spoken with Governor Cuomo by telephone over the past week and advised his brother to resign, said two people who requested anonymity to describe sensitive private conversations. The anchor concluded last week that his brother could not survive the political maelstrom, as the governor’s longtime allies abandoned him and support in the Democratic establishment dwindled, the people said. CNN has barred Chris Cuomo from engaging in strategy sessions with the governor’s aides, but the network has said it would not prohibit him from speaking directly with his brother about the scandal. That distinction is unlikely to placate critics who say CNN erred in allowing Chris Cuomo to keep broadcasting his 9 p.m. news and commentary program while his brother became the focus of a harassment scandal. It was a difficult situation for the network and its president, Jeff Zucker, who had criticized Fox News when its prime-time hosts were enmeshed in former President Donald J. Trump’s administration and campaign. “Cuomo Prime Time” also helped burnish Andrew Cuomo’s national reputation last year. The governor repeatedly appeared on the program to discuss his response to the nascent pandemic, and his intimate, lengthy on-air conversations with Chris Cuomo, who had fallen ill with the coronavirus, riveted viewers. In May, Chris Cuomo apologized to viewers after it emerged that he had counseled his brother’s aides on how to respond to the sexual misconduct accusations, but the anchor said his loyalty resided with “family first, job second.” At the time, CNN called his actions “inappropriate,” but it did not discipline him. The New York Times reported last week that CNN executives had also offered a temporary leave to Chris Cuomo if he wanted to formally advise his brother, with a promise that he could return to his show. He declined to take a leave. CNN declined to comment on Tuesday beyond its past statements about its anchor. On Tuesday, CNN’s afternoon shows covered Andrew Cuomo’s resignation, with the anchor John King telling viewers, “You’ve been watching, simply, blockbuster news.” Fox News, whose commentators have long derided the governor, included segments about Chris Cuomo’s awkward role at CNN in its coverage of the resignation. But Chris Cuomo has received some sympathy from one Fox News host. On his Monday show, Tucker Carlson said he would not criticize the CNN anchor for wanting to help his brother in a crisis. “It’s understandable,” Mr. Carlson said. “It’s his brother. Your loyalty should be to your family above all else.” Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The U.S. reaches a deal with a group of Mexican factories over allegations of labor violations. The Biden administration said on Tuesday that it had reached an agreement with a group of auto parts factories in Mexico to address accusations of labor violations. The case posed an early test of the labor protections in the new North American trade deal. Three months ago, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and other groups filed a complaint with the administration alleging labor violations at the Tridonex auto parts factories in Matamoros, across the border from Brownsville, Texas. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. said workers had been harassed and fired for seeking to organize with an independent union in place of a company-controlled union. Under the deal, Tridonex agreed to provide more than $600,000 in severance and back pay to workers who had been dismissed. It also agreed to a number of steps to help ensure workers’ collective-bargaining rights. The complaint about the Tridonex factories was brought under a novel “rapid response” mechanism in the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, known as the U.S.M.C.A., that allows for complaints to be brought against individual factories if workers are being denied their rights to free association and collective bargaining. In June, the Biden administration asked Mexico to review whether labor violations were occurring at the Tridonex factories. Another case under the mechanism this year involved reported labor violations at a General Motors facility in Mexico. “Workers at home and abroad deserve the right to collectively bargain for a fair wage and decent working conditions without the fear of retaliation,” the United States trade representative, Katherine Tai, said in a statement on Tuesday. She said the agreement with Tridonex showed “our determination to leverage the U.S.M.C.A.’s innovative enforcement tools to address longstanding labor issues.” Mike Carr, the chief executive of Cardone Industries, Tridonex’s parent company, which is based in Philadelphia, said in a statement, “We are pleased to conclusively resolve this U.S.M.C.A. petition and to collaborate with the Mexican and U.S. governments on our voluntary action plan.” Cardone did not admit being at fault and does not believe that workers’ rights were denied at the Tridonex factories, it said in a news release about the agreement. Read more

Dominion sues Newsmax and One America News. Christopher Ruddy, the owner of Newsmax and a Trump confidant, responded to the lawsuit by saying that “Newsmax simply reported on allegations made by well-known public figures.” Credit... Scott McIntyre for The New York Times Dominion Voting Systems, an election technology company that became a target of a baseless pro-Trump conspiracy theory about rigged voting machines, sued the right-wing television networks Newsmax and One America News on Tuesday, accusing them of defamation. Dominion, which also sued Fox News this year, argued in the filings that both channels served as platforms for flagrant falsehoods that devastated its reputation. “The defendants named show no remorse, nor any sign they intend to stop spreading disinformation,” Dominion’s chief executive, John Poulos, said in a statement. “We have no choice but to seek to hold those responsible to account.” Dominion is seeking $1.6 billion in damages from each network. The company also sued Patrick Byrne, the former chief executive of Overstock.com, who has publicly accused Dominion of rigging votes to ensure that President Donald J. Trump would not be re-elected. Mr. Byrne also falsely portrayed Dominion as linked to Hugo Chávez, the long-dead Venezuelan president. Dominion had previously sued Mr. Trump’s lawyers Rudolph Giuliani and Sidney Powell for defamation, along with Mike Lindell, the chief executive of MyPillow and another Trump partisan who has relentlessly spread conspiracy theories about the 2020 election. Fox News has filed a motion to dismiss the Dominion suit. Newsmax, which is owned by Christopher Ruddy, a Trump confidant, responded in a statement on Tuesday: “Newsmax simply reported on allegations made by well-known public figures, including the president, his advisers and members of Congress. Dominion’s action today is a clear attempt to squelch such reporting and undermine a free press.” Representatives for One America News did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Big banks are raising salaries for junior staff to counter burnout. Morgan Stanley has a vaccine mandate for staff and visitors to its New York offices. Credit... Jeenah Moon for The New York Times Hardly a day goes by without a big bank announcing a significant rise in starting salaries for its youngest employees. JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup, UBS and Morgan Stanley are now paying first-year bankers $100,000, while Evercore, Jefferies and Goldman Sachs will pay $110,000. In most cases, base salaries for first-year analysts were previously $85,000 to $95,000. The pay is rising as the heavy workloads caused by high deal flow have led to complaints about burnout in the junior ranks. A notoriously grueling job has become even more challenging during the pandemic, junior bankers say, given the lack of camaraderie and networking when working in isolation from home. The surge in coronavirus cases as a result of the Delta variant has made return-to-office plans less certain, complicating many banks’ aggressive push to bring people back in the office, in part for the sake of morale. More money could help attract and retain junior bankers, but now that most of the major players have landed at about the same rate, it isn’t necessarily a competitive advantage. Flexible working schedules for those back at the office, Zoom-free Fridays and other nonmonetary perks could help. More immediately, the DealBook newsletter notes, it’s worth watching to see if pandemic precautions at the office become a differentiator in Wall Street’s war for talent. The boutique bank Jefferies said on Monday that it would mandate vaccines for those returning to the office, a decision made partly in response to the Delta variant. The bank’s executives said in a letter last month that while “the vast preponderance” of workers at the bank were vaccinated, it recorded 40 new cases of Covid, mostly mild but including two “short hospitalizations.” Morgan Stanley also has a vaccine mandate for staff and visitors to its New York offices, while other banks, like Goldman Sachs, require employees to log their vaccination status before going to the office but don’t mandate vaccination. Bank of America has said it was focused on bringing back vaccinated employees first to corporate headquarters next month. It’s a different calculation for the biggest banks, with universal policies hard to impose on operations across the country, from Wall Street offices to Middle America retail branches. As some banks, like Wells Fargo, have recently delayed their planned office returns, JPMorgan announced that it was only reinstating mask requirements for all U.S. employees, many of whom are back in offices on rotations. But a memo to staff from the bank’s operating committee flagged a potential change to its workplace policy down the road: “We deeply appreciate your efforts and will continue with our previously stated return to the office schedule as we learn more about how hybrid working may work for our company.” Lananh Nguyen contributed reporting. Read more

SoftBank’s big profit report hints at potential trouble ahead. SoftBank’s investors are worried about its exposure to Chinese tech companies that are facing tougher regulatory scrutiny at home. Credit... Yuki Iwamura/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images TOKYO — SoftBank, the Japanese conglomerate that has become a major investor in the technology space, on Tuesday reported a profit of 762 billion yen, or $6.9 billion, for the three months that ended on June 30. That would be an impressive number for just about any company. But SoftBank could face uncertainty ahead, as technology investors focused on Chinese internet firms absorb the impact of Beijing’s tightening regulatory grip. By the numbers, SoftBank’s profit was a nearly 40 percent drop from a year earlier. That year-ago period, however, included a nearly $6.7 billion gain from the loss of its control of Sprint, the American telecom that the Japanese firm sold to T-Mobile last year. In SoftBank’s most prominent businesses these days — investing in other companies — it reported more than $11 billion in gains, compared with $8.9 billion a year earlier. SoftBank’s Vision Fund, the investment vehicle it controls, has become a technology heavyweight, strengthening the company’s bottom line. This spring, SoftBank announced the highest annual earnings in history for a Japanese-listed company: more than $46 billion for the year that ended in March. But with SoftBank’s successes have come a string of failures, particularly in 2019 with the spectacular implosion of the work space start-up WeWork, which cost the company billions of dollars and tarnished the reputation of its founder and impresario, Masayoshi Son. In 2019, SoftBank began a second iteration of its Vision Fund with tens of billions of dollars of its own money after the WeWork debacle scared off other potential investors. Last year, under pressure from outside investors, the company began a $23 billion stock buyback program, financed partly with loans against its holdings in the Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba. The purchases helped send its stock price to record levels. But it didn’t last: The company’s shares have fallen more than 35 percent since peaking in March. In recent months, SoftBank’s shares have come under new pressure from investors worried about its exposure to Chinese tech companies that are facing tougher regulatory scrutiny at home. Chinese regulators have tightened their grip on an industry that flourished under light regulation in previous years. In April, regulators fined Alibaba $2.8 billion. SoftBank said on Tuesday that it had lost nearly $1 billion from financial derivatives backed by Alibaba shares. It could take another hit in the next quarter from its investments in the Chinese logistics firm Full Truck Alliance and the Chinese ride-hailing giant Didi, whose shares have dropped after it came under its own scrutiny from Beijing. SoftBank has around 50 percent of its asset tied up in Chinese firms, with 41 percent in Alibaba alone. In an earnings conference, Mr. Son, who described himself as a risk-taker, implied that even he had limits. The company, he said, is slowing the pace of its investments in China as it waits to see how the regulatory situation shakes out. “That’s something that we would like to be careful about and be cautious,” he said. “Once we have a bit better view, then we would like to resume the investments.” Asked about a possible share buyback, Mr. Son said that the company had no current plans, but that given the recent decline in its stock price, it was something that warranted consideration. The question, he said, is not if but “‘How big and when?’” “That’s something that we are studying every day,” he added. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Google will add privacy steps for teenagers on its search engine and YouTube. Google says it plans additional privacy measures to protect teenage users on YouTube and its search engine, becoming the latest technology giant to adopt tougher standards in the face of criticism that companies are not doing enough to protect children. In a blog post on Tuesday, Google announced that videos uploaded to YouTube by users 13 to 17 years old would be private by default, allowing the content to be seen only by the users and people they designate. Google also will start to allow anyone under 18 years old, or a parent or guardian, to request the removal of that minor’s images from Google Image search results, the company said. It is unclear whether this process will be easy and responsive, considering Google’s historical reluctance to remove items from search results. In addition, Google said it would turn off location history for all users younger than 18 and eliminate the option for them to turn it back on. The company plans to roll out the changes in the “coming weeks,” it said. There is growing bipartisan support in Washington to press technology companies to do more to protect children. In the last few months, two pieces of legislation, one in the House and one in the Senate, seek to update the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act. The 1998 law, known as COPPA, restricts the tracking and targeting of children under 13 years old, and the bills would extend those protections to teenagers. Google has repeatedly faced scrutiny over its handling of data related to children. In 2019, it agreed to pay a $170 million fine for violating COPPA by collecting children’s data without parental consent. Google’s announcement comes on the heels of changes unveiled last month by Facebook to protect teenage users on Instagram. Among the advertising and privacy policy changes, one will make accounts created by children under 16 private by default, Instagram said. Both Facebook and Google said they were limiting the ability of marketers to target teenagers with advertising, but in slightly different ways. Facebook said advertisers would be able to target people under 18 based only on their age, gender and location — and not on their interests or their activity on other apps and websites. Google said it would block personalized ads that were based on age, gender or interests to people under 18. It will still allow ads based on context, such as a person’s search requests. Read more

Recovery of business travel hits a Delta variant speed bump. The rise in virus cases has tempered forecasts for a swift recovery in business travel. Credit... Dan Kitwood/Getty Images Leisure travel roared back this summer, but the airline and hotel industries long depended on business travel for a substantial portion of their revenue because those customers, who often made their plans at the last minute, could be counted on to pay more for seats and rooms. Now that the pandemic has upended the notion that travel is necessary to do business, the question is how much it will resume, even when the coronavirus is brought under control. And now the spread of the Delta variant of the virus is throwing a yet another wrench into businesses’ plans, Jane L. Levere writes in The New York Times. A pressing question is whether the jump in cases will be brief or more long-lived. Even the experts who were most optimistic about the prospects for business travel a month or so ago have begun to temper their forecasts. The quick change was captured by a survey of 1,200 American travelers that Destination Analysts, a market research firm in San Francisco, conducted from July 21 to 23. Among business travelers, it found, nearly 25 percent expected the “coronavirus situation” to worsen in the next month, a jump from under 14 percent two weeks earlier. The U.S. Travel Association said in late July that it continued to forecast “a modest return of business travel over the coming months, so the increase in cases has not materially affected our view.” It said it now expected that business travel would “only achieve 50 percent of 2019 levels in the fourth quarter of 2021.” Travel experts nevertheless remain optimistic that business travel will pick up substantially later this year and early in 2022. Or as Christopher J. Nassetta, the president and chief executive of Hilton, put it on an earnings call last month, “People have to meet.” Scott Graf, global president of BCD Meetings & Events, said that in light of the spread of the Delta variant, “we’ll likely see some cancellations or certainly meetings being pushed out by weeks or months.” “I may be optimistic,” he added, “but it is my hope that vaccination progress will increase dramatically over the next 60 to 90 days and that the fourth quarter and early 2022 will still be quite strong.” Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Unvaccinated and worried what their co-workers will think. Companies are figuring out their own guidelines, leaving workers to navigate a patchwork of disparate policies. Credit... Jeenah Moon for The New York Times As some workplaces have begun determining how to safely bring employees back to the office, the choice of getting a coronavirus vaccine is becoming increasingly public, Sydney Ember and Coral Murphy Marcos report in The New York Times. The vaccines have been shown to be vigorously effective against severe illness and death after infection, including the highly contagious Delta variant, and public health officials, doctors and political leaders are urging inoculation. The Kaiser Family Foundation reported in late July that more than 90 percent of Covid-19 cases, hospitalizations and deaths have occurred among people who are unvaccinated or not yet fully vaccinated. “The more people who are out there without the vaccine, the more Covid will spread,” said Luisa Borrell, distinguished professor at the CUNY Graduate School of Public Health & Health Policy. A growing number of companies are mandating vaccines as a condition of employment, leaving unvaccinated workers at risk of being fired. CNN, which has required full vaccinations for all employees working in its offices and in the field, said on Thursday that it had fired three people who went into the office unvaccinated. Many others are adopting less sweeping — but perhaps more conspicuous — approaches, including mask mandates for unvaccinated workers or the requirement that they work remotely. Tension between the vaccinated and the unvaccinated has simmered since the shots became more widely available in the spring. But with the virus’s resurgence has come mounting frustration among vaccinated Americans toward the unvaccinated, making some unvaccinated workers especially circumspect about revealing themselves. Read more

The Senate passes the infrastructure bill, and turns to the Democratic budget. Video transcript Back bars 0:00 / 1:40 - 0:00 transcript Senate Passes Sweeping $1 Trillion Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill The Senate approved a $1 trillion package to improve and modernize the nation’s aging infrastructure through a bipartisan 69-to-30 vote. The legislation now must pass the House. “It’s been a long and winding road, but we have persisted and now we have arrived. There were many logs in our path, detours along the way, but the American people will now see the most robust injection of funds into infrastructure in decades. In a few moments, the Senate will pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill, dedicating over $1 trillion to strengthen every major category of our country’s physical infrastructure. Today, the Senate takes a decades overdue step to revitalize America’s infrastructure and give our workers, our businesses, our economy, the tools to succeed in the 21st century.” “There’s a joke around town that ‘infrastructure week’ has come and gone so many times that people are a little cynical when we talk about it. Well, today is ‘infrastructure day.’ We’re actually going to see what we’ve been talking about, which is the Senate on a bipartisan basis saying, you know what, it is time to fix our roads and bridges. We can do so in a responsible way, not by raising taxes on the American people, but by making important investments in long-term capital assets that will last for years. So it’s an investment in fixing up our roads, our bridges, our water systems, our railroads, our ports, our electrical grids, our broadband network — and expanding that— and more.” “On this vote, the yeas are 69, the nays are 30. The bill as amended is passed.” The Senate approved a $1 trillion package to improve and modernize the nation’s aging infrastructure through a bipartisan 69-to-30 vote. The legislation now must pass the House. Credit Credit... Tom Brenner for The New York Times The Senate on Tuesday passed a sweeping $1 trillion bipartisan infrastructure package, capping weeks of intense negotiations and debate over the largest federal investment in the nation’s aging public works system in more than a decade. The final tally was 69 to 30, and Vice President Kamala Harris gaveled the vote closed. The legislation, which still must pass the House, would touch nearly every facet of the American economy and fortify the nation’s response to the warming of the planet. It would greatly increase funding to modernize the nation’s power grid and finance projects to better manage climate risks, and it would devote hundreds of billions of dollars to repair and replace aging public works projects. The legislation was largely negotiated by a group of 10 Senate Republicans and Democrats and White House officials. After the vote, President Biden celebrated the news in remarks at the White House, where he thanked Democrats and Republicans for pushing through the package. “They said they’re willing to work in a bipartisan manner and I want to thank them for keeping their word, that’s just what they did,” Mr. Biden said. “After years and years of infrastructure week, we’re on the cusp of an infrastructure decade.” “America, this is how we truly build back better,” he added. “This bill is going to put people to work, modernizing our roads and our highways and our bridges.” Video transcript Back bars 0:00 / 1:41 - 0:00 transcript Biden Thanks Senators for Passing Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill President Biden celebrated the Senate’s passage of a $1 trillion package to upgrade roads, bridges, rail and water systems as a win for bipartisanship in American government. The bill now goes to the House. I want to thank a group of senators, Democrats and Republicans, for doing what they told me they would do. The death of this legislation was mildly premature, as reported. They said they’re willing to work in a bipartisan manner, and I want to thank them for keeping their word — that’s just what they did. After years and years of “infrastructure week,” we’re on the cusp of an infrastructure decade that I truly believe will transform America. America has often had the greatest prosperity and made the most progress when we invest in America itself. And that’s what this infrastructure bill does with overwhelming support from the United States Senate — 69 votes in the Senate. A vote margin bigger than the Interstate highway system passed the Senate in 1956. Makes key investments that will, one, create millions of good union jobs all across the country, in cities, small towns, rural and tribal communities. America, America, this is how we truly build back better. This bill is going to put people to work, modernizing our roads and our highways and our bridges. I know compromise is hard for both sides, but it’s important. It’s important, it’s necessary for democracy to be able to function. Just want to thank everyone on both sides of the aisle for supporting this bill. Today, we proved that democracy can still work. President Biden celebrated the Senate’s passage of a $1 trillion package to upgrade roads, bridges, rail and water systems as a win for bipartisanship in American government. The bill now goes to the House. Credit Credit... Pete Marovich for The New York Times Ahead of the final passage, at least three Republicans who had been tangentially involved with negotiations of the bill announced their opposition. One, Senator Mike Rounds of South Dakota, was absent for the vote, but he registered his concerns early Tuesday. Yet despite criticism from former President Donald J. Trump, many Republicans, including Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the minority leader, embraced federal aid for their states. Mr. Trump, who blew up infrastructure talks during his administration, issued another missive early Tuesday, declaring Mr. McConnell “the most overrated man in politics,” in part for allowing the bill to advance. Democrats immediately after took up a $3.5 trillion budget blueprint that will unlock their ability to muscle through an expansive social policy package over unanimous Republican objections. Under the fast-track budget reconciliation process, that blueprint, if passed with a simple majority, will dictate the parameters of a transformative package expected to provide funding for health care, climate change, education and child care, and to increase taxes on wealthy people and corporations. The budget can pass, however, only after a marathon of rapid-fire votes, known as a vote-a-rama, that is expected to stretch at least through midnight Wednesday. Mr. McConnell, speaking on the Senate floor Tuesday, said hundreds of amendments had been prepared, centered on national security funding, federal funding for abortions, tax increases and immigration. “Republicans do not currently have the votes to spare American families this nightmare,” Mr. McConnell said. “But we will debate. We will vote. We will stand up and be counted, and the people of this country will know exactly which senators fought for them.” The House, which had been scheduled to remain out of Washington through mid-September, changed course Tuesday evening, with House Democratic leaders announcing the chamber would return the week of Aug. 23 to consider the budget blueprint after its expected passage in the Senate. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Here’s what happened in the markets today. The S&P 500 rose 0.1 percent on Tuesday, while the Nasdaq composite fell half a percent.

West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. crude benchmark, rose nearly 3 percent. Oil prices had dropped Monday amid concerns that the Delta variant could threaten the global economic recovery as China, the world’s second-largest economy, imposed new restrictions to try to contain its worst outbreak in more than a year.

The Stoxx 600 Europe gained 0.4 percent, while Asian markets closed mostly higher.

After climbing early in the day, AMC Entertainment’s stock fell 6 percent. The company’s financial performance for the three months ending in June was better than analysts expected, even as it still lost money in the quarter. The company’s revenue is still down 70 percent from the same period in 2019.

The company, which was on the verge of bankruptcy earlier this year, has embraced its status as a meme stock — the label for a group of wildly volatile stocks that have become favorites of small traders who have pushed up prices.

The latest: Mountain Dew plans a line of drinks with alcohol but without caffeine or sugar. Boston Beer Company and PepsiCo have a new partnership for Hard Mtn Dew. Credit... Boston Beer Company PepsiCo and Boston Beer Company, the maker of Sam Adams, are planning to start making Hard Mtn Dew, a sugarless, caffeine-free malt drink with 5 percent alcohol content, Boston Beer Company said on Tuesday. The release from the companies included images showing watermelon, black cherry and classic Mountain Dew flavors. The new drink line is the latest effort by the companies to expand beyond beer and soda as sales of those products level off or shrink. Boston Beer, which also owns the Dogfish Head beer brand, has been adding nonbeer drinks including Twisted Tea, Angry Orchard cider and, most recently, Truly Iced Tea Hard Seltzer. PepsiCo has made big bets on nonalcoholic seltzer by introducing Bubly and buying SodaStream for $3.2 billion.

Boeing said Tuesday that it gained orders for 14 planes in July after accounting for cancellations, representing its sixth consecutive month of net sales. The company has benefited from a strong recovery of air travel within the United States, though sales have been uneven in the rest of the world. Boeing delivered 28 planes to customers last month and its order backlog now stands at 4,141.

Twitter on Tuesday suspended Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene, Republican of Georgia, from its service for seven days after she posted that the Food and Drug Administration should not approve the coronavirus vaccines and that the vaccines were “failing.” The company said that this was Ms. Greene’s fourth “strike,” which means that under the company’s rules she could be permanently barred if she violated Twitter’s coronavirus misinformation policy again.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The company’s problems have been building for years, but lenders, big investors and home buyers alike are treating it as though it is about to fail. By one estimate, Evergrande owes more than $300 billion. Creditors are not sure it can pay the bills. Business partners have filed lawsuits.

Property in China is prone to big swings. Speculative buying propels prices to soar. Local governments then step in to cool things down, sometimes with a heavy hand. Despite the ups and downs, the residential real estate market is still the largest store of Chinese household wealth.

For Xu Jiayin, Evergrande’s billionaire founder, the wild ride has mostly followed one trajectory: up.

A former steel factory technician, he founded Evergrande in 1996 just as China was embarking on the gargantuan task of moving hundreds of millions of people from the countryside to cities. As property prices climbed with this urbanization, so did Mr. Xu’s wealth.

After publicly listing his company in 2009, he began to expand the business into new areas. Evergrande took control of Guangzhou’s soccer club in 2010 and spent billions of dollars on foreign players. It then moved into the dairy, grain and oil businesses. At one point, it even tried pig farming.

As the business grew, Mr. Xu was able to attract tens of billions of dollars in funding from foreign and domestic investors and cheap loans from Chinese banks. The success came with strong political connections. A member of China’s People’s Political Consultative Conference, an advisory body to the central government, Mr. Xu is a presence at the most important political gatherings in Beijing every year.

His proximity to power also gave investors and banks the confidence they needed to keep lending to the company. Over the years when regulators have stepped in to try to curtail Evergrande’s business, they have usually eased off soon after. By 2019, Mr. Xu was one of the richest property developers in the world.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@CNN has barred Chris Cuomo from engaging in strategy sessions with the governor’s aides, but the network has said it would not prohibit him from speaking directly with his brother about the scandal.

That distinction is unlikely to placate critics who say CNN erred in allowing Chris Cuomo to keep broadcasting his 9 p.m. news and commentary program while his brother became the focus of a harassment scandal. It was a difficult situation for the network and its president, Jeff Zucker, who had criticized Fox News when its prime-time hosts were enmeshed in former President Donald J. Trump’s administration and campaign.

“Cuomo Prime Time” also helped burnish Andrew Cuomo’s national reputation last year. The governor repeatedly appeared on the program to discuss his response to the nascent pandemic, and his intimate, lengthy on-air conversations with Chris Cuomo, who had fallen ill with the coronavirus, riveted viewers.

In May, Chris Cuomo apologized to viewers after it emerged that he had counseled his brother’s aides on how to respond to the sexual misconduct accusations, but the anchor said his loyalty resided with “family first, job second.” At the time, CNN called his actions “inappropriate,” but it did not discipline him.

The New York Times reported last week that CNN executives had also offered a temporary leave to Chris Cuomo if he wanted to formally advise his brother, with a promise that he could return to his show. He declined to take a leave. CNN declined to comment on Tuesday beyond its past statements about its anchor.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@While the N.S.A. rarely comments on allegations about its activities, the accusation prompted a rare public denial from the agency, which called it “untrue” and said “Carlson has never been an intelligence target of the agency and the N.S.A. has never had any plans to try to take his program off the air.”

That carefully worded statement, however, left open the possibility that the agency may have incidentally swept up some communications of or about Mr. Carlson as it conducted surveillance of foreigners for intelligence purposes, without intentionally targeting him as part of any nefarious plot to take his program off the air.

In early July, it emerged that Mr. Carlson had been trying to secure an interview with Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin. But in making his accusation, Mr. Carlson had not disclosed to his viewers that he had been reaching out to the Russian government via Kremlin intermediaries at the time.

That context was important. If the National Security Agency, as a matter of routine foreign intelligence-gathering, were targeting a Kremlin-linked Russian who interacted with Mr. Carlson, the agency would have incidentally gathered the communications between its target and the Fox News host without having set out to intercept any of Mr. Carlson’s private messages and without monitoring what he was saying to anyone else.

Similarly, if the agency were targeting a government official in Russia who talked about Mr. Carlson’s outreach with the intermediary he had spoken to or with anyone else, then it would have picked up information about what Mr. Carlson was saying on that topic from such discussions about him.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@But perhaps people will be willing to work harder at certain jobs if compensation is higher. There is a theory of “efficiency wages” that suggests, in effect, that employers get what they pay for — that paying more means a higher-performing work force.

“If you want extra effort, you pay people extra,” said Steven J. Davis, an economist at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. “You would expect to see some positive productivity benefits of compensating people to put forth more effort per hour than they normally would. Will it be sustained? Maybe if wages stay high.”

The work-from-home effect

In the space of just a few weeks in 2020, millions of American workers who once commuted to an office most of the time learned how to work from home. It could have lasting economic ripple effects if even a modest portion of them continue to work from home some or all of the time.

“Employers are embracing this as a long-term solution and taking the steps to invest in the appropriate technology to make it really effective,” said Julia Pollak, a labor economist at ZipRecruiter. “There is a lot of soul-searching going on and companies sharing best practices on how to create corporate cultural virtually.”

At the height of the pandemic, the vast majority of office workers worked from home. In the post-pandemic world, those jobs that most require in-person collaboration may return to offices, but those that can be easily done remotely may stay remote.

“The important thing to understand is that it’s not that working from home is better for everybody, but that once the pandemic is over, the kinds of people for whom it doesn’t work very well won’t continue it,” Professor Davis said. “It’s a selection of people who have figured out how to make remote work work, and that’s where the productivity gains are coming from.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Walter Yetnikoff, who led CBS Records during the boom years of Michael Jackson’s “Thriller” album and lived the sex, drugs and rock ’n’ roll life more indulgently than many of his stars did, died on Monday at a hospital in Bridgeport, Conn. He was 87.

His wife, Lynda Yetnikoff, said the cause was cancer.

Mr. Yetnikoff was one of the most powerful, insatiable and abrasive figures in music in the years just before the digital revolution upended the business.

He was among a small group of powerful executives who shaped the record business in the rock era, including Clive Davis (who led Columbia Records and founded Arista Records), David Geffen of Asylum and Ahmet Ertegun of Atlantic. He strode through those heady days of hit records brashly, licentiously and, by his own admission, often drunk or drug-addled.

Though he never claimed to have much of an ear for music, he was adept at pacifying the stars on his roster — who in addition to Mr. Jackson included Bruce Springsteen, Barbra Streisand and Billy Joel — and at outmaneuvering competitors and perceived enemies, at least into the late 1980s.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dominion Voting Systems, an election technology company that became a target of a baseless pro-Trump conspiracy theory about rigged voting machines, sued the right-wing television networks Newsmax and One America News on Tuesday, accusing them of defamation.

Dominion, which also sued Fox News this year, argued in the filings that both channels served as platforms for flagrant falsehoods that devastated its reputation.

“The defendants named show no remorse, nor any sign they intend to stop spreading disinformation,” Dominion’s chief executive, John Poulos, said in a statement. “We have no choice but to seek to hold those responsible to account.”

Dominion is seeking $1.6 billion in damages from each network. The company also sued Patrick Byrne, the former chief executive of Overstock.com, who has publicly accused Dominion of rigging votes to ensure that President Donald J. Trump would not be re-elected. Mr. Byrne also falsely portrayed Dominion as linked to Hugo Chávez, the long-dead Venezuelan president.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Consumer prices rose at a rapid clip in July as the reopening of the economy kept inflation elevated at levels that are making officials at the Federal Reserve squirm while posing a political problem for the Biden White House.

Prices increased by 5.4 percent last month compared with a year earlier, the Labor Department’s Consumer Price Index showed on Wednesday, matching the prior month’s increase. The gains are beginning to moderate on a monthly basis, but inflation remains much faster than it was before the pandemic.

Underpinning the pop is a rapidly rebounding economy, which has recovered to its prepandemic size remarkably quickly as consumers emerged from lockdowns and spent heavily on everything from cars to vacations. But with supply chains disrupted, some industries have struggled to catch up with that booming consumer demand, and that’s leading to higher costs for cars and other goods and services.

Economists expected that prices would pick up this year after inflation slumped in 2020, but the extent of the jump has come as a surprise. Gains are widely expected to begin cooling, but the key question for the Fed, and for elected officials in the White House and on Capitol Hill, is just how much and how quickly they’ll slow down.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Then came the Delta variant. As the highly contagious version flared across the United States, cities and states were forced to slow down their reopening plans, even as the rate of vaccinations slowed. And as renewed worries about Covid-19 overtook fears of runaway inflation, the return on the T-note tumbled, too.

The bumpy ride in the bond market mirrors a broader one-step-forward, two-steps-back dynamic that has become familiar to investors over the past decade or so. Since the slow recovery from the 2008 financial crisis — annual growth has averaged roughly 2.3 percent since 2010 — the economy has frustrated forecasters who predicted a return to the fast economic growth and higher inflation that prevailed in earlier decades.

At points when the economy has stumbled, bond yields have often come into focus as the surest sign of investors’ thinking.

In 2012, yields on Treasurys plunged to record-low levels as investors rushed to buy bonds after a sharp cutback in federal spending — along with slowdowns in China and Europe — that weighed on growth. And in 2016, when the economy suffered a growth slowdown that some now refer to as an “invisible recession,” bond yields tumbled sharply, hitting record lows that July.

When both the Trump and Biden administrations poured trillions of dollars into the economy during the pandemic, some expected that the fire hose of deficit spending would provide a short-term lift to growth and help the economy build up enough steam to eventually break the pattern of slow growth. But while government spending did juice the recovery — the economy has already rebounded from the sharp but brief recession last year, and is expected to grow more than 6 percent this year, the fastest pace since 1984 — the bond market is telling a less upbeat story.

Dan Ivascyn, group chief investment officer at PIMCO, a giant manager of bond funds, said the drop in the T-note yield partly reflected investors’ pessimism about a recovery, even after the historic stimulus efforts.

“I do think that the markets are looking at the situation, you know, looking at cycles since the early 1980s and saying, look, if this is insufficient to meaningfully change the growth and inflation process, what will?” Mr. Ivascyn said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Follow our latest coverage of business, markets and economy.

Lordstown Motors says it is likely to begin only ‘limited production’ of its electric truck this year. Lordstown Motors said it was considering renting out parts of its factory to other companies. Credit... David Dermer/Associated Press Lordstown Motors, the cash strapped electric pickup truck start-up, said on Wednesday that it will only begin “limited production” by the end of September and expects that to be the situation through the rest of this year. The company, in a release of second quarter financials, indicated it was still in need of cash to meet its eventual production goals. Lordstown said it had $366 million in cash on hand at the end of June and expected to have no more than $275 million available by the end of September unless it comes up with new financing. Lordstown previously has said that without new sources of financing it may not be able to continue as a “going concern.” The report comes after a tumultuous year for Lordstown. Expectations for the start-up grew after it merged with DiamondPeak Holdings, a cash-rich special purpose acquisition company led by a Wall Street real estate investor, which came calling with about $700 million to finance the deal. The company has burned through nearly half of that cash in just about six months. It said it was considering making room to “accommodate additional manufacturing partners” at a 6.2 million-square-foot factory in Ohio that it acquired from General Motors. The company, which has yet to produce a truck, said it lost $108 million in the second quarter. Lordstown has been on a downward spiral since March, when a research firm issued a report critical of the company’s claims that it had 100,000 in pre-orders for its still-to-be-built truck. The company has since disclosed that it is being investigated by federal prosecutors in New York and by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The company tried this summer to revive its fortunes by putting in a new management team following the resignation of Steve Burns, its founder and chief executive. Lordstown, which has warned investors that it is need of cash to continue operating, struck a deal to periodically sell shares to a New Jersey investment firm to raise up to $400 million. But auto industry experts contend that Lordstown will need much more money than that to produce its pickup, which it calls Endurance, at a scale that would make it commercially viable. Lordstown’s stock has tumbled since the spring, when it traded for a near-record price of about $31 a share. It closed on Wednesday at $5.58. Earlier this week, Workhorse Group, another electric vehicle manufacturer, disclosed that it had sold more than 70 percent of its original 10 percent stake in Lordstown, for about $79 million — $52 million less than the shares had originally been valued at. Workhorse was an early investor in Lordstown, in part because Mr. Burns had been Workhorse’s longtime chief executive before leaving in early 2019 to form Lordstown. Read more

McDonald’s, Capital One, N.Y. Stock Exchange and Amtrak require vaccines for some. More companies are announcing vaccination mandates, a move brought on by a rise in coronavirus cases. Credit... Gerald Herbert/Associated Press A rise in coronavirus cases brought on by the spread of the highly contagious Delta variant has pushed companies to grapple with vaccine mandates and delayed returns to the office. McDonald’s said Wednesday that it would require U.S.-based office workers to be vaccinated against the coronavirus. The requirement does not apply to employees of McDonald’s restaurants, whether corporate-owned or franchised. The company said it would push back its official office reopening to Oct. 11 from Sept. 7 to allow time for vaccinations. In addition, the company said U.S.-based office workers must wear masks when they are not eating, drinking or alone in an enclosed room. The news was shared with employees in an internal memo obtained by The New York Times. Capital One said that it would require all employees returning to the office to prove that they are vaccinated. “Unvaccinated associates should continue to work from home and will be supported in doing so,” the bank’s chief executive, Rich Fairbank, said in a memo to employees. Mr. Fairbank said that policy would be in place through at least the first three months of 2022. Capital One will also push back its return-to-office date to Nov. 2 from early September.

The New York Stock Exchange said that starting Sept. 13, anyone entering the iconic trading floor will need to be fully vaccinated. The Big Board is also expanding its random testing program to include vaccinated brokers and exchange employees who work on the floor, effective immediately, according to a memo from Michael Blaugrund, the N.Y.S.E.’s chief operating officer. The moves are “based on recent shifts in public health conditions as well as updated recommendations from federal, state and local authorities,” according to the memo.

All Amtrak employees must be fully vaccinated by Nov. 1, the rail service’s chief executive, Bill Flynn, said Wednesday in a companywide memo. Those who do not provide documentation will be required to be tested weekly for the coronavirus. In addition, all new hires as of Oct. 4 must be vaccinated to start work. The return to work sites has been extended to Nov. 1, and masks are required in all facilities, including offices, the company said. Vaccine mandates are legally allowed and have been held up in court challenges. But for various reasons, not all employers have applied blanket requirements. Here is how some companies are approaching them: 4 Different Return-to-Work Approaches Lauren Hirsch Reporting on back-to-office policies 💼 4 Different Return-to-Work Approaches Lauren Hirsch Reporting on back-to-office policies 💼 James Estrin/The New York Times Companies have mandated vaccines for their workers as the highly contagious Delta variant has driven a surge in coronavirus cases. But not all of these mandates look the same. Here’s what some companies are doing → 4 Different Return-to-Work Approaches Lauren Hirsch Reporting on back-to-office policies 💼 JPMorgan Chase encourages, but does not require, vaccinations. Until recently, this approach was the default. Companies have offered incentives for vaccination, such as cash bonuses. On Friday, JPMorgan announced that unvaccinated employees would be required to complete coronavirus testing twice a week. 4 Different Return-to-Work Approaches Lauren Hirsch Reporting on back-to-office policies 💼 Daniel Slim/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images Delta Air Lines requires vaccinations for new hires. It is unclear how many workers this policy will ultimately affect. The airline industry, like others, is facing a labor shortage. 4 Different Return-to-Work Approaches Lauren Hirsch Reporting on back-to-office policies 💼 Walmart requires vaccinations for some, but not all, of its employees. The country’s largest private employer requires vaccination for workers in its Bentonville, Ark., headquarters and for managers who travel in the U.S., but not for the majority of its employees, who work in its stores and elsewhere. A spokesperson said the limited mandate would send a message to all workers that they should get vaccinated. 4 Different Return-to-Work Approaches Lauren Hirsch Reporting on back-to-office policies 💼 Jeenah Moon for The New York Times Microsoft requires vaccines for all U.S. employees. The tech company, which employs roughly 100,000 people in the U.S., said in early August that it would require proof of vaccination for all employees, vendors and guests to enter its offices. Find more return-to-office stories in our DealBook newsletter. Workplace vaccine mandates reveal a divide among workers.

Walmart and Disney Join a Growing Group of Businesses Requiring Vaccines 3m ago









Item 1 of 6 Emily Flitter , Gregory Schmidt and Noam Scheiber contributed reporting. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The U.S. budget deficit eased last month as the economy recovered. The United States budget deficit is starting to ease from its pandemic highs as a recovering economy yields higher tax revenues and the gush of government relief spending begins to slow, Treasury Department figures showed on Wednesday. For the 12 months through July, the budget deficit declined by 10 percent from a year earlier to $2.54 trillion. The modest decline from last year’s record high came as spending on unemployment benefits and health care have started to slow and as companies and individuals are paying more in taxes because employers are returning to work and spending is picking up. For July, the federal government recorded a shortfall of $302 billion. That was the highest on record for the month, but revenue in July 2020 skewed higher because the usual April tax deadline was delayed last year. A Treasury official said that the numbers reflected a recovering economy. However, the official could offer no forecast for how long the Treasury Department could continue to use “extraordinary measures” to give Congress more time to raise or suspend the statutory debt limit, which expired this month. Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen called on Congress this week to take action to address the debt limit. On Wednesday, Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, urged lawmakers to follow the “historical precedent” and act on the debt limit on a bipartisan basis. More spending is most likely in store. The Senate passed a bipartisan infrastructure bill this week that the Congressional Budget Office estimated would increase the deficit by $256 billion. Democrats are now moving ahead with a $3.5 trillion budget plan that would tackle climate change and fund health care, child care, family leave and public education expansion while increasing taxes on wealthy people and corporations. Read more

Southwest Airlines expects the Delta variant to crimp demand. A Southwest Airlines ticketing agent helping travelers in July. The airline’s lower forecast is a rapid turnaround from a few weeks ago, when business was booming. Credit... David Zalubowski/Associated Press Southwest Airlines no longer expects to turn a profit in the third quarter as a recent rise in coronavirus cases slows sales and drives an increase in cancellations. In a securities filing on Wednesday, the company forecast revenue for the three months that end in September to be down 15 to 20 percent from the same period in 2019, a decline of three to four percentage points from its previous estimate. The revised forecast is a rapid turnaround from a few weeks ago, when Southwest and other major carriers said that business was booming and that the highly contagious Delta variant of the virus was not yet affecting sales. In fact, Southwest said Wednesday that it was profitable again in July, but that it no longer expected to turn a profit for the current quarter, at least after excluding the effect of federal payroll aid to the industry. Late last month, Scott Kirby, the chief executive of United Airlines, said the Delta variant had not affected sales at all. “The most likely outcome is that the recovery in demand continues largely unabated,” he said on a call to discuss quarterly financial results with analysts and reporters. After climbing for months, the number of people flying in the United States appears to have stagnated in recent weeks at about 80 percent of 2019 levels, according to Transportation Security Administration airport screening data. Still, more than 2.2 million people were screened on Aug. 1, the most relative to 2019 since the pandemic began. The rebound so far has mainly been driven by people traveling on vacations or visiting friends and family. Airlines had hoped that growing confidence in travel and a widespread return to offices in the fall would help accelerate a recovery in business travel, which has lagged behind the leisure rebound. But the Delta variant has dashed those hopes as a growing number of companies delay their office reopenings. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In acquiring a shareholder voting company, Robinhood backs its vow to ‘democratize finance.’ The co-founders of Robinhood, Baiju Bhatt, left, and Vlad Tenev. Credit... Andrew Kelly/Reuters Robinhood, the popular trading app for small investors, announced on Tuesday that it agreed to acquire Say Technologies, which specializes in digitizing shareholder votes, for $140 million. The takeover speaks to Robinhood’s pledge to “democratize finance,” the DealBook newsletter reports. Many retail investors buy shares but then don’t vote on things like executive pay packages and who sits on a company’s board. Nell Minow, a shareholder rights and corporate governance expert, said that making it easier for Robinhood’s users to vote their shares could shake up corporate boardrooms just like when millions of traders used the app to send meme stocks soaring this year. “Robinhood was at the kindergarten stage when it came to democratizing Wall Street, and this moves it up to at least the first year of high school,” Ms. Minow said. Individuals acting together could compel companies to take the lead on environmental and social justice issues, she said. But small investors tend to side with management more than institutional investors do, said Jonathon Zytnick, a research fellow at the Institute of Corporate Governance and Finance at N.Y.U. Law School. “Voting methods matter a ton getting retailer shareholders to vote,” Mr. Zytnick said. “And retail investors can perform a monitoring role, but at least right now, it is almost certainly wrong to think of this as a means of environment and social change.” But if there’s anything that the past few months have taught us, the behavior of big crowds of small investors is hard to predict. Read more

YouTube suspends Rand Paul for a week over a video disputing the effectiveness of masks. Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky was suspended from posting on YouTube for a week after publishing a video spreading Covid-19 misinformation. Credit... Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images YouTube on Tuesday removed a video by Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky for the second time and suspended him from publishing for a week after he posted a video that disputed the effectiveness of wearing masks to limit the spread of the coronavirus. A YouTube representative said the Republican senator’s claims in the three-minute video had violated the company’s policy on Covid-19 medical misinformation. The company policy bans videos that spread a wide variety of misinformation, including “claims that masks do not play a role in preventing the contraction or transmission of Covid-19.” “We apply our policies consistently across the platform, regardless of speaker or political views, and we make exceptions for videos that have additional context such as countervailing views from local health authorities,” the representative said in a statement. In the video, Mr. Paul says: “Most of the masks you get over the counter don’t work. They don’t prevent infection.” Later in the video, he adds, “Trying to shape human behavior isn’t the same as following the actual science, which tells us that cloth masks don’t work.” In fact, masks do work, according to the near-unanimous recommendations of public health experts. On Tuesday, Twitter suspended Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene, Republican of Georgia, for seven days after she posted that the Food and Drug Administration should not give the coronavirus vaccines full approval and that the vaccines were “failing.” On Twitter, Mr. Paul called his suspension “a badge of honor” and blamed “left-wing cretins at YouTube,” while linking to an alternative site to watch the video. The senator said in a statement that private companies had the right to bar him, but that YouTube’s decision was “a continuation of their commitment to act in lock step with the government.” “I think this kind of censorship is very dangerous, incredibly anti-free speech and truly anti-progress of science, which involves skepticism and argumentation to arrive at the truth,” he said. Last week, YouTube removed from his channel an eight-minute Newsmax interview in which the senator said that “there’s no value” in wearing masks. According to YouTube policy, the company issues a warning for a first offense, then the weeklong suspension is part of its “first strike” response to a second offense. The strike will be removed from his account after 90 days if there are no more violations. A second-strike in the 90 days would result in a two-week suspension, and the account would be permanently banned after a third strike. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

U.S. stocks edge higher as investors focus on inflation data. U.S. stocks rose on Wednesday after data showed monthly inflation in the United States rose in July roughly in line with economists’ expectations. The Consumer Price Index rose 0.5 percent from the previous month and 5.4 percent compared with a year earlier.

The S&P 500 index rose 0.3 percent by the end of the trading session.

The yield on 10-year U.S. Treasury notes fell to 1.33 percent from 1.36 percent.

Companies set to gain from a federally funded infrastructure push rose on Wednesday. Asphalt makers Vulcan Materials and Martin Marietta Materials both rose about 3.25 percent. United Rentals, which provides machinery for road and bridge building, rose 4.9 percent. The steel maker Nucor also rose 3.7 percent, helping to make the materials sector a top-performing part of the S&P 500.

Coinbase, the cryptocurrency exchange, rose 3.2 percent after the company said on Tuesday that its quarterly revenue soared by more than 1,000 percent and profit skyrocketed nearly 4,900 percent from a year earlier.

WW International, formerly known as Weight Watchers, fell more 24 percent on Wednesday after reporting a slowdown in subscriber growth during the second quarter.

A start-up thinks it may have cracked a technology needed for nuclear fusion. Image Bob Mumgaard, a plasma physicist, is chief executive of Commonwealth Fusion Systems in Cambridge, Mass. Credit... Tony Luong for The New York Times Image A testing machine used in the creation of powerful magnets that Commonwealth hopes will lead to a successful fusion reactor. Credit... Tony Luong for The New York Times Despite decades of investment, scientists have not yet created fusion systems that generate more power than they consume. But an extremely powerful magnet that is under development could open the gates toward what researchers believe could eventually be a fusion reactor. READ THE ARTICLE →

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Instagram is trying to make racist material harder to view as England’s soccer players face abuse. Marcus Rashford kneeling in support of the Black Lives Matter movement before a Manchester United match in March. He has called out “humanity and social media at its worst” for the bigoted messages he has received. Credit... Peter Powell/Pool Via Reuters Instagram is rolling out new features on Wednesday to make racist material harder to view. Among them, one will let users hide potentially harassing comments and messages from accounts that either don’t follow or recently followed them, Ryan Mac and Tariq Panja report for The New York Times. The actions follow a more than two-year campaign by English soccer to pressure Facebook and other social media companies to rein in online hate speech against their players. Soccer officials have since met numerous times with the platforms, sent an open letter calling for change and organized social media boycotts. Facebook’s employees have joined in, demanding that it to do more to stop the harassment. “The unfortunate reality is that tackling racism on social media, much like tackling racism in society, is complex,” Karina Newton, Instagram’s global head of public policy, said in a statement. “We’ve made important strides, many of which have been driven by our discussions with groups being targeted with abuse, like the U.K. football community.” But Facebook executives also privately acknowledge that racist speech against English soccer players is likely to continue. “No one thing will fix this challenge overnight,” Steve Hatch, Facebook’s director for Britain and Ireland, wrote last month in an internal note that The Times reviewed. Read more

Global economic recovery from the pandemic may be slowing, the O.E.C.D. says. Embracing the lifting of Covid-19 restrictions in Paris as cafes and restaurants across France reopened in May. Credit... Kiran Ridley/Getty Images Recovery in some of the world’s major economies appears to be slowing down as people spooked by the Delta variant spend less, travel less and dine out less, according to a new report by the Organization for Economic Development and Cooperation, the research and policy group of the world’s richest countries. In recent months, as vaccination rates increased globally, optimism that life appeared to be returning to normal helped spur consumer spending from Ohio to Paris to Beijing. But that renewed sense of confidence may be ebbing amid news of breakout infections, lockdowns and other requirements. In countries like France and Italy, people now need health passes — paper or digital proof of being fully vaccinated, a recent negative test or recent Covid-19 recovery — to attend big concerts and to enter cinemas, museums and theaters. The O.E.C.D., a Paris-based organization, looked at economic indicators including employment, retail sales, manufacturing output and wage growth in 38 member countries. It said the indicators suggested that growth in major economies like the United States and China may be slowing down, with similar signs of sputtering in Europe, including in Britain, France and Germany. The group said that there might be higher than usual fluctuations in how economic recoveries are playing out because of persistent uncertainties, “despite the gradual lifting of Covid-19 containment measures in some countries and the progress of vaccination campaigns.” The report also said that growth was slowing in Russia and Brazil, where the pandemic has buffeted society and industry. In Brazil, millions have gone hungry in recent months, with scenes of undernourished teenagers holding placards at traffic stops with the word hunger in large print. China, a manufacturing powerhouse, has played a leading role in an upward global economic trend. But some economists say that its growth has started to level off in recent months and that the government’s tougher pandemic restrictions could undermine it. There have been some cautiously encouraging signs, however. Since the pandemic recession bottomed out in the United States in the spring of 2020, the nation’s economic output has been resilient, with second-quarter output 0.8 percent higher than before coronavirus. Read more

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Catch up: Coinbase made a $1.6 billion profit in three months. Coinbase, the cryptocurrency exchange, said on Tuesday that its quarterly revenue soared by more than 1,000 percent and profit skyrocketed nearly 4,900 percent from a year earlier, in its second earnings report as a publicly traded company. Revenue totaled $2.2 billion in the three months ending in June, up from $186 million a year ago. Profit was $1.6 billion, compared with $32 million a year earlier.

The Biden administration said on Tuesday that it had reached an agreement with Tridonex auto parts factories in Mexico to address accusations that workers had been harassed and fired for trying to organize with an independent union in place of a company-controlled union. Under the deal, Tridonex agreed to provide severance and back pay to workers who had been dismissed. It also agreed to a number of steps to help ensure workers’ collective bargaining rights. The case posed an early test of the labor protections in the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As we all put more of our photos, documents and videos online, how much of that data really belongs to us anymore?

That’s the question many are now pondering because of a change coming to iPhones. The debate has implications for online privacy and government surveillance and underlines how the storage of our digital data has changed over time, raising concerns about the ways we should conduct ourselves technologically.

But I’m getting ahead of myself. Let me back up.

The hubbub began last week when Apple introduced a software tool for iPhones to flag cases of child sex abuse. That seems good, right? The tool will be included in Apple’s next mobile software update this fall. It works by scanning an iPhone for code linked to a database of known child pornography when photos from the device are uploaded to iCloud, Apple’s online storage service. Once there are a certain number of matches, an Apple employee reviews the photos before informing the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.

But some cybersecurity experts countered that the content-flagging system was invasive and infringed on people’s privacy. They warned that Apple was creating a precedent that made it simple for surveillance-heavy countries like China to pass laws that could require the company to use the technology for other purposes, such as scanning for political images that are unfavorable to an authoritarian government.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@4 Different Return-to-Work Approaches Lauren Hirsch Reporting on back-to-office policies 💼

James Estrin/The New York Times

Companies have mandated vaccines for their workers as the highly contagious Delta variant has driven a surge in coronavirus cases. But not all of these mandates look the same.

Here’s what some companies are doing →
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@YouTube on Tuesday removed a video by Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky for the second time and suspended him from publishing for a week after he posted a video that disputed the effectiveness of wearing masks to limit the spread of the coronavirus.

A YouTube representative said the Republican senator’s claims in the three-minute video had violated the company’s policy on Covid-19 medical misinformation. The company policy bans videos that spread a wide variety of misinformation, including “claims that masks do not play a role in preventing the contraction or transmission of Covid-19.”

“We apply our policies consistently across the platform, regardless of speaker or political views, and we make exceptions for videos that have additional context such as countervailing views from local health authorities,” the representative said in a statement.

In the video, Mr. Paul says: “Most of the masks you get over the counter don’t work. They don’t prevent infection.” Later in the video, he adds, “Trying to shape human behavior isn’t the same as following the actual science, which tells us that cloth masks don’t work.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An Indiana-based food manufacturer is recalling more than 59,000 pounds of chicken products that may be contaminated with Salmonella enteritidis, federal health officials said this week.

In a food safety alert issued on Wednesday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said it is investigating a salmonella outbreak linked to the recalled products. “The outbreak strain of salmonella was found in unopened packages of raw frozen breaded stuffed chicken that were collected from a sick person’s home,” the C.D.C. said in the statement.

As of Tuesday, at least 28 people in eight states have gotten sick in the outbreak, according to the C.D.C. Eleven of those people were hospitalized, it said.

The frozen, raw and breaded chicken products were produced on Feb. 24 and 25 by Serenade Foods, based in Milford, Ind., and shipped across the country, according to a statement on Monday from the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Food Safety and Inspection Service.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Lordstown Motors, the cash strapped electric pickup truck start-up, said on Wednesday that it will only begin “limited production” by the end of September and expects that to be the situation through the rest of this year.

The company, in a release of second quarter financials, indicated it was still in need of cash to meet its eventual production goals. Lordstown said it had $366 million in cash on hand at the end of June and expected to have no more than $275 million available by the end of September unless it comes up with new financing.

Lordstown previously has said that without new sources of financing it may not be able to continue as a “going concern.”

The report comes after a tumultuous year for Lordstown. Expectations for the start-up grew after it merged with DiamondPeak Holdings, a cash-rich special purpose acquisition company led by a Wall Street real estate investor, which came calling with about $700 million to finance the deal.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@LOS ANGELES — California regulators voted Wednesday to require builders to include solar power and battery storage in many new commercial structures as well as high-rise residential projects. It is the latest initiative in the state’s vigorous efforts to hasten a transition from fossil fuels to alternative energy sources.

The five-member California Energy Commission approved the proposal unanimously. It will now be taken up by the state’s Building Standards Commission, which is expected to include it in an overall revision of the building code in December.

The energy plan, which would go into effect on Jan. 1, 2023, also calls for new homes to be wired in ways that ease and even encourage conversion of natural-gas heating and appliances to electric sources.

“The future we’re trying to build together is a future beyond fossil fuels,” David Hochschild, the chair of the Energy Commission, said ahead of the agency’s vote. “Big changes require everyone to play a role. We all have a role in building this future.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Taylor Mac’s “Joy and Pandemic,” a play set during the 1918 flu pandemic, was a bright spot on the horizon at the Magic Theater in San Francisco: a world-premiere production, to open in September for what would have been the theater’s first live audience in 18 months.

But now, in a further life-meets-art-meets-life twist, the production, which was announced in March, has been postponed indefinitely because of the Delta-variant-driven surge in Covid cases.

“Timing is everything,” Mac said in a statement. “With the rise of infections, this is not the time to engage wholeheartedly with the themes in this work. Our hope is that time will come soon.”

Mac is best known for “A 24-Decade History of Popular Music,” a marathon 24-hour performance piece that takes in all of American history through song, refracted through a radical queer lens (and involving some exuberant audience participation). “Joy and Pandemic,” to be directed by Loretta Greco, was partly inspired by some of Mac’s research for that show and had been commissioned by the Magic, a 144-seat nonprofit theater with which Mac has a long association, before the Covid-19 pandemic.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Southwest Airlines no longer expects to turn a profit in the third quarter as a recent rise in coronavirus cases slows sales and drives an increase in cancellations.

In a securities filing on Wednesday, the company forecast revenue for the three months that end in September to be down 15 to 20 percent from the same period in 2019, a decline of three to four percentage points from its previous estimate.

The revised forecast is a rapid turnaround from a few weeks ago, when Southwest and other major carriers said that business was booming and that the highly contagious Delta variant of the virus was not yet affecting sales. In fact, Southwest said Wednesday that it was profitable again in July, but that it no longer expected to turn a profit for the current quarter, at least after excluding the effect of federal payroll aid to the industry.

Late last month, Scott Kirby, the chief executive of United Airlines, said the Delta variant had not affected sales at all. “The most likely outcome is that the recovery in demand continues largely unabated,” he said on a call to discuss quarterly financial results with analysts and reporters.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Many retail shareholders don’t vote, buying shares but then not exercising their power to have a say on things like executive pay packages and who sits on a company’s board. Nell Minow, a shareholder rights and corporate governance expert, said that making it easier for Robinhood’s users to vote their shares could shake up corporate boardrooms just like when millions of traders used the app to send meme stocks soaring this year.

“Robinhood was at the kindergarten stage when it came to democratizing Wall Street, and this moves it up to at least the first year of high school,” Minow said. Individuals acting together could compel companies to take the lead on environmental and social justice issues, she said.

But small investors tend to side with management more than institutional investors do, said Jonathon Zytnick, a research fellow at the Institute of Corporate Governance and Finance at N.Y.U. Law School. “Voting methods matter a ton getting retailer shareholders to vote,” Zytnick said. “And retail investors can perform a monitoring role, but at least right now, it is almost certainly wrong to think of this as a means of environment and social change.”

But if there’s anything that the past few months have taught us, the behavior of big crowds of small investors is hard to predict.

Vaccine mandates, four ways

Companies are increasingly mandating coronavirus vaccines for their employees. This is legally allowed, and has been held up in court challenges. But for various reasons, not all employers have applied blanket mandates. Here are four of the common approaches that have emerged:

Microsoft requires vaccines for all U.S. employees. The tech company, which employs roughly 100,000 people in the U.S., said in early August that it would require proof of vaccination for all staff, vendors and guests to enter its offices.

Walmart requires vaccinations for some, but not all, of its employees. The country’s largest private employer mandates vaccines for office workers at its headquarters and for managers who travel in the U.S., but not for the majority of its employees, who work in its stores and warehouses.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Put the ice cream near the cash registers.

That is traditional grocery store wisdom, mainly so the product won’t melt in the cart as it winds through the aisles.

For shoppers worn down by the journey through a hangar-size Whole Foods, it’s also a reward: an ultradecadent bounty in an ever-multiplying variety of daring and imaginative flavors.

It has never been a better time to eat ice cream or a more cutthroat time to try to sell it.

Fueled by pandemic trends of “at-home comfort” and “anytime eating,” the $7 billion industry grew 17 percent in 2020, after roughly 2.4 percent annual growth over the previous decade, said Jennifer Mapes-Christ of the market research firm Packaged Facts. Artisan ice cream — a “squishy” term, she said, that usually refers to product with less air and more fat but “mostly just means ‘fancy’” — is growing even faster than mainstream ice cream and is considered the industry’s future.

Small, indie producers like Jennifer Dundas, the co-founder of Blue Marble in Brooklyn, have driven the innovation in the past decade. Ms. Dundas has been in the field for 14 years, but I’ve known her even longer — we grew up in the same Boston suburb — and through her have seen how ruthless selling organic banana cream pie ice cream in biodegradable bowls can be.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Marvin Alexander, a makeup artist in New York City who decided to shift from the fashion industry to bridal during the depths of the pandemic, is also seeing lots of last-minute bookings, including from rescheduled weddings. The events are often more modest affairs, with smaller wedding parties and guest lists, in a nod to virus risks.

“I’m starting to see a few people being more comfortable about 2022, even with the Delta variant strong on our heels,” Mr. Alexander said.

On the other end of the spectrum, Magdalena Mieczkowska, a wedding planner, has seen demand in the Hudson Valley and Berkshires take off for big events in 2022. And clients are willing to spend: Her average was typically $100,000 per event, but now she's seeing some weekends come in at $200,000 or more.

“People were postponing, and now they have more savings,” she said. Plus, vendors are charging more for catered meals and cutlery rentals. “Everyone is trying to make up for their financial losses from the 2020 season.”

Wedding industry experts said they expected demand to remain robust into 2023 before tapering back to normal, as new bookings vie for resources with delayed weddings like the one Ariana Papier, 31, and Andrew Jenzer, 32, held last weekend in Richmond, Mass., a town in the Berkshires.

The couple had to cancel their original June 6, 2020, date, opting to elope instead, but rescheduled the event to Aug. 7, complete with signature cocktails (a bush berry Paloma and an Earl Grey blackberry Old-Fashioned), a dance floor and s’mores.

“We’re calling it a vow renewal and celebration,” Ms. Papier said just ahead of the ceremony, adding it was the couple’s third attempted venue, thanks to pandemic hiccups.

“Third and best,” she said. “We are so excited.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@One of the other takeaways I had was, early in my tenure at McKinsey, I had a manager who gave me some very harsh feedback. He tore me up in my performance review for not interviewing our clients in this extremely direct and hostile manner, which was his style. He had a military background and would be very confrontational. It was the first time in my career that I had really had to step back and think about feedback and say: “Am I going to internalize this? Do I really think he’s right, and is this style going to serve me and advance my objectives? Or am I actually getting really good outcomes, but I just disagree with him about the method and where is he coming from?”

There was a gender element there, but I realized that while it’s good to get harsh feedback, you also have to look at it critically and say: “You know what? That’s not for me. I have to be kind of true to who I am and move forward.”

How do you explain the rise of the freelance economy?

People want more flexibility and control over how they work, where they work, who they’re working for and really charting their own path around their careers in a different way.

At the same time, the pact around what an employee-employer relationship looks like has been weakening over time. Over the course of several recessions, most recently 2008, the social contract has been shown to be not what it was several generations ago.

As newer generations enter the work force, millennials and Gen Z in particular, they’ve seen that the contract for employment is broken and say, “That’s not for me.” They have a much more kind of empowered idea around how they’re going to build their careers that’s much more autonomous and not related to a single firm. It’s much more about skills that they have, portfolios that they’re building. They feel like that’s where they have safety and security. Being tethered to a single employer actually feels more risky to them.

And I think people’s mind-set has shifted with the pandemic, and we’ve seen now a sea change in people really re-evaluating their relationship to their work. They’re saying: “Wait a minute. I need some different things. I want to draw boundaries in different ways. I want to have a different relationship to my work than I did in the past, where I am much more in control.”

Do you think that social contract between the employer and the worker is broken forever in this country?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Most four-year degrees pay off by paving the way for graduates to recoup the cost of their education relatively quickly, a new analysis finds. But that’s particularly true for some programs, while others may offer little economic advantage over a high school diploma.

The findings are part of a report on some 38,000 post-high school degree and certificate programs published this week by Third Way, a center-left public policy group. The report analyzed data collected for the federal Education Department’s “College Scorecard” tool to measure the “return on investment” offered by various higher education programs.

The report found that almost two-thirds of the 26,000 bachelor’s degree programs in the study enabled a majority of their graduates to make enough money to recover their costs in 10 years or less after graduation.

Bachelor’s degree programs, which typically take four years, are generally more expensive but are most likely to show at least some return on investment — meaning graduates earn enough to pay off their college costs reasonably quickly — for those who complete a degree, compared with two-year associate degrees or shorter certificate programs.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“It’s how I imagined myself, but I’d never put it in those words,” Mr. Little said, adding that his strengths included putting events in context and always looking to the future. “I use the past to guide the decisions I make for the future. And I’m deliberative. I think a ton before I make a decision.”

Manyi Ngu, 17 and a high school senior in Jacksonville, Fla., said she had gotten the most from an activity, in the first part of the program, that asked the teenagers to pick 10 things or values that mattered the most to them and then narrow the list to five and then two.

“The 10 was easy,” she said. “Going down the line to five was tough. Getting it down to two was hard.”

Her two, she said, were family and honesty.

From the larger group, the Blank program selected 40 boys and girls for the trip to Montana for a weeklong program that combined classroom work and speakers with outdoor activities. The goal was to put the teenagers into new situations and force them to work with people they didn’t know.

Among the speakers were Shasta Averyhardt, one of the first Black women to earn L.P.G.A. Tour status, and Michael Vick, the former N.F.L. quarterback, who was sent to prison for his role in an illegal dogfighting operation.

“Michael Vick talks to them about life choices,” said Mr. Blank, who has been a mentor to Mr. Vick, a former Falcon. “He doesn’t talk to them about dog fighting. He talks about making good choices versus bad choices.”

Mr. Little said Mr. Vick’s talk was the most memorable moment of the retreat for him because he had talked about the impact that bad choices can have on your life.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Snopes, which has long presented itself as the internet’s premier fact-checking resource, has retracted 60 articles after a BuzzFeed News investigation found that the site’s co-founder plagiarized from news outlets as part of a strategy intended to scoop up web traffic.

“As you can imagine, our staff are gutted and appalled by this,” Vinny Green, the Snopes chief operating officer, said on Friday. He said the Snopes editorial team was conducting a review to understand just how many articles written by David Mikkelson, the site’s co-founder and chief executive, featured content plagiarized from other news sites.

As of Friday afternoon, the team had found 60, he said. By Friday morning, dozens of articles had been removed from the site, with pages that formerly featured those articles now showing the word “retracted” and an explanation that “some or all of its content was taken from other sources without proper attribution.” Ads have been removed from these articles, according to Mr. Green.

Mr. Mikkelson, who owns 50 percent of Snopes Media Group, will continue to be Snopes’s chief executive, but his ability to publish articles has been revoked, Mr. Green said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The concert industry had hoped that this summer would mark its high-decibel rebound after being shut down for more than a year by the pandemic.

It started promisingly, with restrictions being eased and fans snapping up tickets, but as the spread of the highly contagious Delta variant has accelerated in recent weeks, an ominous cancellation blotter has begun to build up.

Foo Fighters and Fall Out Boy have missed high-profile shows. Stevie Nicks and Limp Bizkit have scuttled tours. The New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival, planned for October, was canceled amid high infection rates in Louisiana.

The pileup of bad news, along with fearful chatter among artists and touring workers on industry back channels, has led to what many in the business describe as a confusing and even chaotic situation over whether — and how — to proceed.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Send questions about the office, money, careers and work-life balance to workfriend@nytimes.com. Include your name and location, or a request to remain anonymous. Letters may be edited.

No More 9 to 5

I am 27. In the last year, I landed my dream job. My job has purpose. My skills and qualifications are used and challenged. My co-workers and supervisors are unparalleled but alas: 40 hours a week is not sustainable. I have hobbies. I have creative pursuits and therapy and laundry, and I own a small dog, so I am busy. My partner and I are considering starting a family in a few years. Because I already feel like there is not enough time in the week, I wonder what getting away from the 40-hour workweek looks like. I have considered self-employment, trying out the artist lifestyle, going back into academia, mildly rejecting capitalism, but maybe I should just get over it? Thoughts? — Brit, Indianapolis

At 46, as the workaholic daughter of immigrants with an intense work ethic, I am inclined to tell you that this is life. You have to get over it and find a way to balance your professional and personal lives. For many people, only having to work 40 hours a week at one job would be a dream. It’s important to acknowledge that. But we do live in a country obsessed with work to the detriment of our collective well-being. You ask an important question and one many of us struggle with. Is this all there is? Are our lives destined to be consumed by work? It is kind of maddening. Work is a means to an end. If you’re lucky, you enjoy what you do and thrive professionally but we’re not working for fun. We are working in a capitalist society that demands our participation.

Many European countries model more reasonable work/life balance. In July, Iceland shared results of a four-day workweek trial that showed great results. So there are alternatives to working a 40-hour week. You should know that most of the other options you list are more demanding than you might think. Academia is demanding; you just have more control over where you spend your time when you’re not in the classroom, though that is if you’re one of the very few academics who gets a tenure track position. As an adjunct, you do essentially the same job for a fraction of the compensation.

I don’t want to discourage you, but there is no magical way to earn a full-time salary without working full-time. You have to decide what your priorities are and what you’re willing to do to nurture those priorities. If you want to pursue an artist’s life or reject capitalism, how will you pay for housing, food and health insurance? What are you willing to forego to have a more fulfilling life? That is the question; it’s an unfair choice until we, as a culture, decide there is, indeed, more to life than work.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Collective action problem

As they approach the limits of persuasion and incentives, the biggest question facing companies is whether to make coronavirus vaccines mandatory for workers. This is legally allowed, but many companies are still worried about political implications, employee pushback and other issues.

Also of concern is what competitors are doing, which is why C.E.O.s have been hustling behind the scenes to figure out their counterparts’ plans, gauging if the time is right to change their vaccine policies without standing out from the crowd.

The Business Roundtable is surveying members about their plans, DealBook hears. The influential lobbying group, led by Walmart’s Doug McMillon, declined to make the results public, but the results indicate that more companies are considering vaccine mandates compared with a few months ago, we understand.

The White House wants C.E.O.s to help persuade others. President Biden met with executives of companies that have mandated vaccination, including Scott Kirby of United Airlines, to discuss how they could encourage fellow business leaders to do the same. Since United issued its mandate (to a work force that was largely vaccinated), it has held a number of town hall meetings to discuss it. Frontier and Hawaiian Airlines issued their own mandates after United’s, and Alaska Airlines told employees it was considering doing the same.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Camille Walker’s troubles with Southwest Airlines began well before her trip to Fort Lauderdale, Fla., in July when her direct flight from Louisville, Ky., was changed to a connecting flight through Atlanta. It became a nightmare when she tried to return from vacation and her departure was pushed back 24 hours. The flight boarded, only to sit on the runway for hours. Assuming she’d miss her connection, Ms. Walker, who works in marketing, found a Delta Air Lines flight she could connect to, but a flight attendant said many passengers were making connections and that the airline would take care of them.

Instead, once she arrived, she said Southwest blamed the weather and disavowed responsibility. Ms. Walker asked to be put on the Delta flight; Southwest refused. When she tried to book it herself, it was sold out. Frantic to get home to attend a friend’s funeral, she tried to book a rental car, but could only find a monthlong rental for $2,000 that had to be returned in Atlanta. She booked an airport hotel. In addition to missing the funeral, the fiasco set her back about $1,000 — for which the airline has offered a $200 flight voucher.

“If you don’t have enough pilots, don’t sell that many flights,” she said.

Ms. Walker is among thousands of passengers who have experienced delayed or canceled flights since June when airlines began to struggle with surging demand, seasonal storms and worker shortages.

In July, according to FlightAware, a flight-tracking platform, airlines canceled up to 3 percent of their flights; the normal figure is less than 1 percent. On-time rates, normally close to 80 percent, fell to between 60 and 70 percent. (Airlines dispute the figures; American, for example, said it canceled about 1.5 percent of its flights in July and its on-time arrivals rate was nearly 77 percent.) The statistics are even worse for Spirit, which canceled up to half its departures in early August.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@And the job itself is, as any Hollywood agent would tell you, a pretty sweet gig.

When the “Jeopardy!” cast and crew gather on the Sony Pictures stage in Culver City, Calif., they film five 30-minute shows in a single day, the equivalent of one week of syndicated television. The host works roughly two days a week, two weeks a month — and toward the end of his tenure, Mr. Trebek’s salary was estimated at $16.5 million. Sony would not disclose Mr. Richards’s compensation, but several people familiar with internal discussions said it was significantly less.

There are other perks to being the face of a show that is still watched by a broad audience on local network affiliates, a rarity as the nation divides into ever-more-partisan extremes and as traditional TV is supplanted by niche streaming services.

“It’s appointment television, which is rare,” said George Stephanopoulos, the ABC News anchor, who guest hosted for a week. “It’s the kind of thing you can watch with your whole family.”

Plus there is the reflected glow of always having the right answers.

“It’s absolutely iconic,” said Rick Rosen, the TV superagent at Endeavor. “Everybody knows the show and has played along with it. And it’s not the type of show where you’re just a genial host — there’s a perception of intelligence that goes along with it.”

Unlike his rivals, Mr. Richards, 46, had a deep background in game shows. Born in Burbank, Calif., he started his career as a stand-up comedian and went on to host game shows like the mid-2000s concoction “Beauty and the Geek.” He hosted and produced numerous series on the Game Show Network before auditioning to replace Bob Barker on “The Price Is Right.” Drew Carey got the job, but Mr. Richards was brought on as executive producer; his successful 11-year tenure revived the wilting franchise into a hit.

By “Jeopardy!” standards, though, he was a newcomer.

He started as executive producer at both “Jeopardy!” and “Wheel of Fortune” in May 2020, replacing Harry Friedman, who oversaw both shows for 25 years. Mr. Richards overlapped with Mr. Trebek on set for only 15 shoot days before the host stepped aside, 10 days before he died.

Sony said that while Mr. Richards initially led the hunt for Mr. Trebek’s replacement, he moved aside after he emerged as a candidate.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It can have devastating mental health effects. But avoiding burnout is not a priority for all companies. About 20 percent of U.S. workers in the private sector do not have access to paid vacation or holidays, according to the Labor Department. Companies in industries where retaining talent is difficult, such as technology, tend to see giving employees time to recharge as a worthwhile investment. ​​Other companies consider turnover part of their business model because their data show that employees become less engaged over time.

Extra time off, though, is only a short-term coping strategy, says Christina Maslach, a researcher at the University of California, Berkeley’s Healthy Workplaces center.

“It’s not preventing burnout and chronic stressors because those are still there in the workplace,” she said. “If those don’t change, you’re getting away from them, but then they’ll start back again.”

This is backed by research. A 2009 study published in the Journal of Occupational Health found that vacation led to modest decreases in exhaustion and health complaints and modest increases in life satisfaction. Within two to four weeks after resuming work, however, those benefits had vanished, according to Jessica de Bloom, a vacation researcher at the University of Tampere in Finland who was a co-author of the study. Other studies have shown that well-being lapsed to pre-vacation levels within the first week of resuming work.

This was especially true for a category of people prone to burnout: workaholics and perfectionists. A 2012 study in the Journal of Applied Psychology and a 2014 study by Dr. de Bloom and others in the journal Stress and Health found that workaholics and perfectionists gained more in terms of well-being than other workers, but they also lost more upon returning.

How companies can reduce burnout

When corporations have a problem, such as high attrition, and they don’t know how to solve it, they tend to copy what competitors are doing, said Dan Wang, a professor at Columbia Business School. He believes that’s part of the reason several companies are bulking up their vacation benefits this year. But given the relative lack of data on whether vacations are the best way to improve employee well-being at work, is it the best approach?

Leaders’ first priority should be to stop glorifying exhaustion, said Dr. Maslach of Berkeley. After that, she suggests that managers ask employees what they need, rather than assume that they know, since there is no one answer. For example, companies have sought to improve morale by installing a volleyball court on the rooftop of an office or by providing free food during the day. What may have made more of a difference to employees was receiving fewer emails from bosses during evenings and weekends.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@That’s the context in which Red Ventures — a company that backed its way into media after specializing in online marketing — makes sense.

Mr. Elias grew up in San Juan hearing stories of his late grandfather, a Lebanese immigrant who, according to family lore, built a huge produce importing business but lost it because he hadn’t paid his taxes. It recently occurred to him, he said, that he has spent his career trying to restore the family name.

He arrived at Boston College, in 1986, a semester late because he’d been trying to make a local professional basketball team, the Leones de Ponce, and speaking what he described as broken English. From there, he earned an M.B.A. at Harvard Business School. In 2000, he and a friend, Dan Feldstein, who is now the chief marketing officer of Red Ventures, started a business built on the notion of driving online shoppers to physical stores. It was a “terrible idea,” Mr. Elias said, and they quickly ran out of money. They spent the next few years digging out and repaying their investors, among them their more successful Harvard Business School classmates.

Mr. Elias and Mr. Feldstein sold the business to management in 2005 and started again under the name Red Ventures, becoming pioneers in that era’s efforts to link digital data and real world commerce. They entered the business of selling subscriptions for DirecTV and burglar alarms for ADT Security. Along the way, they figured out how to integrate online marketing and old-fashioned telemarketing — and they got very good at search engine optimization.

Other tricks were more ingenious. For instance, they purchased more than a million toll-free phone numbers, and each visitor to their marketing website was shown a different one. So when prospective customers called, Red Ventures knew exactly what they had been looking at on the site, which gave the agents what they needed to make personalized sales pitches. This was a pretty high-tech form of digital surveillance in those more innocent times. As the company grew and the market shifted, its founders realized that the technological know-how they had developed had itself become a commodity and that they needed to develop their own brands, not just sell others’.

In 2015, Red Ventures raised $250 million, which went toward its $1.4 billion purchase of Bankrate, a personal finance company that helps people comparison shop for financial products (and earns a commission on each sale). That acquisition included The Points Guy, a site devoted to elucidating airline mileage programs and credit card deals. The Points Guy had built a profitable business earning commissions whenever people signed up for credit cards they had read about on the site — often in rave reviews of high-end cards.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@TOKYO — Japan stepped back into economic growth in the second three months of 2021, but prospects for a more robust recovery looked dim as the country grappled with its worst coronavirus outbreak since the pandemic began.

The country’s economy, the third-largest after the United States and China, grew at an annualized rate of 1.3 percent during the April-to-June period, recording a quarterly increase of 0.3 percent. The expansion followed a quarter-to-quarter drop of 0.9 percent in the previous three-month period.

Even as other major economies have roared back to life, Japan’s has been stuck in a cycle of growth and contraction as the country has struggled with a persistent spread of infections that has kept its shops, bars and restaurants under constricted schedules.

Currently, case levels in Japan are at record highs. The country reported almost 18,000 new infections on Sunday, with nearly 4,300 in Tokyo, which entered its fourth state of emergency in July. The declaration has since been expanded to cover the country’s other major economic centers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Image Credit... Giacomo Bagnara

What’s Up? (Aug. 8-14)

Infrastructure Bill Moves to the House

The Senate approved a $1 trillion bipartisan infrastructure bill to rebuild roads and bridges and to fund broadband and climate resilience initiatives. The legislation includes several measures to help pay for it, including repurposing pandemic relief funds and tougher scrutiny of cryptocurrency transactions (though the Congressional Budget Office said the plan would still add $256 billion to the deficit over the next decade). Shortly after the passage of the infrastructure bill, the Senate voted along party lines to pass a $3.5 trillion budget blueprint to expand the social safety net, which would be funded primarily by higher taxes for the wealthy and corporations. Both measures face an arduous path in the House.

Misinformation Surges

The highly contagious Delta variant of the coronavirus is causing a new surge in cases as well as a spike in vaccine misinformation. Compared with June, mentions of some phrases prone to misinformation in July jumped as much as five times, according to Zignal Labs, which tracks mentions on social media, on cable television and in print and online outlets. Experts say the boom signals that efforts by social media companies to remove falsehoods about the virus from their platforms haven’t worked.

California’s Push for Solar Power

California regulators supported a proposal that would require builders to include solar power and battery storage in many new commercial structures and high-rise residential buildings. Doing so could reduce emissions over the next 30 years — as much as if more than two million cars were taken off the road, they said. The proposal also calls for new homes to be wired in ways that help and even encourage conversion of natural-gas heating and appliances to electric sources. The state’s Building Standards Commission is expected to include the proposal in a December revision of the building code. It would take effect on Jan. 1, 2023.

Image Credit... Giacomo Bagnara

What’s Next? (Aug. 15-21)

Get That Vaccine Card Ready

New York City’s new vaccine requirements go into effect on Monday. They require customers and staff to show proof of at least one vaccine dose for indoor dining, performances and gyms. An even further-reaching rule will take effect in San Francisco on Friday. It will bar unvaccinated people from indoor dining, bars, nightclubs, gyms, large concerts, theaters and other events held inside. The new rules apply even to people who can show they have tested negative for the coronavirus. President Biden has required that federal workers either be vaccinated or undergo frequent testing, and encouraged businesses to require employees to get the shot. Last week, United Airlines, Amtrak, Capital One and McDonald’s joined the growing list of companies to mandate vaccines for all or some workers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Marissa Meizz, 23, was out to dinner with a friend in the East Village in mid-May when her phone started buzzing. She tried to silence it, but the texts kept coming. They all wanted to know: Had she seen the TikTok video?

She clicked the link and a young man appeared onscreen. “If your name’s Marissa,” he said, “please listen up.” He said he had just overheard some of her friends say they were deliberately choosing to hold a birthday party when she was out of town that weekend. “You need to know,” he said. “TikTok, help me find Marissa.”

Ms. Meizz’s heart sank. After getting in touch with the man who posted the video, which amassed more than 14 million views, she confirmed that she was the Marissa in question and that it was her friends who had conspired to exclude her from their party.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@