Ruinous, eye-watering, crippling, stratospheric, massive. That’s the cost to the UK of beating the climate crisis, according to those who portray getting to net zero emissions as economic suicide that is being thrust on an unwilling population by posh eco-fundamentalists and zealots.

This is not just wrong, it is the exact opposite of reality. The delusions come from those with histories of climate change scepticism and could be dismissed as the latest mutant variant thrown up by the death throes of denial. But they are having a real-world impact, slowing action at the precise moment acceleration is needed.

So how did we get here? In 2019, the then chancellor, Phillip Hammond, wrote a letter to the prime minister claiming the cost of the UK getting to net zero would exceed £1tn. Then, in July of this year, the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) estimated the investment needed for net zero by 2050 was £1.4tn. These figures are the source of the hot air.

But this is only one side of the balance sheet. The other, conveniently ignored by the critics, carries huge cost savings due to more efficient vehicles and buildings, and the economic boost of many thousands of good jobs in the green industries that will be the growth story of the 21st century. And that’s just the start.

Getting to net zero avoids the terrible costs and suffering that unrestrained global heating is beginning to wreak on the world, as starkly laid out in the week’s IPCC report. Cutting fossil fuel burning also brings benefits such as slashed air pollution, which still kills about 40,000 people a year in the UK.

Let’s put some of that into numbers. Once the fuel efficiency savings are included, the OBR’s cost estimate falls by about 75%, to 0.4% of GDP a year. The OBR also said delaying decisive climate action by a decade could double the cost to the government.

Chris Stark, head of the government’s advisers, the Climate Change Committee, estimates that the cost of getting to net zero by 2050 would mean a mere four-month delay in economic growth over 30 years, even without considering the wider benefits to society. Given the alternative – climate chaos – Stark says: “I would argue we can’t afford not to do net zero.”

Swiss Re, the insurance giant whose business is risk, agrees. It calculates a 10% loss of global GDP by 2050 without further climate action now, similar to other recent analyses. Another study suggests that breaking the 1.5C temperature limit outlined in the Paris agreement will cost far more than acting to hold temperatures down, even if rich nations have to pay for action in poorer nations. Basically, climate action is a bargain.

In the face of this, why do some still make hysterical claims of ruinous costs? The first reason is blinkered nationalism – the UK’s emissions are just 1% of the globe’s, they say. The problem here is that the UK is holding the vital Cop26 climate summit in November – why should anyone act to save the world if the host is not? Failing to act would also cede competitive advantage in green industries to other nations: kiss goodbye to “Global Britain”.

The second reason for the hysterical claims is rooted in inane free-market ideology. It is true that there are upfront costs for green technology. Electric cars cost more to buy for now, but are already cheaper to own overall.

The solution here, proposed as much by centre-right voices as the left, is ensuring the less well-off get the help they need, such as subsidised electric vehicles or payments funded by carbon taxes levied on the high consumption of the wealthy. To those further to the right, such state redistribution is anathema, which may be why none of those complaining of the costs of net zero seem able to come up with any alternative plans.

They claim to be concerned about struggling families, but as Sam Hall, director of the Conservative Environment Network, says: “If we were to pursue the alternative approach of not mitigating climate change, unfairnesses in society would be exacerbated. Low-income households, for example, are disproportionately exposed to flood risk.”

The cries of “crippling net zero costs” may be laughable, but they are causing damage, and not just because they are helping delay cuts to carbon emissions. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is dragging his feet over urgently needed green policies, such as the plan to phase out gas boilers, at just the moment when the UK needs to be leading the way ahead of Cop26.

A reckoning is coming. The Treasury must publish its review of the costs of the net zero transition in the coming months, which is said to be being redrafted after a first attempt that was considered overly pessimistic in its high projected costs. If the final report accepts the compelling logic that climate action is both vital and affordable, the UK may yet lead Cop26 to the successful outcome the world desperately needs. If not, the cynics – those who know “the price of everything and the value of nothing” – will have won, and the world will continue to burn.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Academic papers often take time to leach out into public consciousness. One that did not filter through was a study from Anglia Ruskin University that analysed “nodes of persisting complexity”, in the face of “global decomplexification event”. What’s that, you ask. Places you can probably still get electricity and toilet paper when climate breakdown destroys the rest of the world. New Zealand and Finland top the list. Perhaps coincidentally, it recently emerged that Google founder Larry Page has been granted New Zealand residency.

The recently released “last chance saloon” Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report will surely add pressure on governments to “do something” about all this. After all, we can’t all move to a nice “persistent node”. But doing something, as we know, is hard. So, what we can expect instead is for governments to redouble their usage of a time-tested rhetoric of distraction called “getting back to normal”.

Instead, of telling us that we need to truly transform the way we live and organise society, we will be told that we can still carry on as we were, except perhaps with our fossil fuels and one-use goods replaced with green energy and recyclables. Maybe a bit less air travel, but still ‘back to normal’ with green edges.

This way of thinking is perhaps as dangerous as the climate crisis itself. While banging on about inflation as a threat to the poor is a rhetoric of reaction, getting back to normal is a rhetoric of distraction. Rather than pandering to our prejudices, it builds directly upon how our psychology has evolved over millennia – it plays upon two things that we are hardwired to believe.

The first is what statisticians call “mean reversion”. Basically, if you see someone really tall, that person is labelled an outlier. Most people are of middling height and so we all reasonably expect most of the people we encounter to be our “normal” size. Nassim Nicholas Taleb famously demolished this line of thinking with his idea of “black swan” events. The fact that you expect only short people to show up makes you vulnerable to the appearance of tall people. Apply to banking crises, pandemics etc. This type of thinking makes us vulnerable to extreme events.

The second is that there is equilibrium associated with that middle-of-the-distribution model where things don’t change very much. Just as I assume there are no 8ft people in my home town (simply because I have not seen one yet), I presume that shocks to the world I live in (meeting an 8ft neighbour) are temporary deviations from some kind of stable self-generating order (hanging around with folks under 6ft is normal).

These ideas portray a comforting world because it implies, in the case of markets for example, that big crises can happen, but after a while, we will get back to normal. Or, in the case of pandemics and novel viruses, yes, that was a global crisis, but now with vaccines we can get back to normal. For everything there is a season etc.

The black swan is an ever present problem. But the equilibrium assumption may be even more pernicious because it rests upon a belief that human societies, and the natural systems that support them, have powerful self-equilibrating tendencies. Push too much one way and things break, sure, but then the system provides feedback and we restore the equilibrium – we get back to normal.

The economy is ground zero for such thinking. Not only is economics explicitly based on ideas of equilibrium, but in terms of policy we can normalise anything no matter how odd it truly is. Consider that when the global financial system was bailed out in 2008-9 by the world’s central banks, actions such as quantitative easing were supposed to be emergency measures. But over the following decade propping up markets became the new normal, so when the pandemic hit governments everywhere added 30% to the global debt stock while at the same time talking about getting back to normal.

But this pretence does not work with climate breakdown, it is a giant non-linear outcome generator with wicked convexities. In plain English, there is no mean, there is no average, there is no return to normal. It’s one way traffic into the unknown. As study after study shows, the one thing humans hate dealing with is uncertainty. Risk – odds you can count on – is fine. But systems with truly random outcomes freak us out. We are also terrible at dealing with scale. As evolutionary psychologists put it, “Our modern skulls house a stone age mind.” It evolved to solve problems in a pretty stable mean-reverting world with face-to-face interactions. When we encountered things that freaked us out in such a world, we filled in the gaps with a mutually agreed story (religion or political ideology, for example) that helped us ignore what we could not explain.

But now we live in a world we can explain, and yet rather than accept what we know and act upon that knowledge, we increasingly imagine our world to be different from how it actually is. That we can get back to normal (albeit with a few modifications) and that normal is a place of stability and comfort. “Yes, there are wildfires, but there are also floods, so it balances out, right?” Our coping mechanism is to ignore the big picture and focus on the local, which gives us a greater illusion of control at the price of increasingly misunderstanding the world we actually live in.

So, if you hear a politician talking about “getting back to normal”, remember that while this is comforting they are peddling a dangerous idea we are hardwired to accept. And if we keep accepting it as a plausible goal in the area of climate crisis, we will end up further away than ever from where we really need to be. As well as accepting the facts, it’s time to give up on getting back to normal and face the fact that there is no normal to return to. As the IPCC report makes clear, there are now only unknown and unfamiliar alternative futures that we can choose from. Embracing that uncertainty, rather than denying it, is the first step to choosing the right one.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@How we rebuild our high streets and town centres after the pandemic is one of the most urgent questions facing communities across Britain. The answer has often come in the form of corporate-led regeneration schemes that prioritise demolition, dispossess local communities, and provide scant “affordable” housing. To build a sustainable and inclusive economy, we need to move away from this model. In Tottenham, north London, a pioneering solution is under way that could provide an alternative.

After struggling for 15 years against a widely criticised regeneration plan, traders and residents in Tottenham have won the opportunity to restore a listed historic building and celebrated market for the benefit of the community. The Wards building opened in 1901 as one of London’s “grand department stores” and for decades formed an iconic gateway into Tottenham. Yet the construction of the Victoria line saw their compulsory purchase by Transport for London (TfL). They were derelict until 1985, when a market serving migrant communities opened on the ground floor. Years of underinvestment by TfL left the buildings dilapidated and in 2002, Haringey council designated the site for regeneration, with Grainger – one of Britain’s biggest build-to-rent developer – selected in 2004 as their preferred partner and awarded significant public funds to design proposals for the site.

Grainger’s plans would have demolished the entire Wards Corner block, including the locally listed Edwardian Wards building and Seven Sisters Indoor Market. Known locally as the Latin Village or Pueblito Paisa, the market is an important retail and cultural hub for London’s Latin American communities. A 2011 report by Trust for London found that 85% of London’s Latinx diaspora rely on the clusters of businesses at Seven Sisters and Elephant and Castle to directly experience their culture – with both areas threatened by intensive regeneration. This threat was underscored in 2017, when United Nations human rights experts warned Grainger’s plan would have “a disproportionate impact on people belonging to minorities and their right to equal participation in economic, social and cultural rights”.

Not a single affordable or social-rent home would have been provided at Wards Corner as part of Grainger’s scheme. Instead, it would have built 190 private flats and provided space for several chain stores, encouraged by planning policy that sought to gentrify the area, placing existing residents at risk of displacement. This outdated scheme was conceived in another era, before the pandemic accelerated the high street crisis that had been instigated by the shift to online retail, which has seen a 20% decline in high street visitors and 50,000 shops across the UK close in the past decade. Citing viability concerns and the changed economic landscape, Grainger’s withdrawal is a major victory for all those who want to see urban development for people, not profit.

The community plan to save the market and restore the Wards buildings, first developed by El Pueblito Paisa Ltd in 2007, evolved over several iterations through public meetings, workshops, and events before gaining planning permission in 2014 and again in 2019, when it received hundreds of letters of support. The fourth iteration of the plan, co-designed by the architectural cooperative Unit 38, would sustainably restore the existing buildings and provide over 3,000 sq metres of retail space and cafe space with an enhanced market at its heart, alongside 650 sq metres of affordable workspaces and new community facilities, including a childcare centre. On the wider site, there is the potential for social housing development in collaboration with the council and the community.

The buildings will be democratically owned and operated by a community benefit society led by local people on a one member, one vote basis. Grant funding, community shares and ethical investment will meet the estimated £12.9m cost of the refurbishment. Instead of extracting profits for remote shareholders, the surplus generated from the restored building will be reinvested in further community wealth-building initiatives in Tottenham: financial modelling commissioned by the West Green Road/Seven Sisters Development Trust suggests this could total as much as £84m over 60 years. The community plan represents more than the restoration of a neglected market and heritage building: it is a new, democratic model of urban development that benefits the people who live in an area, rather than distant corporate interests.

Now all efforts must turn to delivering the community plan as soon as possible. Since the compulsory purchase process began, the urban block earmarked for development has sharply deteriorated, with vacant or dilapidated units becoming magnets for fly-tipping and antisocial behaviour, market tenants victimised and existing residents evicted and left destitute. After the most recent market operator declared insolvency in 2020, TfL were forced to step in as operator as a last resort. It uncovered serious health and safety breaches – including fire safety, electrical and gas risks – which it said left the market too unsafe to open. The market remains closed, nearly 18 months later, leaving traders without access to their livelihoods, and the community without crucial support throughout the pandemic. It is therefore imperative that the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, extends his financial hardship scheme for traders until a temporary or permanent market is in place, and for that market to be provided by the end of 2021.

We now call on Khan to join Haringey council in offering his full support for the community plan and ensuring that the future development of Wards Corner delivers the maximum benefit for local people. As we emerge from the pandemic to face the stark reality of the climate crisis, how – and for whom – we undertake urban development will be critical to building a sustainable and just economy. The Wards Corner Community Plan is a viable and coherent answer to this question, which could offer a model for communities across the country seeking to rethink urban change. The late David Graeber – a friend of the campaign – once wrote: “The ultimate, hidden truth of the world is that it is something that we make, and could just as easily make differently.” Perhaps nowhere is this clearer than in our cities.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Obviously look away now if you have ever personally employed me, but: I don’t think I’ve ever done an afternoon’s work in my life. It’s just not really my vibe. I learned a long time ago that most of my focus happens to me in the morning. There’s a fairly juicy period of concentration between 10am and 1pm, but once I’ve been to Pret and picked out an egg sandwich it really is game over for the rest of my day. You’re welcome to email me, of course, and sometimes you will get a reply. If you look at me at my desk, I do a very good pantomime of doing work (a furrowed brow, some frenzied clicking, spinning a pen on my fingers). But fundamentally nothing’s getting done again until tomorrow; 60% of my salaried working life I just spent looking at football forums and browsing eBay. Nobody has ever, ever noticed this about me.

This is because most office jobs aren’t really real.

This should be a talking point, this week, but it isn’t, because fundamentally we had one chance at building society correctly and we messed it up, and now we have a Conservative government and conservative bloggers telling us all to get back to the office, you workshy wastrels! To catch you up: a global pandemic affected the working operation of literally everything in the world some time in early 2020. This led to a lot of people in Britain, by necessity, working from home or remotely for a proportion of the year (though, obviously, not everyone: while 48% of London’s workforce had to download Zoom then Microsoft Teams then Zoom again, the figures are more like a third in other parts of the country). After a year of that, and the slow staccato reopening of shops and restaurants and pubs, some people have decided it is time for those in England to get back to the grind, and anyone who thinks otherwise should … hold on, am I reading this correctly? “Have their pay cut”?

“People who have been working from home aren’t paying their commuting costs so they have had a de facto pay rise, so that is unfair on those who are going into work,” an anonymous government minister told the Daily Mail this week, in a story about getting civil servants back into Whitehall, and to be fair I would rescind my name from publication too if I was chatting such wham. Meanwhile an anonymous PR firm owner writes in the Times, “It’s no longer the workplace, it’s the wokeplace. My business partner and I employ about 20 members of staff, many aged under 30, and it’s a serious struggle to get them back to the office.” At least Rishi Sunak had the nuts to put his name to comments made to LinkedIn News last week, where he credited the office environment (not going to public school, or then attending Oxford) with the connections he made in his early career. “I doubt I would have had those strong relationships if I was doing my internship or my first bit of my career over Teams and Zoom,” he said. Remember when he wanted us all back in the office in September 2020? How did that go, in the end?

Things I am not going to get into: the hellish nightmare so many people have had with juggling their full-time jobs with full-time childcare with full-time being locked in their own houses this past year; the fact that years of wage stagnation and the massive inflation of necessities such as housing mean that very few people in the UK have been paid a fair wage for years now; how being at home more does not necessarily mean spending less money, by the way. Things I am going to get into instead: what’s so good about the office, anyway?

Even on the mornings when I actually did things, I have never been in an office environment that has been conducive to work. Think of the constant emails about the shared fridges; the radio that is on for some reason; the guy making an ostentatiously loud phonecall on Bluetooth headphones. Never in my life have I seen a photocopier or central printer placed in a position where the sound and smell of it doesn’t disturb at least three people.

“Hi guys, quick meeting please, I know some of you are in the middle of something but I just need to see your faces.” “Hi guys, it’s the annual one-on-one where we make you fill out a four-page form assessing your own performance at work then I quietly tell you you’re not getting a pay rise again.” “Hi guys, Friday afternoon so I’m going to make up a 40-minute presentation on the spot, you all have to stand and watch me mumble through it.” How is this good? How are we meant to work amid this? What is that strange smell? The only toilets with actually private cubicles have flooded, you find out. The repairs to the toilet flood damage somehow take eight months of constant drilling, you find out. Come into the office! You get to have short-notice meetings with other people who keep getting pulled from one task to another without ever really completing any, then will be forced on the spot to think of a creative idea! Come on, this is fun! Someone’s going to microwave their lunchtime fish in a minute!

Thing is, we have a once-in-a-generation chance to build office work from the ground up: to re-evaluate the old nine-to-five, to relocate city centre offices that don’t have any real reason to be in there, to let people work tight four-day weeks to let their life breathe around their jobs, to allow people to take dentist appointments in the middle of the day, to realise that working smart is better than the old-fashioned idea of working hard. We could even consider not cutting pay from people for taking – in the middle of a global emergency – an opportunity to have more flexible working, and even offer (gasp) pay rises to the key workers who chugged on through it throughout. But we won’t do any of that because the people in charge have only ever got to their positions by turning up to the office every day for years in a row, even when they had a cold, and as a result “discipline” is the only working mechanic they understand, and now we’ll be stuck with it until the sun burns us out of the sky. Welcome! Back!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“I could have worse tags than ‘Air Miles Andy’”, Prince Andrew once remarked, “although I don’t know what they are.” Yeah, well … SPOILERS. I’m not sure if the Duke of York would have better luck if he considered the question again today, in light of Various Events of the past few years. His infamous Newsnight interview revealed him to be a man of such baroque stupidity that in some ways its most sensational revelation was that Prince Edward must have been the clever one.

And so to events overnight in New York. For the first time, the Queen’s second son has been made the subject of a US lawsuit, a civil case brought by Virginia Giuffre, formerly Roberts, teenage victim of Andrew’s former close friend, the late underage sex trafficker Jeffrey Epstein. Giuffre alleges that the Queen’s second son sexually abused her when she was a minor on three occasions – in London, in New York, and in the US Virgin Islands. Quite a lot of air miles, there, though I fear we can rule out HRH cashing them in for a free flight to the US any time soon. The prince has not commented on the case but he has always denied the claims saying they’re false and without foundation.

He won’t be sweating even now, of course – as Andrew famously explained, he is biologically incapable of perspiration because he OD’d on adrenaline in the Falklands. And you know, no matter how many times I type that, I always need to take a moment to get my eyebrows down off the roof.

Anyway, this latest development may well represent Giuffre’s last available option for personal agency in pursuit of justice for her claims. Otherwise, she can only await the glacial creep of the various investigations into the now-dead Epstein and his associates, including the financier’s alleged procurer Ghislaine Maxwell, who is herself awaiting trial in the US.

Alas, accounts differ as to the level of the prince’s assistance with any of these various inquiries. Last January, the then–US attorney for the southern district of New York, Geoffrey Berman, declared HRH had offered “zero cooperation” up to that point. According to Berman, not a lot had changed six months later. “If Prince Andrew is, in fact, serious about cooperating with the ongoing federal investigation, our doors remain open,” he reiterated last summer, “and we await word of when we should expect him.” Reading that, you might have felt minded to pencil him in for the 12th of never, but the prince’s legal team countered that he had “on at least three occasions this year offered his assistance as a witness to the DOJ”. In the suit filed on Monday, the documents state: “Again Prince Andrew stonewalled - ignoring (the) plaintiff’s letter and emails without any reply or response, thereby making this action necessary now.”

Let’s move on, then, to a recap on the three locations referenced in Giuffre’s case. The Virgin Islands relates to Epstein’s private property in the territory, apparently known locally – though perhaps not altogether opaquely – as “Paedophile Island”. On the New York allegation, Prince Andrew has already asserted that he couldn’t have had “activity” with Giuffre at Epstein’s Manhattan address that night as he was staying with the then British consul general in New York, Sir Thomas Harris. Or as Harris put it: “It doesn’t sound like he stayed with me,” adding that he had “no recollection” of the claimed royal visit, and it had not appeared in the Court Circular as would be convention. The London allegation arguably comes with the most helpful aide memoire for the prince, what with the existence of a photo of Andrew with his hand resting on the bare hip of Giuffre in an upstairs room of Ghislaine Maxwell’s home. Maxwell herself is smirking in the background of the picture, allegedly taken after a visit by her, the prince, and Epstein to Tramp nightclub.

All sorts of claims have been made about this photograph and what it shows. Placing those allegations and denials to one side for a moment, let’s just focus on what we can see, and ask ourselves a basic question. Namely: what are three big-hitters in their 40s doing hanging round late at night with a 17-year-old runaway? Is this the behaviour of non-weirdos? Not really, let’s face it. Virginia Roberts wasn’t a whole lot older than Andrew’s eldest daughter at the time, which perhaps ought to have crystallised his thinking. Far better to take her to Pizza Express than to run the gauntlet of the aged slimeballs at Tramp.

Nor was it the behaviour of a non-weirdo to continue to hang out with a Tier 1 sex offender AFTER he had been to prison for procuring an underage girl for prostitution, as the Duke of York undeniably did in the case of Epstein. And let’s not forget it wasn’t just one girl, in some kind of he-said, she-said situation. As the Palm Beach police chief who ran the case summarised: “This was 50-something ‘shes’ and one ‘he’ – and the shes all basically told the same story.”

As for what’s next for Andy, I wouldn’t pin hopes on him being a blockbuster Tower of London exhibit for autumn. It was almost exactly two years ago that the fallout of his Epstein friendship hotted up for him again, and back then the prince headed straight to join the Queen’s summer retreat to Balmoral, where he was accompanied by his ex-wife Sarah Ferguson. Andrew was even prominently displayed in the prime seat next to his mother in the car on the way to the local church. He and Fergie then private-jetted off for a second time to Sotogrande – though oddly some random private plane Meghan and Harry had recently taken was deemed of far more febrile and condemnatory interest to most of Fleet Street at the time.

You certainly wouldn’t bet against the same pattern being followed this year. Prince Andrew and Fergie are already reported to be imminently expected at Balmoral, suggesting he is not exactly the Banned Old Duke of York. Perhaps we shall see him with mama again, pursing his lips with the grave satisfaction of one who knows that Balmoral’s humble kirk does not actually have an extradition treaty with hades.

In the immediate wake of the Newsnight interview, a YouGov poll found that a mere 6% of the UK public believed Prince Andrew to be telling the truth. It does seem particularly notable that he asserts he was “acting honourably” in flying all the way to New York in 2010, supposedly to end his friendship with Epstein. Strangely, he has yet to regard it as a matter of honour to fly to New York to clear his own name. If he fails to take up this new opportunity to do so in a court of law, he and his surrogates can hardly complain about being tried in the court of public opinion.

Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnis

This article was amended on 10 August 2021 to refer to the US Virgin Islands, not British Virgin Islands, and on 11 and 16 August 2021 because an earlier version, referring to January 2020, gave Berman’s role incorrectly as “attorney general of New York”, and a later version, due to an editing error, gave it as “US attorney general for the southern district of New York”. In fact he held the role of US attorney for the southern district of New York.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The sixth assessment report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is no ordinary publication. Its 4,000 pages were written by hundreds of independent scientists from 66 countries. It was commissioned by 195 governments and all of them signed off on the conclusions after reviewing them line by line and word by word. These governments, whether supportive, ambivalent or hostile to climate action, now own the messages in the report. So what does it say?

The report concludes that there is now “unequivocal” evidence that human actions are changing our climate. Behind this are alarming findings. The burning of fossil fuels and deforestation has led to levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere that are higher today than at any time in the past 2 million years. Alongside methane and other greenhouse gases, this has driven Earth to be warmer than at any point in the past 125,000 years. The impacts of this can be seen in the loss of Arctic sea ice, accelerating sea level rise, hotter and more frequent heatwaves, increased and more frequent extreme rainfall events and, in some regions, more intense droughts and fires.

As scientists, we can now clearly and unambiguously join all the dots, linking these “climate-impact drivers” back to global heating and carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel use. Today’s global temperature rise of 1.1C above pre-industrial levels confirms the predictions of climate scientists more than 30 years ago. The increases in heatwaves and extreme rainfall events were also long foreseen. Those in power may have heard the warnings in previous reports, but they did not listen.

The current wave of devastation from heatwaves, fires and floods is causing misery across the world. Even the world’s wealthiest countries, such as Canada and Germany, are woefully ill-prepared for the escalating effects of the climate crisis. Destructive events are the consequences of failing to act on past warnings. As a result, the climate emergency is no longer a future hypothesis: it is with us here and now.

Global emissions of carbon dioxide are rising again after their temporary fall during the Covid lockdowns. According to the International Energy Authority, unless new policies are enforced, CO2 emissions will probably hit record levels in 2023. And, as if that were not enough bad news, extreme heatwaves, rainfall events and droughts will get worse until carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions are reduced to zero.

It is hard to make sense of all this. How do we even think of a time as hot as 125,000 years ago? At that point, humans were coexisting with Neanderthals. As much carbon dioxide as two million years ago? Our species hadn’t even evolved by then. It is no wonder these incredible changes feel existential. But we must urgently make sense of them, and act fast.

The problem is ultimately that the use of fossil fuels is a “progress trap”. Decades ago, fossil fuels improved lives compared alternative energy sources, but now their use does the opposite, actively destroying lives and livelihoods. Fossil fuels have gone from an ingenious enabler of human progress to a trap that undermines it. The climate crisis is not caused by vague “human actions”; nor is it a result of some innate aspect of human nature. It is caused by specific investments by specific people in specific things. Change those, and we can change the future.

It may feel uncomfortable saying that fossil fuel companies, their investors and the politicians who enable them are the enemies of progress. But if we care about our collective future we need to say it, again and again, without flinching: using fossil fuels today is destroying our future.

The fossil fuel industry is a powerful and complex enemy. Historically, it is where the world’s most influential lobbyists have worked. Their efforts have secured subsidies, military campaigns and a free licence to pollute, all justified in the name of access to fossil energy. Oil, coal and gas are also intimately involved in our lives, from heating our homes to powering transport. There is no single policy, technological breakthrough or activist campaign that alone can help us escape this trap.

Instead we need a three-pronged attack on fossil fuels: target the industry directly, join broad social movements to secure the political changes needed to end the fossil fuel era and make changes to reduce our demand for fossil fuels. That might mean asking your pension provider to divest from fossil fuels, joining the next Extinction Rebellion protest or replacing your polluting gas cooker with a modern electric one. In this, there is a role for everyone.

What also matters is talking about the climate emergency and the urgent need to end the fossil fuel era. We should be bringing this up at home, at work, at school and with our friends. While the sweeping changes needed must ultimately come from government regulation, it is us who must demonstrate that the desire for change exists.

The new sixth assessment report was not all bad news. It included one unambiguously positive finding: the level of devastation we face is in our collective hands. If the world slashes emissions now and reduces them to net zero by 2050 we would keep the global temperature rise close to 1.5C and avoid the worst impacts of climate change.

To achieve this, politicians will need to hear that the clamour of millions of people’s voices is greater than the might of the fossil fuel lobby. Governments accept the science of climate change. Now they need to be forced to act on what they know is true, and help us escape the fossil fuel progress trap.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@We have all made sacrifices over the past 18 months. People have stayed home to protect others. Businesses have shuttered and many people have lost their incomes and jobs. Trips to see family members overseas have been cancelled; weddings have been postponed. As an initial strategy, these pandemic rules made sense. Our collective sacrifices saved lives and bought scientists time to deliver solutions. In the race to produce a vaccine, time was the currency that counted most.

But now we have several safe and effective vaccines. Hospitals are more experienced at dealing with Covid-19. We know that ventilating buildings, wearing face coverings indoors and avoiding crowded spaces and workplaces when feeling unwell all help to stop the spread of the virus.

It is hard to overstate how transformative vaccines in particular are. Though less effective at stopping the spread of the Delta variant, they are still remarkably effective at preventing severe disease and death. In most instances, people who avoided infection until being vaccinated acquired another layer of protection; they can still get infected, but it is highly unlikely they will end up in hospital or die.

It can be confusing to know how to live in this new situation, where vaccines have transformed but not solved the Covid crisis in richer countries. Legal restrictions have lifted across the UK, but people have not resumed their pre-Covid behaviours. Most are still acting cautiously. This is wise: we know how serious the virus is, and we know that underestimating it is foolish.

At the same time, the collective experiences denied to us during the pandemic are part of being human. Whether it’s going to live music concerts, sitting in the cinema or lifting weights in the gym, the rituals and experiences that were dangerous because of the virus are those which give us meaning and joy. I have started doing some of the things I love again, taking part in hot yoga and spin classes. Life is better and brighter when we can do the things that make our lives meaningful.

In many ways, now is the moment we were holding out for. The UK has achieved high vaccination coverage; a recent ONS study estimates over 93% of adults have antibodies across the four nations. The vaccination programme has raced to get a lid on new variants such as Alpha and Delta that are dramatically more transmissible. In terms of uptake, it has been extraordinarily effective.

While life hasn’t returned to pre-Covid normality, it is nonetheless time to start getting back to living. The challenge now is to return to the activities we enjoy while maintaining a sense of caution and consideration for others, particularly those who are immunocompromised, who can’t get vaccinated and children under 16 who haven’t had access to the vaccine. Because not everyone is equally protected against the virus, it makes sense to keep wearing masks in public spaces and acting with others in mind to avoid spreading the virus.

We made sacrifices to buy time for a scientific solution that has now arrived. Thanks to vaccines, we are now in a position where we can make informed decisions about how to take part in previously risky activities. You might think of this like a “risk budget”; if you are doubly vaccinated and get tested regularly, you can go back to doing the things that make you happy and feel alive, deciding where and how you choose to take risks. Covid-19 has not gone away, but the vaccines allow us to think of it like the other risks we take, such as driving on motorways or travelling to foreign countries.

In the early months of the pandemic, when there was still considerable uncertainty about the potential for scientific breakthroughs, suppressing the virus entirely through the so-called zero-Covid approach was, in my view, the best early strategy for countries able to achieve it. I made the case for this approach across the UK in summer 2020 in order to avoid the second wave and a winter lockdown. Antibody prevalence was less than 10% at the time. Now even the countries that pursued this model, such as Australia and New Zealand, need a more sustainable strategy. This will involve vaccinating 80-90% of their populations and opening up cautiously to international travel. All countries are running towards the same goal: mass vaccination coverage.

There are still questions over what will happen this winter in the UK and Europe. But the problems we may face in the future will pale in comparison to the devastation that Delta is causing in countries such as Peru, Namibia, Indonesia and Nepal. Vaccines are largely unavailable in these places, health systems are collapsing and people face the choice of going to work and catching Covid-19 or staying home and going hungry.

Now that we’re able to go back to living, there’s no excuse for not caring about the rest of the world. Rich governments urgently need to start putting real investment into vaccinating poorer countries, whether by building regional manufacturing hubs, waiving intellectual property rights or investing in other countries’ medical capacity. The UK government should be doing more to help on these issues and ensure Covid becomes a manageable issue, because the pandemic is not over until it is over everywhere.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nobody really cares about prisons. They are so far removed from the experience of most people and they are, apparently, full of horrid people. Occasionally, the media will run stories about rat-infested cells or suicide rates, but because so few people have anything to do with prisons, the stories soon fade and life for those on the outside continues as normal.

But prisons matter. It matters who goes into them. It matters what happens inside them. And it matters how much they cost. Although prisons too often function like black holes into which society banishes those it deems problematic, the state of our prisons tells a story about all of us. Prisons reflect society back to itself: they embody the ways we have failed, the people we have failed, and the policies that have failed, all at immense human – and economic – cost.

As chief executive of the prison reform charity the Howard League for the past 35 years, reforming prisons has become my life’s mission. In October, I will leave my work with one sad but inescapable conclusion: prisons are the last unreformed public service, stuck in the same cycle of misery and futility as when I arrived.

If a time traveller from 100 years ago walked into a prison today – whether one of the inner-city Victorian prisons or the new-builds where the majority of men are held – the similarities would trump the differences. They would recognise the smells and the sounds, the lack of activity and probably some of the staff. It is not only the buildings that have stayed the same – it is the whole ethos of the institution.

Prison is an unhealthy place. Most prisoners have come from poverty, addiction and social deprivation cemented by decades of failed social policy. Many arrive with long-term health problems, and in prison their health deteriorates further. While life expectancy and the quality of life for much of the country has advanced significantly in the past three decades, prisoners are considered “old” at 50. In the 12 months to June 2021, 396 people died in prison custody – some from Covid, some from suicide, many from “natural causes” that few of us on the outside would consider natural in middle age.

Even before prisons were locked down during the pandemic, it was normal for men – who make up 95% of the prison population – to spend almost all day in their cells. Wing-cleaning or an education class might occupy a few hours on a weekday. A shower every few days might offer brief respite. Men spend the day, and sleep, in ill-fitting, saggy prison uniforms, unwashed for days on end, waiting to be released.

Mealtimes provide structure, but not sustenance. Breakfast is a pack of white bread, a small bag of cereal and a small carton of milk, provided at tea-time the day before. (Inevitably, it is consumed that night.) They wake hungry, without food until lunch at about 11am – usually a small, soggy baguette, a packet of crisps and an apple, if they’re lucky. One hot meal comes with stodge and vegetables cooked beyond the point of identification at about 5pm.

The sheer monotony of life inside does nothing for the mental health challenges many prisoners face. Addictions worsen, with drugs readily available across the nation’s prison estate. Lockdown may have ended what little human contact prisoners had with the outside world. It did nothing to stem the flow of narcotics.

On release, many face homelessness and joblessness and may well have lost any family contact they had before incarceration. The people we step over in the street, for whom we sometimes buy a sandwich or a cup of coffee, are often people recently released from prisons. It is hardly surprising that about half of those released are reconvicted of a further offence and end up back inside. It is a merry-go-round but without cheer.

Minister after minister has done nothing to address the central question haunting our prison system: what is it all for? Each new secretary of state arrives with a new idea – improving a handful of prisons, building a few new ones, or getting people on to sex offender courses – and millions are duly splurged on the latest fad. But it does not face up to the problem that is the prison system as a whole.

At the heart of prisons is the fact that they are fundamentally unjust. They embed and compound social, economic and health inequalities. They disproportionately suck in men from poor, Black and minority ethnic backgrounds. They do nothing to help people out of crime. We only have to look at the internal punishment system to see that unfairness is the name of the game, with Black people significantly more likely to be physically restrained and punished than their white counterparts.

The whole system needs radical overhaul, starting with a swingeing reduction in the number of people we imprison. Custody is the most drastic and severe response the state has at its disposal and should only be used in exceptional and rare instances – either for the most egregious crimes, or when someone poses a serious and continuing threat to public safety.

Abiding by that principle would virtually empty our prisons of women and children, and drastically reduce the number of men behind bars. Most women are either on remand or serving a short sentence. Many are survivors of domestic abuse. Vanishingly few have committed violent crimes that warrant incarceration; fewer still could be reasonably considered to pose an ongoing threat to society. They, along with the 500 children who are currently incarcerated, should be managed in the community by specialist local authority-run services that provide the support, rehabilitation and education that will save them from further imprisonment. Thousands of men would benefit from similar support, whether that’s community addiction services, decent housing or mental health facilities.

The number of people in prison in England and Wales today sits at 78,600. That number could and should plummet – and swiftly. Margaret Thatcher – no softie on criminal justice – managed with less than half that number of prisoners. The Netherlands has drastically cut its prison population and is closing its prisons. A shrunken estate could be transformed so that prisons become places of purpose where people receive holistic support, quality care, meaningful skills and education, in an environment that is as similar to the society they will eventually re-enter as possible.

Over the past 35 years, I hope that I have contributed to making things just a bit better. I am most proud of the work we have done with police forces to reduce the arrests of young people, saving hundreds of thousands of children from experiencing the trauma and lifelong damage of being arrested. But the state of our prison system, the leviathan that continues to devour lives and resources and contaminates political discourse, remains my most bitter regret. A small, ethical and compassionate prison system would save the taxpayer a fortune, change lives and transform incarceration for good. It does not have to be like this.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The hard men of Ulster loyalism are adept at spotting Trojan horses. Belfast’s first Irish-language preschool, planned to open in September, wouldn’t get past them without a fight. This weekend, as the school announced it would look for another location, they celebrated victory over Irish republican insurgents disguised as tiny two- and three-year-old children. After the incursion was abandoned, one of the leaders of the rout addressed “the loyal residents” of the area via a social media post: “STAY STRONG AND PROUD … THE DAYS OF LOYALISTS QUIETLY ROLLING OVER, FOR THE SAKE OF PEACE AT ANY PRICE … ARE OVER.” It was, in reality, a disgraceful episode of intimidation led by a few paranoid and sectarian individuals against a lovely, educational and life-enhancing project for 16 preschool children.

It is a mark of the current dysfunctional volatility within unionist politics in Northern Ireland that this crazed campaign gained enough traction to convince those behind the project to look for premises elsewhere. These situations can escalate. In 2001 loyalists in another part of Belfast hurled abuse and bags of urine at small children and their parents on their way into school during what became known as the Holy Cross dispute. The cause? The alleged taking down of a flag.

In Northern Ireland’s largely segregated education system, Irish is taught in Catholic schools and not taught in Protestant ones. The naíscoil – nursery school – was all set to start up in September. It would sit in a spare prefab on the corner of the playground at the big redbrick primary school in the heart of the Braniel housing estate. It was set up by a committee established by a group of parents and supported by the education authorities. One of the instigators is Linda Ervine, a brilliant educationist who has run Irish language classes for adults in mainly working-class Protestant areas for several years now. She works for an organisation called Turas, which also teaches about how Irish was an intrinsic part of Protestant identity until recent years. Ervine lives in east Belfast.

The idea of Naíscoil na Seolta was to provide a religiously and ethnically integrated group of toddlers access to the Irish language through the medium of play. Funds had been raised, teachers appointed, walls brightly painted, toys propped up on shelves, tiny sofas and chairs installed. But as excitement built, those opposed to the project were launching a campaign to have it stopped. They set up social media accounts, circulated a petition and put up posters in the area, in which Ervine’s face is superimposed so that she appears to be standing among Sinn Féin leaders as an election candidate. Keyboard warriors piled in claiming that the community was concerned and “key stakeholders” should have been consulted about this contentious and “devious imposition”.

The head teacher at Braniel primary school, Diane Dawson, a vibrant woman with spiky blond hair, has been a champion for the project. When approached, she gladly rented out the prefab, which is owned by the education authority. She is passionate about the way multilingualism improves learning skills in the very young. Her unionism is not in doubt. She grew up in the minority Protestant community in South Armagh, marched in Orange Order parades, taught the flute to members of the Redrock Purple Heroes band, and while her politics have changed somewhat she still loves the boom of a Lambeg drum. She spoke out on BBC Radio Ulster. No word of Irish spoken in her school, she declared, posed any threat to her identity. Just two parents had expressed concern to her about the naíscoil. The petition which purported to represent the opposition of local residents was, she pointed out, signed by people from all over the United Kingdom.

She told me that “Braniel” comes from the Irish and means “bright slope of the O’Neill”, and that the red hand of Ulster, which is now the adopted symbol of loyalism, originated with the Irish chieftain. Her school has nearly 500 students. She has already introduced Irish along with Spanish and sign language as part of her post-Covid recovery curriculum, and parents and children are overwhelmingly delighted. There is also a short course in Ulster Scots – short, Dawson pointed out, because it is not really a language. She showed me emails and messages from parents backing her stand, which also has the full support of her board of governors. She showed me inside the prefab. There had already been an induction day and a whiteboard had Irish words on it. They were, in English, “children together”, “I am at school”, “happy” and “An Ghaeilge” – the Irish language.

It is a language that has been heavily politicised in Northern Ireland where symbols of Britishness dominate the public sphere and those representing Irishness are only tolerated in areas where Catholics are in a majority. Republicans have placed it at the core of their Irish identity. During the Troubles, IRA prisoners learned and spoke it in jail in defiance of the authorities. Infamously one republican urged that every word learned was “a bullet in the freedom struggle”. Equally infamously, the DUP first minister Arlene Foster in 2017 rejected calls from nationalists and republicans for an Irish language act claiming that “if you feed a crocodile it will keep coming back for more”; while a DUP MP said if there was such an act he would use it as toilet paper. Political agreement was reached that an act would be introduced, but unionists have so far succeeded in blocking this.

Ervine found the intimidation disturbing. However, she is heartened by and grateful for the immense support the naíscoil got from Dawson, within Braniel and from the wider community of east Belfast and beyond. Her enthusiasm for Irish is undimmed. The naíscoil will go ahead – somewhere. The invitation to return to Braniel is still open.

She shows me Turas’s latest promotional animation. It tells the true story of a young member of Belfast’s LGBTQ+ community who, being from a Protestant background, felt “from the wrong side of the tracks” to learn Irish. However, Chris took up classes and fell in love with the language. They also fell in love, learned the Irish words with which to propose, and are now happily married. Chris describes Irish as giving them a sense of being at home. What could be sweeter, or less threatening? Sadly, the DUP also opposes same-sex marriage.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The crisis in social care in the UK does not have just one cause, nor one simple solution. Chronic underfunding, an ageing population, the Brexit-induced labour shortage and the devastation wreaked by Covid-19 have all played a part. But the problems forcing the care system to the brink of collapse don’t just come from a series of exogenous shocks – they are internal too. The very structure of the sector is unstable.

The growing involvement of private equity, hedge funds and real estate investment trusts in the care sector in recent decades has brought about a rise in the use of predatory financial techniques, justified in the name of enticing capital into a sector that the government has persistently failed to adequately fund. According to data from the Care Quality Commission, these firms now own one in eight care home beds in England.

A screen of financial jargon helps investors avoid public scrutiny, but a slew of recent reports has begun to detail the many tactics used to ensure “healthy” returns on investment – and the profound and troubling consequences that these strategies have for the care sector.

In 2012, the UK-based private equity firm Terra Firma Capital bought Four Seasons Health Care in an £825m debt-leveraged buyout, backed by US-based hedge fund H/2 Capital Partners.

Leveraged buyouts are a common technique used to increase return on investment. They allow investors to pay only a fraction of the purchase price using their own capital; the rest is covered with a loan. In theory, the target social care company then pays off the debt using their cashflow, increasing the equity portion owned by the investment firm, meaning a larger windfall for investors if the care company is sold on.

However, recent research has found that these kinds of buyouts are associated with an 18% increase in risk of bankruptcy for the target company. In the case of Four Seasons Health Care, onerous debt payments contributed to the company’s collapse into administration in 2019. Two of the other largest care home providers in the UK – HC-One and Care UK – have also undergone leveraged buyouts and, as a result, their corporate group structures remain saddled with significant debts.

The implications of this debt-heavy model are significant. Among the five largest care home chains backed by private equity in the UK, interest payments on leveraged buyouts and other debt obligations absorb about 16% of the average weekly bed fee.

But interest payments on debt aren’t the only additional cost some care providers face. Other strategies for increasing return on investment see investors selling off care home properties for a one-off lump sum, then leasing them back – sometimes from a new landlord, sometimes from other entities within the corporate structure.

Care UK’s accounts, for example, state that it paid £4.1m in rent in 2019 to Silver Sea Holdings – a company registered in Luxembourg, a low-tax jurisdiction, which is also owned by Care UK’s parent company, Bridgepoint.

These financialised structures demand an ever-growing revenue stream, not to fund more and better quality care or higher wages, but to keep up with growing interest repayments on the debts they carry and rising rents, and to line the pockets of investors, some of whom are astutely located in low-tax jurisdictions.

Current reform proposals do not even begin to touch these problems. The touted 1p increase on national insurance contributions to fund social care, while welcome, would be like pouring money into a bucket that someone has wilfully punched holes into. We have to stem the outflow too.

Tighter financial regulation of the sector could rein in extractivist financial practices, and in the short term should be used to do so. However, this misses an even more fundamental challenge: that the core characteristics of adult social care make it almost impossible to privatise successfully. The supposed benefits of the free market – quality innovations and cost efficiencies – simply don’t apply. The bucket itself is not, and never has been, structurally sound.

For starters, well-functioning markets rely on consumer choice: if a product or service is inadequate, you simply choose another. But unlike a phone contract, where poor service may inspire you to switch provider, the physical and emotional costs associated with moving between care homes – known as “transfer trauma” – can leave vulnerable residents with limited power to voice their concerns.

In addition, the time-insensitive nature of care work means that there are few opportunities for cost-efficiency savings without compromising working conditions and quality of care. After all, asking a care worker to spend less time with each client can only be detrimental for a service in which, as the economist Tim Jackson puts it, the “quality rests entirely on the attention paid by one person to another”.

These two features of the care sector mean that service quality and worker pay come into conflict with returns to investors. Independent studies appear to corroborate this, finding that both quality of care and wages are generally lower in for-profit care homes.

Signing-on bonuses to recruit new carers, piecemeal funding reforms and even improved financial regulation cannot scratch the surface of these structural challenges.

The competitive, for-profit model of social care provision has had 30 years to deliver on its promises of efficient, high-quality services. In that time, the crisis in adult social care has only deepened. Instead of driving innovation, increased competition between providers has undermined care quality. It is time to stop pursuing the same strategy and expecting a different outcome.

The care sector needs an overhaul. Not only do we need adequate long-term funding from central government, we also need to address some searching questions about the role of profit in the sector, and ask: who is benefiting from this dysfunctional model? And who, ultimately, is paying the price?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Throughout history, writing systems have reflected available technologies. Ancient Mesopotamian cuneiform featured triangles and lines because the characters were impressed into clay with a dowel; ancient Germanic runes were distinguished by angular shapes instead of curves because they were etched into stone. Now, with electronic writing and emojis at our fingertips, even those without any artistic talent can easily “write” a number of pictorial symbols, from a smirk to a syringe, from a bento box to a pregnant man.

With emojis on the mind following the Unicode Consortium’s recently released draft of the newest forthcoming set, Emoji 14.0, it is a good time to ponder the relationship between emojis and the mind. Research conducted within the last few years has allowed us to begin answering some of these questions, such as whether emojis are language – and whether we can think in emojis.

This research seems to support the idea that people excel at processing and understanding sentences that feature text and emojis together. If an emoji replaces a word in a sentence, people comprehend it without issue. If an emoji that doesn’t make sense is added to a sentence, we spend more time trying to make sense of it, just as we do with nonsensical words. In my own research, I’ve observed that the electrical pattern our brain produces when we interpret sarcasm in words is also evoked by a sarcastic emoji. Our brains produce a different electrical pattern when we encounter an unexpected word, and that pattern appears when we happen upon an unexpected emoji as well.

And yet, emojis are not words. Consider what happens when emojis stand on their own, without text. Cognitive scientist Neil Cohn has run several experiments on emojis, including one that encouraged participants to communicate using only emojis. The grammar of the resulting “sentences” was drastically less complex than the grammar found in language. In another experiment, we’ve found that when emojis are strung together one after the other, like words in a sentence, they are harder for people to comprehend than when they are combined to look like one picture.

These findings reinforce the observation that stringing emojis together like this is fairly unnatural. Linguists Gretchen McCulloch and Lauren Gawne have determined that the most-produced multi-emoji expressions just repeat the same emoji multiple times, a pattern that happens far far far less in multi-word expressions. Emoji Dick, Fred Benenson’s translation of Moby Dick into emoji-only sentences, is both an incredible work and an impossible read. While emojis can stand in well for concrete nouns such as kiwi and cat, they’re inadequate at grammatical concepts such as verb tense, prepositions and pronouns. In addition, emoji users can’t easily create new ones to fit a conversational context, which is how primitive natural languages start to blossom into full-fledged languages. These limitations mean emojis will never replace language nor exist as a language all on their own.

So if emojis aren’t words, what are they? In some sense, emojis give us something we already have with spoken/signed language. In face-to-face communication, as well as using words we also extract meaning from the tone and pitch of the voice, facial expressions, hand gestures, body language – and even the physical setting of the conversation. Emojis, similarly, give us a way to enrich the text-based medium. Just as facial expressions and gestures are intrinsic to our face-to-face conversations, it’s easy for us to use emojis in our electronic conversations to fulfil some of the same functions.

From this perspective, then, emojis aren’t necessarily changing the way our brains work. Instead, they capitalise on resources we’ve already developed over thousands of years, which is integrating different streams of information into a unified meaning. Psychologists David McNeill and Susan Goldin-Meadow have argued that gestures shouldn’t be considered ancillary to language, but rather that the two systems evolved together to provide key cognitive advantages. Even though the neural mechanisms that we use to take in these streams of information may differ, combining the contents of these streams into a unified interpretation is natural. Emojis functioning like gestures or tone markers in electronic communication is an expected and natural outcome, now that the technology allows it.

I’d wager that thinking in emojis may be possible – but would be constrained by the limitations of emojis themselves; without a language-like grammar, these emoji thoughts wouldn’t be as structurally complex as the full-sentence constructs we’re capable of with language. We can already think in gestures and images, so I don’t think it’s a stretch to say that simpler thoughts could take an emoji form; sometimes, this may even be more natural than any language-based thought. 😳 seems to be a better representation of an emotional reaction than any words, and if people send 😳 as a message enough times, they may start thinking of 😳 as a natural response, even without phone in hand.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The release today of the first part of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s sixth assessment report makes for stark reading. It reaffirms that anthropogenic climate change is real, present and lasting: it is now unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, ocean and land to an unprecedented degree, with effects almost certain to worsen through the coming decades.

The report also dispels any notion that the effects of the climate crisis are abstract or distant. Extreme events are being felt across the world, from wildfires in Australia, Sweden and north-west America to heatwaves in Siberia and Canada and the devastating drought in South Africa. Evidence has grown since the last assessment report that human activity has exacerbated extreme weather events. Without urgent action, such events will continue to get worse. Moreover, sea levels are projected to rise over this century. Rises of as much as 2m cannot be ruled out, leaving low-lying lands and coastal communities extremely vulnerable.

One of the headline figures in the report is that average global temperatures in 2011-2020 were 1.1C higher compared with 1850-1900. Though this may seem like a small increase on any individual day, the increments matter in the long term. With every additional fraction of a degree increase in global warming, changes in extreme events such as heatwaves, floods and droughts become larger.

The Paris agreement in 2015 was momentous in committing signatories to limiting global warming to 2C above pre-industrialised levels, and preferably 1.5C. The IPCC’s report makes plain that our goal should be to keep temperature rises as small as possible. Relative to a 2C increase, limiting temperature rises to 1.5C would reduce the risks of food and water shortages, improve prospects for endangered species and protect human health from air pollution, malnutrition and extreme heat. We must aim for that goal.

Limiting global warming to 1.5C is ambitious – but is not fanciful. In the 2019 amendment to the Climate Change Act, the UK showed the intent required and committed to reaching net-zero emissions by 2050. Still, achieving that aim will be a challenge. The climate crisis is as much a rural problem as an urban one. It is both economic and human, domestic and international. This means transformation is required at every level of society: individuals, employers, institutions and international partners will need to work together to understand the trade-offs, agree compromises and seize opportunities. And just as scientists are pooling insights from diverse fields of expertise, policymakers will need to work in new ways, sharing ideas across disciplines to plot a clear path from here to net zero. This is a whole systems challenge. Tackling it will require a systemic approach.

03:55 Climate crisis: what one month of extreme weather looks like – video

Working back from 2050, it is clear that reaching net zero requires a renewed emphasis on science and innovation. First, we need to assess the technologies already available, identify those we need at scale by the middle of the century and deploy them as fast as possible. Second, we need to rigorously monitor progress against intermediate targets to make sure we are on track. Third, we need to identify areas where practical answers don’t yet exist – where research and innovation is still required to answer specific challenges – and invest accordingly; done well, these investments can seed the industries of the future. Across all this, we need to think globally, ensuring climate innovations are affordable and that their benefits are shared equally.

We must also recognise that the climate has already changed, and will continue to do so as we near 1.5C. The seas are rising, and floods and wildfires are more frequent. Again, science and engineering can help us to adapt, boosting the resilience of the most vulnerable and strengthening global food security. Existing tools can anticipate adverse events, while adjusting the design of cities, transport systems and agriculture can minimise their worst effects.

Together with the Cop president designate, Alok Sharma, we will ensure that the forthcoming climate change conference (Cop26) will emphasise science and innovation, including a dedicated day of activity. We hope that one of the legacies of Cop26 will be that science is considered as important in producing solutions to climate change as it is in understanding it.

Each of the IPCC’s assessment reports are an extraordinary undertaking, drawing on thousands of experts from around the world to provide the most comprehensive assessment of the present and future climate to date. They have made their mark, too. The second assessment report, published in 1995, memorably stated that “the balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate” and ultimately led to the Kyoto protocol committing parties to limiting greenhouse gas emissions. The fifth informed the Paris agreement of 2015. We hope that the sixth will spur similarly historic action in Glasgow in November and set the world on a safe and sustainable trajectory.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What should we do about people who refuse to get vaccinated, or who continue to deny that Covid is real? Debate on this issue has raged for months in the US. “Respect them!” scolded conservative commentators. “Shame them!” urged some. Others counselled empathy for them as victims of disinformation.

But as the surging Delta variant ushers in the “pandemic of the unvaccinated”, uncertainty about persuading pandemic holdouts has given way to anger and despair. This was exemplified by the recent public reaction to a viral news video showing a Louisiana man recovering from a severe Covid-19 infection in a hospital bed, stating that he would still rather have had to be in hospital than accept a vaccine. It was the first time many of us saw the human face of a puzzling phenomenon which healthcare workers have been telling us about since last year: patients denying the realities of the virus even as they lay sick and dying from it.

As Leo Tolstoy famously asked of another seemingly hopeless social problem – poverty – “what then must we do?” The sociology of fraud, one of my research specialties for the past decade, offers some answers.

In 1952, the sociologist Erving Goffman analysed the art of the con in a seminal essay, On Cooling the Mark Out. To understand the phenomenon, he identified a cast of characters: first, the “operator”, who perpetrates the con; second, the “mark”, the target of the con; and third, the “cooler”, an ally of the con artist who attempts to console the victim once the fraud has become apparent “in a way that makes it easy for him to accept the inevitable and quietly go home”.

Goffman observed that all “marks” eventually come to understand that they have been defrauded. But strangely, they almost never complain or report the crime to the authorities. Why? Because, Goffman argues, admitting that you have been conned is so deeply shameful that “marks” experience it as a kind of social death – the painful end of one of the many social roles we all play.

Instead, many “marks” simply deny the con, claiming they were “in on it” the whole time. This saves their pride and cheats social death, but it allows the con to continue unchecked, entrapping others. By prioritising their self-image over the common good, “marks” make a cowardly, selfish choice. Goffman doesn’t shrink from calling this out as a “moral failure”.

In 2021, this “moral failure” takes the form of Covid-infected pandemic deniers and anti-vaxxers ranting from hospital beds: they have chosen saving face over saving other people’s lives. They could do this by telling the truth and exposing the con, saying: “Covid is real, get vaccinated.” Some do. But many won’t. It’s difficult not to conclude that some are making a conscious choice to protect themselves socially and emotionally at the expense of the rest of us.

Goffman’s work suggests two parallel strategies for dealing with people who have committed themselves to false ideas. The first is to let them experience the shame of what he terms “social death”. But the second, and perhaps the more productive, is to identify and deploy “coolers” to coax the pandemic holdouts back into the fold of mainstream society.

The most effective “coolers” are figures that the “marks” trust, people whose opinion they value. Most people aren’t interested in earning the good opinion of just anyone. Rather, we care about status and “face” within specific communities that matter to us, what two other sociologists of the mid-20th century, Herbert Hyman and Robert Merton, called “reference groups”.

Everyone belongs to multiple reference groups, many of which overlap, including their families, neighbourhoods, schools and workplaces, and their political affiliations. These groups not only structure our social networks, but serve a gatekeeping function: we generally trust information gleaned from our reference group, and seek approval from others within it.

Covid deniers and anti-vaxxers are just like everyone else in this regard: they don’t crave validation or seek information from everyone. This is why the “respect them”, “shame them” and “empathise with them” approaches haven’t worked and won’t change a thing. Respect, shame and empathy only have currency and impact within specific social networks; so, too, with the trustworthiness of information. For someone who considers themselves part of the “Fox Nation” reference group, pandemic precautions recommended by the “lamestream media” are to be disregarded. But if the same information were to come from Sean Hannity or Tucker Carlson, it would probably be taken far more seriously.

From a purely pragmatic perspective, it’s good news for everyone that some influential conservative figures are beginning to act as “coolers” in relation to pandemic holdouts by encouraging vaccination – even if the “coolers” have often been, as in Goffman’s theory, complicit in the con. The call back to reality has to come from inside the house.

But there are still too few Fox News hosts and Republican politicians encouraging vaccination, masking and other Covid precautions. We need more “coolers” – and we need them quickly.

One way to do this is by seeking out other reference groups besides the big ones in media and politics, ones that matter to pandemic deniers and anti-vaxxers. Social media, as damaging as it has been in spreading disinformation, also makes it relatively straightforward to identify and sometimes to join groups that foment anti-vax sentiment.

Within those groups, we can pinpoint influential members who may be turning their backs on Covid denialism, and encourage them in their journey. We can message them offering support, particularly if our reference groups overlap – whether that means sharing the same home town, or practising the same faith. The more shared social space, the better. We might offer to back them up if they get trolled for expressing misgivings about Covid denialism. Or we could let them know that we would admire them for telling the truth.

Those people may not have a television audience of millions, but they nonetheless have the potential to act as “coolers” for those in their reference groups – both online and off. The higher their status within the groups, the more influence they will have in reconciling their fellow travellers to the reality of the pandemic, perhaps enabling them to rejoin society, or at least preventing them from endangering the rest of us.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tucked away in the government’s 300-page police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, are various clauses which will have serious implications for the right to protest. The bill seeks to quietly criminalise “serious annoyance”, increase police powers to restrict protests, and give the home secretary discretion over what types of protests are allowed.

It is striking that such an enormous bill had its second reading less than a week after it was published and was only allocated two days of debate. It appears that the government had hoped to pass it quickly and without fanfare, but instead the introduction of the bill coincided with the fallout from the police response to the Sarah Everard vigil and ultimately sparked in Bristol the very thing it sought to limit: protests.

Clauses 55 and 56 of the bill will make it easier for the police to impose conditions on marches and static protests, removing the distinction between the two. Where before, protests would have to threaten serious public disorder to warrant certain restrictions, under this bill police could intervene merely if the protest was noisy enough to cause a person in the vicinity “serious unease”.

Further, the range of conditions that may be imposed would be increased. Where before police could only rule on the place, duration and number of persons attending a protest, under this bill, the police would be able to impose any condition they thought necessary. As Liberty, the civil liberties organisation, points out, this would give the police the power to ban static protests altogether.

This is significant because breaching one of these conditions is a criminal offence, and the bill also lowers the threshold for committing such an offence and increases the maximum penalty. Whereas before, someone would have to actually know that the condition had been imposed by the police, under this bill organisers can be prosecuted if they merely ought to have known, and could end up facing nearly a year in prison.

This bill would make it a crime to cause “serious annoyance” to the public, with a maximum penalty of 10 years in prison. However, one of the most worrying powers created by the bill gives the home secretary control over the definition of “serious disruption to the life of the community” and “serious disruption to the activities of an organisation”, both of which can determine when police powers to limit protest are engaged. This power effectively grants a minister the ability to suppress the kinds of protests that he or she does not like or agree with.

In the debate on the bill, even former Conservative prime minister Theresa May, herself an ex-home secretary, pointedly commented: “It is tempting when home secretary to think that giving powers to the home secretary is very reasonable – because we all think we’re reasonable. But actually future home secretaries may not be so reasonable.”

The government refers to the 2019 Extinction Rebellion protests and the recent “Kill the Bill” protests in Bristol as justifying these new powers. After all, given the images of a seemingly beleaguered police force struggling to defend itself against a mob who have set fire to vans, with officers suffering broken bones and a collapsed lung, ought we not to give the police the tools to fight back?

Except that it turns out that the media coverage of the Bristol protests has been misleading, the Avon and Somerset police admitted there had not been any broken bones or punctured lungs and the locals in Bristol tell a very different story of heavy-handed police tactics. In addition, it has been reported that far more protesters than police were injured.

The reality is that the police do not need more powers to limit protests, as much as they might like them. Even if all of the protesters in Bristol were being as violent as the initial reports claimed, there are already laws in place to deal with that behaviour. The clauses in this bill about noise, inconvenience and annoyance betray what it is really trying to do: keep those pesky protesters away from the places they will have the most impact. That way, the government will not have to worry about protests the next time they do such things as authorise police informants to commit torture or excuse soldiers for historic war crimes.

Make no mistake, this bill is not about law and order, it is about state control and the subtle erosion of freedom of expression. Protests are supposed to be loud and inconvenient; they would not be particularly effective otherwise. As Theresa May put it: “There will be people who will have seen scenes of protests and asked, ‘Why aren’t the government doing something?’ The answer, in many cases, may simply be that we live in a democratic, free society.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@‘The fight against the novel coronavirus pandemic has highlighted the importance of ‘Asian values’.” “Asian culture’s emphasis on obedience to authority could play a role in explaining how successful public health measures have been in the region.” “The massive disparity in eastern and western responses to the pandemic lies in their cultural values. Western ‘individualistic’ culture puts the needs and desires of the individual the priority whereas eastern ‘collectivist’ culture pushes societal needs to the forefront.”

Last year, “Asian values” became the one-stop explanation for the success of countries such as China, South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Singapore and Vietnam in controlling the virus. The west, many insisted, had paid for its individualist ethos by having populations refuse to obey the authorities, fail to wear masks or observe lockdowns.

Except that it has not quite turned out like that. The Olympics in Tokyo have been superb, full of spectacle and drama. But there have been no spectators in the stadiums to watch that drama. Tokyo is in its fourth lockdown and Covid cases are still rising sharply. Most Japanese did not want the Games and in no country has there been more scorn for the way the authorities have handled the pandemic. Less than a third of the population has been vaccinated and only a minority trust Covid vaccines. The only other nation so sceptical of vaccines is another east Asian country, South Korea. Those two countries also have the lowest levels of trust in health authorities’ ability to deliver an effective vaccination programme. There are reasons for such scepticism, such as Japan’s history of botched vaccination programmes. Yet all this puts a dent in the claim that Asian countries are particularly trusting of authority and exhibit a herd-like obedience.

Meanwhile, in Britain, 96% trust Covid vaccines. The supposedly highly individualist population has throughout the pandemic desired more restrictions than the government imposed. The latest polls suggest almost half of Britons think restrictions have been lifted too soon (as compared with one in eight who think they should have been eased sooner); the vast majority want masks to be mandatory in shops and on public transport and social distancing rules maintained; half want nightclubs closed; and almost one in five want to maintain the toughest forms of restrictions – banning people from leaving their homes except for essential shopping, exercise and work.

Such attitudes are not peculiar to Britain. At the beginning of the pandemic, most European nations were highly supportive of lockdowns and other restrictions on personal freedoms, much to the surprise of the authorities. Trust in vaccines has increased in most European nations, including in France where, for historical reasons, there has been greater hesitancy. Australia has seen low numbers of Covid cases and deaths, but also a glacial rate of vaccination. Individual states have imposed a series of severe lockdowns but, despite a number of anti-lockdown protests, most people view the authorities as having handled the pandemic very well. Australians seem as, if not more, willing to conform to government demands as people in most “Confucian” countries.

Perhaps the most depressing consequence of the east/west myth is the belief that one can have only one or the other

Far from there being a simple east/west divide, the global picture is messy in terms of attitudes, policy and outcomes. East Asian countries have disappointingly low vaccination rates, but the numbers of Covid deaths also remain low. Britain has a very high proportion of vaccinated people, but the numbers of deaths are very high and few would suggest, with the exception of the vaccine rollout, that policy has been coherent or well-judged.

This messiness reflects the fact that both responses to Covid-19 and the outcomes are the products of many factors. One reason many east Asian states were initially better prepared for Covid was their recent experience of similar diseases, especially Sars. In Britain, the plan that had been prepared for dealing with pandemics was shelved, partly because of austerity. The hollowing out of the state, and outsourcing of basic functions, has restricted Britain’s ability to react to major issues. In the EU, both the inertia of the bureaucratic machine and the tensions between national interests and bureaucratic needs paralysed policymaking, most noticeably in the vaccine rollout. In America, political polarisation has shaped attitudes to Covid and to social restrictions.

Much of this complexity gets ignored in the drive to look for simple categories through which to view people and events and for simple divisions with which to explain the world. Many cultural developments in east Asian countries, from Seoul’s club scene to Japanese subcultures, belie the “conformist” tag. Or consider that in comparing China and Taiwan the fact that one is authoritarian and the other democratic matters more than the fact that both have Confucian traditions. Ignoring that distinction allows many to portray authoritarianism as Confucianism. Nor is Confucianism the only philosophy in east Asian countries – it is simply the one with which western observers are most familiar.

Similarly, the idea that one can simply distil “western values” into individualism is as misleading as imagining that “eastern values” are synonymous with conformity. Liberal individualism is certainly a key thread in western traditions. But western cultures have been shaped by figures as divergent as Aristotle and Aquinas, Edmund Burke and Karl Marx, as by the philosophers of the liberal tradition, such as John Locke or John Stuart Mill.

Perhaps the most depressing consequence of the east/west myth is the belief that one can have only one or the other: that one can either be socially minded or believe in individual freedoms. The fallout from this kind of zero-sum thinking has been the distortion of ideas both of freedom and of social-mindedness. On the one hand, ideas of freedom and rights have been increasingly associated with the right and trivialised. When the refusal to wear a mask becomes seen as a heroic celebration of individualism, there is something deeply confused about the notion. Meanwhile, many sections of the left seem to have forgotten the importance of freedom to those who least possess it and have come to view community-mindedness as the imposition of greater restrictions.

There are clearly cultural differences between nations but to frame such differences in terms of “east v west” is to ignore the reality. If the pandemic has revealed anything about values, it is that east and west are still struggling to work through the relationship between individualism and community-mindedness.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) announced this week that everyone in the UK aged 16 and 17 should be offered the Covid-19 vaccine. Just two weeks ago, it said the vaccine wouldn’t be offered to non-vulnerable people aged 12-17. The change in position is welcome, but the reasons for the committee’s two-week delay, and its decision to not extend the vaccine to 12- 15-year-olds, are unclear. Unlike the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the committee has offered no quantitative analysis of the risks associated with vaccinating people in this younger age group.

Delaying the rollout of the vaccine to adolescents is risky. Recent figures show that 1% of 10-19s were being diagnosed with Covid-19 a week. Waiting for further data on vaccine safety when infections are ripping through younger age groups isn’t cautious, it’s reckless.

This seems particularly clear given what we already know about the safety of vaccines in adolescents. The UK Medicines Healthcare Products and Regulatory Authority deemed the Pfizer vaccine safe and effective for 16- and 17-year-olds in December 2020, and stated that “the benefits of this vaccine outweigh any risk” when approving it for 12- to 15-year-olds in June this year. In the US, where close to 9 million adolescents aged 12 to 17 have been fully vaccinated, the CDC has unambiguously recommended vaccines for those 12 and above.

Worryingly, the JCVI’s recent announcement has only recommended the first dose of the vaccine for 16- to 17-year-olds. Millions of adolescents in this age group have been vaccinated with two doses in the US and other countries, and we know that full protection with the Delta variant depends critically on receiving two jabs. So much data on this is already available. It’s unclear why the JCVI needs yet more data to make an assessment that many countries made months ago.

The choice in the UK now is between infection and vaccination. Given the high rates of infection among young people in the UK, there is little doubt that the benefits of vaccines far outweigh the risks. Vaccines also reduce the burden of long Covid by protecting people against infection. The Office for National Statistics, which has regularly followed up with thousands of people across the UK who have had Covid-19, finds that persistent illness is common (about 8%) after infection among children. For many of those who become infected, Covid-19 is not a minor illness. Recent ONS estimates suggest that around 20,000 children aged under 17 with long Covid currently suffer from its impact on their day-to-day lives. Some 7,000 children have been living with this for more than a year.

Although only a few children may develop severe symptoms as a result of Covid-19, if thousands of children are infected the number who become seriously ill can quickly stack up. It’s puzzling that those who are nervous about vaccinating children due to the risks of extremely rare and typically minor side-effects are not equally concerned about exposing children to a novel virus. We know that Covid-19 causes poorly understood multi-system, long-term disease, even in young adults with mild infection, and is associated with thinning of brain grey matter. We also know it causes long-term neurological effects among hospitalised children, some of which may be permanent.

High rates of infection among adolescents and younger people reflect the spread of the Delta variant, particularly in schools, where few safety measures have been put in place. Vaccinating adolescents could have a significant impact on reducing transmission in schools and reduce the educational disruption that children have suffered over the past 18 months. Reports from frontline clinicians across the globe suggest that more children are being seen in hospitals as a result of Delta, and that more are requiring intensive care support.

While the JCVI has dithered about whether 16- to 17-year-olds should receive the vaccine, and has yet to make a decision on whether 12- to 15-year-olds should get the jab or whether 16- to 17-year-olds should get a second shot, millions of 12- 15-year-olds have been vaccinated across the US, Europe, Israel and south-east Asia. During this period thousands of children have been infected in the UK, a significant number of whom will develop longer-term illness, much of which could have been prevented.

Waiting on the JCVI to decide will come at a cost to children and their families. Delaying the vaccines gives out mixed messaging, which could contribute to vaccine hesitancy. If parents and children are only offered a vaccine only months down the line, they may well ask whether it’s worth having. Over the last year, the government has normalised the mass suffering and death of adults. Just because the risks of Covid-19 appear lower in children, we must not normalise their long-term illness. Vaccines are a crucial step towards protecting adolescents from these risks.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“I was thinking this morning that it is a bit like a race,” Sajid Javid said last Wednesday when commenting on Britain’s vaccine rollout. “The older adults have done their bit. Now we need them to help us start winning in that race. We have passed the baton to younger people, and are saying: ‘Please help us.’”

It seems the health secretary would have you believe young people are now solely responsible for the consequences of his government’s pandemic response. Forget “freedom day” or the delayed India travel ban that helped the Delta variant gets its claws into this country. Now it seems the real culpability lies with a vaccine-hesitant generation that just won’t play its part.

Boris Johnson is reportedly “raging” at our vaccine uptake rates. An editorial in the Times last month was more explicit still, speaking of “the shameful reluctance of young people to follow the older generation in getting vaccinated”.

The Sunday Telegraph’s front page this weekend reported that shopping vouchers are to be given out, in time for the start of the new academic year, “to boost youth jabs”. We are encouraged to focus on the fact “just” 67% of under-29s have had a first dose, supposedly forcing the government to offer bribes to increase vaccination levels.

But this is a classic conjuror’s misdirection. The question we should be asking is: what is the government trying to distract our attention from with this contrived controversy over supposedly feckless young people?

It is true that young people are less enthusiastic to get vaccinated than the adult population as a whole: one in eight under-30s in recent Office for National Statistics data report hesitancy, compared with more than the one in 25 of the general adult population who feel the same.

Given the diminishing risk to our lives that the virus poses, this hesitancy is to be expected. Yet the overwhelming majority of young people do want to get jabbed. The ONS figure obscures the fact two-thirds of young adults have had a single dose – making them the most vaccinated of their age group in the world.

Bear in mind that, for 16 months, this generation has complied with restrictions that were necessary in order to protect people largely other than their age group. From exam-grading mayhem and the university admissions fiasco to the disproportionately high economic impact on the young, my generation has proved itself prepared to play its part in the necessary social solidarity.

As the NHS put it, there was an “encouraging Glastonbury-style rush” when online bookings began for over-18s jabs, with long queues at walk-in centres across England.

The Reddit online discussion forum, GetJabbed, has become the chief tool for many people looking for a quicker way to get a second dose (at four-week intervals for Pfizer, say, as opposed to the eight-week wait recommended by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation).

The community works by publicising walk-in centres, with users logging their own good fortune in order to alert others. The site is full of stories of desperate young people visiting multiple centres. One user, a young woman who wanted to travel to see her terminally ill grandfather and needed to be double dosed to do so, was among those successful. Her partner praised the site: “Actually managing to get a dose after many rejections specifically from this site is beyond awesome.”

I got my second dose this way, as have many friends. But not everyone gets lucky. A walk-in open one day may be overwhelmed and close the next, while those young people who received the Moderna vaccine first time round – a comparative rarity – face added difficulty.

True, the number of vaccines administered has been falling. But many more would have had their second dose had the government been more flexible with the eight-week gap (the European Medicines Agency and US Centers for Disease Control recommend the shorter 21-day interval between Pfizer jabs).

Moreover, instead of focusing so much energy on scapegoating younger citizens, we should instead perhaps be thinking about by far the most pressing aspect of the fight against Covid: the urgent need to vaccinate the people of poorer nations, both to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe and to suppress the emergence of new variants.

Only 0.3% of doses have been administered in low-income countries. After Canada, the UK has more spare doses per head of the population than any country in the world. We’ve purchased enough to fully vaccinate our population four times over. This is the real scandal: Britain has only just started sending this surplus to the territories where these doses are urgently needed.

Merely a tiny fraction of the UK’s purchased doses – 5m– is so far being donated to Covax, the worldwide vaccine sharing system.

It is a question of priorities. When those such as the former M&S chairman and Conservative peer Stuart Rose advocate paying young people £250 to be vaccinated, has it occurred to them that they might be asking the wrong question? The suggested sum could fully vaccinate dozens of healthcare workers in low-income countries, where just 1.1% of people have received at least one dose.

This is a question of basic human decency, but it is in our interest too: if we shirk the task, a vaccine-resistant variant may emerge and land everybody – young and old – back at square one. Already, scientists are concerned about the Lambda variant that is raging through South America. We have to act fast.

So don’t focus on the supposedly errant young. Focus on humanity as a whole, the global mission to vaccinate everyone and the millions of deaths that the west has the power to prevent right now.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After initially resisting the idea of Covid passports, the government has decided to introduce them in “higher risk” settings in England, such as nightclubs and large crowds, by the end of September in an attempt to coax young people into getting vaccinated. Although the details of this measure are yet to be released, it will probably involve showing proof of vaccination, a negative Covid test or recent recovery from the virus.

The plans for England’s vaccine passports were announced shortly after France introduced its hardline “health pass” approach, which requires people entering restaurants, cinemas, trains and shopping malls to show proof of two vaccinations, a recent negative Covid test or recent recovery from infection. News of France’s health pass sparked mass protests; an estimated 160,000 people took to the streets on 24 July. But it also stimulated vaccine uptake. Nearly 4 million people came forward to get vaccinated after the health pass was announced.

Many seem to think vaccine passports are a viable solution that would encourage uptake and allow businesses to remain open while ensuring restaurants, bars and nightclubs don’t become Covid hotspots. Yet introducing a passport would be a technical and ethical minefield, and a number of criteria would need to be met, ranging from how immunity is measured to what technology is used, and what ethical requirements it meets. The technology would need to work across multiple operating systems and be linked to personal information while also maintaining privacy. But beyond these concerns, would a Covid passport actually work?

At the end of June, the Netherlands introduced the type of passport that is currently being proposed in England. Its CoronaCheck app crumbled within hours of release. People were required to have a negative test, proof of vaccination or recovery. The passport was aimed at nightclubs, but on the first night, a report filmed drunken partygoers explaining how they used the negative test results of a friend to gain entry and found ways around the QR code.

The app was clever: in addition to proof-of-vaccine or a test, it requested limited personal details (your initials and part of your birthdate), while its constantly changing QR code avoided privacy and tracking concerns. But the weak link was that bouncers rarely checked the app against personal identification, since this would have required additional staff on the door. Perhaps the UK government has developed a more advanced solution, but I’m not optimistic. The only way I could obtain settled status in the UK was by borrowing an Android phone from a colleague, as the government application form didn’t work on an iPhone.

Like much of its pandemic response, the government’s Covid vaccine passport shifts responsibility from ministers to individual members of the public. First we were asked to use our “personal judgment” for when and where to wear face coverings. Now nightclubs will become the referees for whether people are safe to enter. In France, a vaccine passport will apply across restaurants and other venues, but in the UK, nightclubs – which generate an estimated £66bn annually and are responsible for 8% of the country’s employment – have been singled out by the government. If businesses now work towards hiring staff and implementing new Covid passes only for the policy to change in September, their preparations could be in vain.

Public health experts and behavioural scientists have long argued that policies nudging people or dangling incentives like a carrot are more effective than the stick. Although it seems hard to fathom now, there was considerable backlash over mandatory introduction of seatbelts, and it took years to ban smoking on public transport and in indoor spaces. Again, the concern was how far the state could interfere with personal rights and lifestyle. In the US, where there are large numbers of vaccine-hesitant people, states have introduced incentives ranging from free guns and beer to million-dollar lotteries. Yet a recent study found that it wasn’t coercion that worked, but the personal approach of a text reminder saying this vaccine is “reserved for you” that was the most effective in getting people vaccinated.

There is a risk that a mandatory Covid pass will be seen as coercive, fuelling greater mistrust around vaccines. Requiring an ID card or passport to enter a football match or nightclub could fuel suspicion for those against the use of Covid certification. We carried out a nationally representative survey of 1,476 adults in the UK in December 2020 during the first vaccine rollout, together with five focus groups, and found that those who are distrustful of government and receive information from unregulated social media sources such as YouTube were less willing to be vaccinated. For Covid conspiracists, a vaccine passport may have the same symbolic effect as the face masks that have so riled anti-lockdown protesters.

When dealing with public health measures, it’s naive to argue a straightforward libertarian case that the government should stay out of people’s private lives. As with secondhand smoking, the government has a moral duty to stop the spread of Covid, and promote and safeguard the health and wellbeing of its citizens. Policies that curtail individual liberty for the greater public good can be powerful, but they need to be properly scrutinised to ensure they work. That means avoiding unjustly coercive measures that will only produce more harm than protection.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Many will have heard of Typhoid Mary, but fewer will know her full story – or her real name. That was Mary Mallon, an Irish-born cook who worked for affluent families in the New York City area in the early years of the 20th century. She was employed by eight households, seven of whom contracted typhoid, a nasty bacterial infection that can be deadly. Whenever an outbreak began, she would usually leave without giving a forwarding address, not believing she could be spreading infection because she was never ill herself. The idea that people could carry a disease without displaying any symptoms was a novelty to the medical science of the era. So it took a lot of detective work and a long time before she was identified as what we might now call an asymptomatic super-spreader.

When she was finally tracked down in 1907, she was arrested as a threat to public health, forced into an ambulance by five policemen and sentenced to an enforced quarantine. Doctors discovered massive amounts of typhoid bacteria in her gall bladder. She rejected the suggestion that the infected organ should be removed, the one operation that might have cured her. It was a risky procedure and Mary could not be convinced that she was a carrier.

The authorities of the day were divided about the ethics of imprisoning her. She was released after three years on condition that she would not work as a cook again and take reasonable steps to avoid infecting others with typhoid. She broke that pledge by taking employment, under false identities, in a number of kitchens in restaurants and hotels and, lastly, a hospital. It is thought she infected more than 100 people, but it can’t be said precisely how many deaths she caused. Estimates range between three and 50. Rearrested in 1915, she was placed back in enforced quarantine on a small island in New York’s East River. And that was where she spent the rest of a miserable life until she died 23 years later.

I begin with the story of Typhoid Mary because it is a vivid example of an individual’s liberty coming into conflict with the safety of society when that individual poses a deadly threat to public health. How you react to her story may reveal your preferences when it comes to the argument over vaccine passports. If you think that it was appalling to force this woman into involuntary isolation, then I suspect you react negatively to the idea of placing restrictions on people who have refused to be fully vaccinated against Covid. If your sympathies are with the authorities who locked her up for the protection of the public, then I surmise that you will not quarrel with requiring people to get jabbed if they want to go to places and engage in activities where others will be present.

Some governments have already made their minds up and are legislating for vaccine passports. One of the strictest versions has just gone through France’s legislature. It requires proof of vaccination or a recent negative Covid test to access a wide spectrum of venues. From early August, those who do not possess a pass sanitaire will be excluded from trains, planes, workplaces, restaurants, museums, cinemas and swimming pools. Protesters crying “Liberty!” have been on the streets. Emmanuel Macron responded: “What is your freedom worth if you say to me, ‘I don’t want to be vaccinated’, but tomorrow you infect your father, your mother or myself?”

There’s the debate in a nutshell. One interpretation of liberty, which is solely focused on the rights of the individual, versus another, which pays respects to the rights of others not to have a disease inflicted on them by an unvaccinated carrier. To date, 13 European governments have already introduced, or will soon do so, a “green pass” of some kind. In every case, the plans have been followed by protests.

Britain is different. The opposition to the idea got angry before the government produced anything resembling either an argument for passports or a plan to introduce them. After initially ruling them out, ministers have hesitantly, haphazardly and rather stealthily crept towards embracing them. On “freedom day”, Boris Johnson announced that people would need to prove their vaccination status to get into nightclubs from September. Shortly afterwards, Nadhim Zahawi, the vaccines minister, suggested that requirement would be expanded to cover a broader range of venues, including sports fixtures, music festivals and big exhibitions. Those going to this autumn’s Conservative party conference, not an event noted for its youthfulness, will be required to prove their Covid status.

Ministerial announcements have generated swirls of suspicion about their motives because the government has never consistently articulated its case. Does it believe in passports as an effective tool for preventing infection and allowing as much opening up as possible? Or are ministers using them as a coercive stick to push more people to get themselves vaccinated? Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, suggested that it was the latter when he remarked: “It is a little bit of coaxing and cajoling.”

Ministers have also exposed themselves to accusations that they are being sly. The NHS app was recently given an unannounced tweak to include a domestic Covid passport section. Trying to introduce them by stealth hands opponents more ammunition to complain that the whole idea is sinister.

On some of the most tricky issues around passports, the government is subcontracting decisions to others. On Friday, Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, said he supported companies that oblige staff to get vaccinated in order to return to the workplace. It was “a good idea”, but not one that the government was going to turn into legislation. The strident opposition of a sizable chunk of Tory MPs means the government will struggle to get any passport law through parliament without Labour support. Absent any law, what employers demand of their employees could vary wildly. The “no jab, no job” rule being implemented by some businesses, with the encouragement of government, has yet to be tested, as it surely will be, in employment courts.

Libertarian opposition to vaccine passports demands a fundamental right to endanger others

One reason for the unsteadiness of the government’s approach is that ministers are divided among themselves. Another is the opposition of the noisy libertarian right and the rightwing media, which exert a strong gravitational pull on Mr Johnson. The libertarians contend that vaccine passports will fundamentally compromise the freedom of the individual. They do raise ethical issues, which require a proper discussion, but the libertarians are wrong to suggest that the idea is so unthinkable it should not even be a subject of debate. As the challenges and concerns of societies change, so there is a constant adjustment of the boundary between individual freedoms and the responsibilites of the individual to the community in which they live. It used to be the case that you could drive without a seatbelt and while drunk. It used to be the case that you could smoke cigarettes in the office and the pub. When these harmful activities were first made illegal, there was ferocious opposition from libertarians on the grounds that prohibition was an unconscionable assault on individual freedom. No one now seriously argues that you ought to be free to risk the lives of others by drink-driving or puffing toxic fumes into a shared environment. Libertarian opposition to vaccine passports demands a fundamental right to endanger others. They want the freedom of John to refuse a vaccine to trump Joanna’s freedom to travel, work or enjoy her leisure time in safety.

As for Labour, its MPs are divided and its position unclear. Sir Keir Starmer has said that the issue is “really difficult” while remarking that “the British instinct” will be against passports, though polling actually suggests majority public support for them. Trade union leaders are hotly opposed to “no jab, no job” rules in the workplace. Many union members might take a different view about being obliged to work alongside vaccine refuseniks.

Sceptics ask good questions. What rules will apply for those who can’t be vaccinated for health reasons? Will policing be effective and consistent? How vulnerable will passports be to cheating? There are legitimate anxieties, which the government has yet to answer.

The wrong way to try to introduce vaccine passports is in the incoherent and stealthy fashion recently displayed by ministers. The right way is to clearly articulate their case and demonstrate that the effort is worth the reward because they will make it safer to reopen and save lives.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@At present, confirmed cases in the UK are declining; by specimen date in England, they fell by 29% in the week up to 24 July. In contrast, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimates that over the same period the proportion of the population in England infected with SARS-CoV-2 continued to rise, to around 1 in 60. Is there a conflict between these trends?

The measures are somewhat different: testing data provides new recorded infections (the incidence); Public Health England counts some positives from rapid tests, as well as standard PCR tests. The ONS results are based on its large infection survey: a nationally representative sample is repeatedly PCR-tested for the virus and so estimates how many people would currently test positive (the positivity).

But people with the virus can test positive for many days. Think of it like filling a bath with the plughole open. Incidence is how quickly water flows in, the positivity is the level of the water in the bath, and there is some draining as older infections fall away. As you start turning the taps down, the level continues to rise for a while longer, until the plughole takes over.

This is demonstrated in Scotland, which has been ahead of England both in starting school holidays and getting knocked out of Euro 2020. Its confirmed cases hit a peak at the end of June and central ONS positivity estimates and hospitalisations are now declining. This is all good, and somewhat unexpected, news.

Other recent survey findings include that 40% of infections show no symptoms - a bit higher than the “one in three” figure usually quoted. And for those unlucky enough to get reinfected, at least the second infection tends to be milder. In contrast, the US struggles without a nationwide survey and so has only now estimated that 60% of infections have gone unreported.

The daily-updated PHE dashboard and the ONS Covid Infection Survey are excellent and complementary resources (but note that David Spiegelhalter chairs the survey’s advisory board, so he would say that, wouldn’t he?). Different data sources form a mosaic of evidence and insight.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@An email arrived from my cousin this week outlining how bad Covid cases are in her part of South Africa. Delta is surging, she wrote; their friends and neighbours were starting to die. Meanwhile, vaccination rates were terrible, with less than 5% of the population fully vaccinated. After filling me in on the rest of the family news, she assured me that she and her husband were on the waiting list for vaccines – for what it was worth. Her husband, she said, was “convinced they’re not safe”.

This was information to me. Not that a member of my extended family differed from me in his thoughts about drug trials and government-agency approval, but more broadly: wow, I had no idea my cousin was married to a lunatic.

This was a reflex response. At an odd time in the life of the pandemic, when every step forward is seemingly followed, immediately, by a jump in the numbers and a hasty step back, there is one, cast-iron certainty: that given the opportunity to call someone else crazy, it is almost impossible to turn down.

This consolation is particularly available in the United States at the moment, where a third of Americans eligible for the vaccine remain stubbornly unjabbed. (By contrast, in Britain, 88% of those eligible have received at least one dose.) That these vaccine holdouts fall demographically along existing lines of political division has made dismissing them as fanatics much easier. Under-vaccinated populations in the US skew heavily towards traditionally Republican areas in the south and midwest, particularly among those without college degrees.

Articles abound about idiots partying, for example at a lake in Missouri. (“Personally,” says an unmasked, unvaccinated bartender serving unmasked, unvaccinated patrons, “I feel like my immune system is doing a good job, so why pump it full of something that we don’t really know what it is?”) The popular image of the vaccine-hesitant American is of a Trump supporter, his limited capacities further eroded by too much time spent absorbing the work of online conspiracy theorists.

Aspects of this image may well be true. The fact remains, however, that liberal disparagement of the vaccine-hesitant rests on a double standard. If we think of vaccine holdouts as taking their cues not from neutral information but from pre-existing narratives (democrats are bad; government is bad; it’s all a hoax) this is a dynamic we’re not entirely free from ourselves. The enjoyment one gets, when confronted with an anti-vaxxer from saying “these people are nuts”, and fitting them instantly into the category of dumb asshole, clearly delivers an emotional dividend as strong as the ones being indulged on the other side.

And the Covid anti-vax demographic isn’t entirely clear-cut. Lots of parents who didn’t think twice about giving their children MMR vaccines, for example, are on the fence about what to do in the autumn, when the US Food and Drug Administration will almost certainly approve the vaccine for the under-12s. I’ve heard similarly anxious murmurs from pregnant women getting their shots.

The closest I’ve come to understanding this mindset arose one afternoon, when I thought about the assurances given to women by the British government during the thalidomide scandal in the 1960s. For a second, I could feel it: the appeal of thinking that the real credulity here is blind faith in the government.

It didn’t last. Neither, perhaps, will the tendency among those who are vaccinated to disparage those who remain hesitant, for the simple reason that it will backfire and end up hurting us more. During the first flush of the vaccine rollout in the US, there was a collective sense among the vaccinated population of: big deal, if they’re dumb enough not to get the vaccine, let them get sick. Now, thanks to the latest advances in armchair epidemiology, we understand that if large portions of the population remain unvaccinated, not only will society’s reopening be compromised but it will provide a petri dish for possible vaccine-resistant strains of the virus to develop in.

“Let them get sick” has evolved into a refrain that was familiar during the Trump years, for different reasons: “My God, these people are going to get us all killed.”

Calling them dumb assholes, therefore, while it can feel really good, isn’t a helpful strategy in winning people around to your side of the argument. This week Kay Ivey, Republican governor of Alabama, which has one of the lowest vaccination rates in the US, said: “Time to start blaming the unvaccinated.” And you understood her point of view. Yet pointing the finger doesn’t work. “We all but shamed people,” Johnny Taylor, head of the Society for Human Resource Management, told the New York Times this week in reference to private companies’ initiatives to persuade hesitant staff to get vaccinated. “But now we’re at a point that none of that’s working and we’ve got to close the gap.”

Offering people $100 for getting your shot, as President Biden has urged states to do, may work for some people; others may end up being forced to take it. (Biden has announced that the country’s entire civilian federal workforce – well over 2 million people – will require vaccination too.)

Meanwhile, I’m trying to push back against the temptation to ask my cousin what’s wrong with her husband, and in the process be less shut down myself. “Why does he think that?” I said.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Since the announcement of the removal of all Covid-related restrictions in England, experts have warned of disastrous consequences, from the inevitable spike in cases to new variants emerging. We can hope the government will eventually recognise the public health risks and put some of these measures back into place. However, power and cronyism – and not health needs – are likely to drive any such decision. As the last 18 months have shown, the British government’s Covid-19 strategy was never designed to manage the virus.

For all the talk of “following the science”, No 10’s use of scientific evidence has been adjusted to its policy preferences throughout. The effectiveness of masks in preventing transmission was acknowledged only in the summer of 2020, despite World Health Organization (WHO) guidance earlier in the year. Ventilation only recently became part of public health guidance in England, despite sustained evidence of aerosol transmission. The UK’s continued insistence on fever, cough, and the loss of smell and taste as symptoms of coronavirus stands in tension with research on asymptomatic infections and emerging evidence suggesting loss of smell and taste may not be as common with the Delta variant.

Other scientific evidence the government has been reluctant to acknowledge is that, while vaccines may be very efficient in preventing the worst outcomes – hospitalisation and death – vaccinated people can still contract and transmit Covid-19. This raises important moral and ethical questions about the effects of placing large numbers of unmasked people into small, poorly ventilated spaces without social distancing, such as public transport or nightclubs.

It may be tempting to explain the government’s lagging public health advice by a lack of clear evidence, the novelty of the situation, or just “bad luck”. But this obscures the degree to which the government has also exploited the uncertainty generated by the Covid-19 pandemic for economic and political gain, by using the facade of incompetence to narrow the political choices available to the public.

In a report released last December, the cross-party joint committee on national security strategy condemned the government for having “failed seriously to consider how it might scale up testing, isolation and contact-tracing capabilities during a serious disease outbreak”. But the report missed a key aspect: the delay in scaling up public testing helped to prime the space for private UK-based firms to enter the market. In January 2020, the UK passed on the early chance to use a viral sequence developed by a German lab and made freely available by the WHO to make a Covid test. It did, however, award last-minute public contracts for testing, tracing, and the production of PPE and ventilators to companies with little or no prior experience in similar tasks.

The illusion of incompetence also obscures the government’s responsibility for creating the conditions that contributed to the crisis in the first place. While other countries were rolling out testing, the British government was liaising with executives at Serco, Deloitte and other private firms – and instructing individual NHS trusts to stop purchasing ventilators or their own PPE until a centralised system run by Deloitte was operational. Subsequent reporting has revealed links between companies that were awarded contracts and the Conservative party.

By allowing the virus to replicate, the government contributed to its spread. Yet this governing approach, which we call “fatalistic liberalism”, allows it to place the blame on the mix of public behaviour and natural causes. Risk appears to be the consequence of personal choice – people can decide whether to wear a mask or whether to get vaccinated – not the result of policy decisions made at the top.

The twin alibis of incompetence and ignorance enable politicians to deny responsibility for the consequences of their own inaction. If, as the head of NHS test and trace, Dido Harding argued, no one could have predicted the virus would mutate, then no one can be held accountable for the surge in infections and the inevitable harms created by the removal of masks and social distancing.

This fatalistic approach to managing public risk is reflected in Johnson’s statement, “We need to learn to live with the virus.” But the government’s strategy is not about teaching people to live with the virus; it’s teaching people to accept that the lives of many of them are not worth saving. In this sense, the choice the British people have is not whether they want to live with the virus – it’s whether they want to live with a government that sees them as chesspieces on an invisible board in a game that it pretends no one is playing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Few issues seem to provoke such a range of opinions among experts as Covid-19 and children. When the WHO-China Joint Mission first reported on the virus in February 2020, one of the nuggets of good news was that children seemed to be relatively unaffected by it. This was surprising; like other acute respiratory infections, coronaviruses usually spread among and infect younger children. China’s strong suppression of the virus meant cases remained extremely low, preventing the virus spreading into other age groups. At the time, Covid appeared to be a disease of elderly and overweight people and those with underlying health conditions.

One year into the pandemic, richer countries embarked on a mass vaccination programme to protect not only older age groups but entire adult populations. The success of vaccines in weakening the link between hospitalisations and deaths is clear (although the link is not completely broken). With vaccinated adults now largely protected from the severe consequences of Covid-19, the questions for children have changed. In the UK, there has been a surge of infections among children and adolescents. These will only increase when the school year starts again in the autumn.

Is it better for children to catch Sars-CoV-2, as they do the common cold, or is it better to protect them through vaccinations, and measures such as social distancing and face masks? This is the question many countries are now asking. Some may worry about potential side-effects from vaccines, but these are extremely rare and clearly outweighed by the benefits. Fortunately, healthcare regulators in the UK and US have approved the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine as safe for use in children between 12 and 15. Already 25% of 12- to 15-year-olds across the US are fully vaccinated, while a third of them have received one dose. Elsewhere, Israel, Italy and France are steaming ahead with vaccinating children in this age group, while Germany gives parents the ability to “opt-in” for the vaccine based on informed consent.

The current approach in England seems to be to let teenagers get on with it and see what happens once they’re infected. The result will be an uncontrolled epidemic among younger age groups. Some British scientists aren’t alarmed by this, pointing to other diseases such as seasonal flu, which cause more hospitalisations among children than Covid-19. By contrast, paediatricians in the US argue that exposing children to a new virus with potentially long-term complications is a major risk that should be avoided. Covid-19 was among the top causes of child death in the US in 2020. Though I’m not a paediatrician, I struggle to understand how a disease considered risky to adolescents in the US can be considered innocuous in Britain.

Children under 12 are a trickier challenge for scientists and governments. No vaccine has been approved for use in this age group, although the results from early trials are promising. In Israel and the US, health authorities hope that vaccinating enough adults will suppress Covid-19 among children. While this seemed a valid approach against earlier variants, it may prove more difficult with Delta. The Delta variant is more transmissible. It has pushed up the threshold for herd immunity; for this to be achieved, some estimate that as much as 98% of the population would need to be vaccinated.

Paediatricians appear split over how dangerous Covid-19 is in younger children, too. Long Covid is a major risk here: recent studies suggest it can cause long-term illness, physiological changes to the body and issues with the heart, kidneys, blood vessels and lungs in children. How common is long Covid in children, and will those who have it get better? Are some children at greater risk than others? Answers to these questions will emerge over time as science progresses, but there is currently no obvious consensus. The prevailing view is that long Covid is a major challenge – but the details are still unclear.

For all countries, schools are the major minefield that lies ahead. It is hard to understate the harms endured by children during the pandemic. Sexual and domestic abuse, child hunger and mental health problems have all risen. The widening education gap will take years to close. Children need to be in school for their social, mental and physical wellbeing. But Delta means children now transmit the virus more than before, meaning clusters are likely to emerge, particularly in secondary schools.

There are things that can be done. Improving ventilation can help stop the spread of both Covid-19 and seasonal infections. Current mitigation measures in schools are also far from ideal; weekly lateral flow testing is uncomfortable and voluntary, which has resulted in low uptake. And requiring children to wear masks all day when adults have been told in England they can go to nightclubs without masks seems contradictory and unfair.

The alternative of letting the virus spread among young people seems reckless. England is alone in doing this. It is acting as a laboratory for other countries, which are watching to see what happens before they decide on their own policies towards children. The UK government’s comparatively relaxed attitude may also create a petri dish for Covid variants. The consequence could be a new variant that makes our current vaccines less effective, or has more severe outcomes for unvaccinated children.

Will Covid become a disease of the young? Will children who suffered under restrictions for 18 months now have to face a wave of infections with unknown consequences? There’s no good path forward until we have approved vaccines for all age groups. Until then, we need to continue to have an open and honest debate about how to put children first, protect their health, education, and general welfare, and listen and learn from other countries discussing this same issue.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@England has now entered the strangest phase to date of its Covid experience. Though the health secretary insisted, in a tweet he eventually deleted, that we must not “cower from” the virus, the contradiction between the lifting of restrictions and most epidemiological wisdom sits in the midst of our national life like a dull headache. The same prime minister who promised his ideological soulmates a new dawn of liberty is now embracing vaccine passports, and reportedly facing the prospect of defeat in the House of Commons. Meanwhile, references to “personal responsibility” have brought a new unease to everyday life, as the government reverts to type and does what Tory administrations usually do, transferring risk from the state to individuals.

Wearing a mask now feels a bit like putting on a badge. On what the rightwing press rather laughably called “freedom day”, I did some shopping at my local Asda, observed a masked-to-umasked ratio of about 70:30, and sensed – or thought I sensed – the crackle of judgment and mistrust, passing between those who were sticking with face coverings and those who had decided to go without. Two days later, I was in Stoke-on-Trent, where the ratio in a huge Tesco was more like 60:40 in favour of masking up. Despite announcements over the PA advising people to behave as if restrictions were still in place, the fact that some were sticking to the old rules while others were not felt like a matter of dull normality.

Only when I spoke to people did something more uneasy reveal itself: an apparent belief that things were now so messed up that whether individuals were taking precautions or not was really not that significant. One woman I met worked in a care home, and said that she was going to carry on wearing a mask in enclosed spaces. But she had no faith that her behaviour, in tandem with vaccinations, was going to play a part in returning us to our pre-Covid state of innocence: “I don’t think we’re ever going to go back to normal,” she said, with a shrug.

Meanwhile, the versions of reality presented by the old and new media continue to explode with polarised fury. On the right, a loathing of the state has fused with hostility to vaccines, and everything is tied together by the belief that those who want restrictions to endure are not just killjoys but enemies of freedom. Some on the left, by contrast, have seemed to want restrictions to go on for as long as possible: not just, perhaps, to keep the virus under control but also because life in such conditions has ticked so many of their political and philosophical boxes: a huge expansion of the state, the primacy of “the science”, clear benefits for the environment, and an insistence on collective sacrifice. With all this has come often swingeing judgment of “Covidiots”, and the assumption that going maskless or being sceptical about getting jabbed puts you in the same category as irate callers to talk radio stations and the dreaded Laurence Fox.

Somewhere in between these two ideological camps are millions who are too easily forgotten: those for whom lockdowns and stringent restrictions have not been the subject of a gleeful ideological war but a byword for misery and strife. Many of these people have had to leave home every day to work in dangerous circumstances. Some live in overcrowded conditions, and as part of dysfunctional and abusive families. Small business owners have either had their livelihoods shredded or live with the fear they are about to go under; for millions of young people, some of the most basic necessities of life have been put in hold for unbearably long stretches of time, with no sign of concern from the people at the top. In that context, even if some people are simply being irresponsible, I understand why others have quietly delighted in binning their masks, and greeted the end of most restrictions in England with a sigh of relief.

A couple of months ago, I was in the Alum Rock area of Birmingham, where I met a twentysomething British-Asian man who talked about his life and the shared experiences of his community before and during the pandemic. He emphasised the state’s neglect of local needs, and his awful experiences at the hands of the police – and went from there to his antipathy to getting jabbed, even though the local Covid death toll had been grim.

He was, it seemed, a perfect example of another overlooked part of the population: those who have been sceptical about both restrictions and vaccination, not out of ideological zeal, but because they have an understandably cynical and fearful view of the state and its edicts, and making oneself known to the authorities. Thinking of government as essentially benign and well-intentioned is, perhaps, the preserve of a certain section of the middle class. If you have had any experience of the nastier aspects of policing, the benefits system or this country’s immigration regime, you too might balk at the idea of downloading the official Covid app, dutifully turning up for your injection or registering Covid tests.

In large part, this country’s dire experience of Covid-19 is a result of awful government incompetence. But the past 16 months have also shown that societies ridden with inequality and institutional prejudice cannot cope with any convulsive crisis. The basic point is almost banal, but it seems to elude far too many people: if too many are insecure and isolated, and successive governments have made a point of kicking them around, they will either not be able to do what they are told, or treat edicts from the top and disapproval from those living more privileged lives with the utmost cynicism. Given that the worst effects of Covid have been visited on our most marginalised communities, such behaviour may look irrational, but that tension is hardly surprising.

There is a very persuasive school of thought that claims Covid will turn out to have been a dress rehearsal for the imminent worsening of the climate emergency. Both crises, after all, require us to follow instructions from the top, move in lockstep and engage in difficult acts of self-sacrifice. As things stand, some people can do those things, but others cannot. The danger is that, as one crisis follows another, amid the individualistic noise generated by social media and politicians happy to speak the language of blame, the noise of swingeing personal judgment will be much louder than any voices pointing out that our social model is now broken beyond repair. Dysfunctional societies usually produce deeply dysfunctional outcomes: until we start to address that basic modern truth, sneering and finger-pointing will only make things immeasurably worse.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For the second time in my adult life, I feel we must have a national conversation about domestic compulsory ID. Last time, in the mid-00s, it was an authoritarian solution looking for a problem to fix, with immigration, benefit fraud and everything but climate change proffered as justification. This time the problem posed by the government’s catastrophic “economy first” approach to pandemic management is all too clear. Still, the introduction of an internal passport will be just as costly, divisive and counterproductive as before – and even more dangerous to any way of life worth fighting for beyond this terrible time.

Many people will have watched the government flip-flopping over whether some kind of public or commercially sourced proof of vaccination status should be required before access to a whole host of everyday activities from attending a nightclub or sports event to a trip to the pub or the shops. There have been similarly mixed messages about whether the introduction of such a regime should be left to businesses to decide on and regulate for themselves.

I’m becoming less and less convinced that this constant oscillation marks a mere lack of competence rather than a more malevolent and studied chaos aimed at passing the buck for any further deaths from what international experts call Boris Johnson’s “unethical experiment”. This approach, Herd Immunity 2.0, lets the virus surge, creating fertile territory for vaccine-resistant variants. To be fair, government spokespeople are increasingly brazen about their threat of compulsory ID – an illiberal and discriminatory measure – being a means to force young people to get vaccinated rather than to effectively prevent transmission.

Compulsory vaccination is counterproductive in nations with liberal and libertarian traditions and is unethical given the newness of these vaccines and the paucity of public education or supportive incentives. Necessary social distancing has been particularly cruel to young and older people. Older people arguably had a very direct personal incentive to vaccinate. Why not offer youngsters and everyone in poorly paid and insecure work fully paid time off to recover from any side-effects of taking the jabs?

So what about Labour? With the possibility of a rebellion on the government benches, there has understandably been some interest in what position the opposition might take. It seems the line is currently against vaccination passports as “costly, open to fraud and impractical”. Yet the same spokesperson says that “testing for access to venues would be more efficient, and would give people and business more certainty”.

Let’s unpack that shall we? How is proof of a test less costly or open to fraud than proof of vaccination itself? Further, lateral flow tests are notoriously unreliable. And does our summer of sport suggest that stewards on zero-hours contracts and the minimum wage should be relied upon to interrogate the detail of someone’s daily testing status rather than wave them through for a quieter life? We will not speak of Wembley. Potential super-spreader events are either safe to go ahead or not. That calculation is about our general state of transmission, the health in the community and the capacity of the NHS to cope – not the compromised decisions of outsourced bouncers-turned-Covid cops.

I could rehearse the arguments about racism, sexual harassment and all the other ways in which domestic pass laws of any kind will inevitably lead to discrimination, corruption and oppression. I will only say that as this new kind of compulsory ID is explicitly about health data, it crosses a further line into personal privacy as well as liberty.

It has always been clear to me that there are instinctive liberals and authoritarians on both sides of a left-right political spectrum that is traditionally defined around tax and spend. Yet during our war on Covid, the underlying debates around rights and freedoms come into sharper focus, testing us all. Domestic Covid passports are part of a strategy of smoke and mirrors for a government that would like to believe that “personal responsibility” can substitute for sound and ethical public health policy during a pandemic that has already cost the UK nearly double the civilian fatalities of the second world war.

This is no time for triangulation or political games. This is high time for an honest debate about how we protect each other as a community, and how soon we should be unlocked together in the safest manner, without making those vulnerable on grounds of race, age or economic insecurity pay for so-called “freedom day”.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Right at the beginning of the pandemic, there was intense concern among officials about the health of one elderly female. I was subsequently told by a very senior figure that there was “a lot of worry” the Queen could be killed by Covid, with incalculable effects on public morale and trust in government. The public would ask, so shivered Whitehall, how anyone could be safe if they could not even protect the head of state? This fear was reasonable. We were not far into the crisis before Prince Charles got Covid.

While elaborate precautions were put in motion to safeguard the Queen, someone in government did not get the memo. Or he did receive the memo, but couldn’t be arsed to read it. In mid-March of last year, when staff at Number 10 were already falling ill as the virus rampaged around that rabbit-warren building, Boris Johnson told aides that he was going to carry on with his weekly in-person audience with the Queen. He answered protests that this was sensationally reckless by responding: “That’s what I do every Wednesday. Sod this, I’m gonna go and see her.” On the retelling of Dominic Cummings, he had to explain why going to see the Queen was “completely insane” and asked what the prime minister would do if he caused her death. Only then did Mr Johnson finally relent. “He basically just hadn’t thought it through.”

Is Cummings' account of Boris Johnson's recklessness with the Queen's health consistent with everything else we know?

“The day the prime minister threatened to bump off the Queen” is a pretty remarkable story and yet it has not generated headlines as large as might be expected. Perhaps this is because people’s capacity to process information about his bonkers behaviour has reached its saturation point. It may also be because this revelation came in a BBC interview with Mr Cummings, whose testimony is discounted by some or dismissed altogether by others as the bitter effusions of an ex-aide on a revenge quest against a man he describes as “ludicrously” unfit to be prime minister.

My view is that you do not have to like Mr Cummings or find his motives unimpeachable to treat him as a useful source of information about how Mr Johnson thinks and operates, especially when being his real self out of public view. Ask yourself: does this story ring true? Is the account of recklessness with the health of the Queen consistent with everything else we know about the prime minister’s approach to dealing with the virus? Has he not displayed a repeated failure to “think things through”? A “sod this” attitude has surely been a consistent theme of the tragically bungled handling of the pandemic, especially when he has been confronted with hard decisions he doesn’t want to face or expert advice that conflicts with his own prejudices or assessments of his personal interests.

In the initial phase of this crisis, it was “sod this” to attending meetings of the Cobra emergency committee because he was too busy dealing with his divorce. Then it was “sod this” to agreeing to a timely first lockdown because that involved accepting how serious the situation had become. Last autumn, it was “sod this” to the scientists when they warned that the disease would accelerate wildly out of control if he didn’t impose a second lockdown. And “sod this” to acting in time to save lives because he had made a baseless promise that the nation could revel through a “normal Christmas”. It was also “sod this” to the fatality rate because the data suggested to him that the median age of those claimed by Covid was 82. “That is above life expectancy,” he flippantly declared. “So get Covid and live longer.” He went on to say: “I no longer buy all this NHS overwhelmed stuff.” That’s something Number 10 can’t deny because it was recorded in WhatsApp messages.

Bringing us right up to date, a chorus of voices cautioned against “freedom day” because it was a dangerous gamble to release England from virtually all lockdown restrictions when the number of new cases was going up and a third of the population was still unvaccinated. To those warnings, it was another prime ministerial “sod this”.

While the deployment of vaccines has weakened the link between getting the virus and being hospitalised by it, the third wave is taking further lives, will leave more people with debilitating long Covid and is causing severe disruption in critical areas of the economy such as food and fuel supply. Many people have not been “liberated”. They are effectively back in lockdown because they have the virus, fear catching it or have been told to self-isolate. It is such a mess that it even inspired Keir Starmer to produce a rare zinger when he dubbed Mr Johnson “the super-spreader of chaos”.

The prime minister, the chancellor, the health secretary and the leader of the opposition are among those who have been forced to self-isolate in recent days. It is symbolic of how distant we still are from normality that Mr Johnson celebrated the second anniversary of his premiership quarantined at Chequers. This episode has been accompanied by another example of his “sod this” style of governing. After Sajid Javid announced he had tested positive for Covid, the prime minister and the chancellor were pinged as close contacts. Number 10 then announced that Mr Johnson and Mr Sunak had been magically selected to participate in a supposedly random “daily testing” pilot scheme that exempted them from self-isolation. They only did a reverse ferret after a furious backlash among MPs and the public, especially the bereaved. Trying to wriggle out of the rules was not idiosyncratic behaviour, but entirely characteristic.

The majority of voters have faulted the government not for being too draconian about imposing restrictions, but too slack

This further undermined government messaging when it was already in a terrific muddle. Tear off your masks. Keep on your masks. Return to the office. Don’t go back to the office. If you’re pinged, it is up to you to decide what you do. If you’re pinged, you must isolate. Be careful. Go clubbing. The explanation for Mr Johnson’s behaviour often offered by his friends is that he is reflexively antagonistic to restrictions because he is an instinctive libertarian. This is a poshed-up way of saying that he loathes rules and has a career history of breaking them. If he were a backbencher rather than prime minister, he would almost certainly be among the anti-lockdowners who depict any sensible precaution as a step towards turning us into East Germany. But his “libertarianism” is too kind an explanation because it overlooks the way he has lurched between chronic prevarication and cavalier impetuousness throughout the pandemic.

Another explanation you hear, and this also often comes from people close to him, is that he wants to be loved and hates to disappoint the public. So having promised a “freedom day” he couldn’t bear not to deliver it. Yet most of the general public didn’t want this version of liberation. Polling has been consistent throughout the pandemic. The great majority of voters have faulted the government not for being too draconian about imposing restrictions, but too slack. In terms of his personal approval ratings, the prime minister’s most positive period started at the beginning of this year when he was impelled to pay more heed to scientific advice and act with greater sobriety by the appallingly high death toll of the second wave. A YouGov poll published to coincide with “freedom day” suggested that almost twice as many people believe it wrong to remove nearly all restrictions as think it a good idea.

The “sod this” approach to tackling a deadly virus is not popular. It does, however, satisfy the appetite of a minority strand of opinion that is disproportionately influential over this prime minister. Hostility to restrictions has been noisily proclaimed by a faction of Tory MPs and their allies in the rightwing press. Many well-placed sources agree that their ferocious opposition to a pre-emptive “circuit-breaker” lockdown last autumn exerted a grip as powerful as it was baleful on the prime minister. Had he not gone ahead with the “freedom day” for which they had clamoured, Mr Johnson feared a monstering at the hands of the rightwing media and a big revolt by Tory MPs, a chunk of whom turned up in the chamber of the Commons ostentatiously refusing to wear masks. On Mr Cummings’ account, the prime minister regards the Daily Telegraph, for which he once wrote a highly remunerative column, as “my real boss”. That puts everyone else in their place. It is to this minority faction of opinion, not to parliament or the public, that he sees himself as answerable.

Few can claim to have got everything right about this pandemic, but none has been more consistently wrong than the threat-deniers, lockdown-haters, mask-defiers and let-it-rippers. Yet this is the one group to whom the prime minister is never capable of saying “sod this”.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For teenagers who began A-level courses in September 2019, the last 18 months have been an educational ordeal. Schools in England were let down by a government that failed to develop an adequate plan B when classrooms closed. An estimated third of learning time has been lost to the pandemic. Remote lessons exposed damaging inequalities in domestic circumstances, and the quality of provision was patchy. The suspension of formal exams plunged schools into uncharted territory which was hopelessly navigated by the education secretary, Gavin Williamson.

In that dismal context, Tuesday’s outstanding set of A-level results represents an unalloyed triumph. Those in Wales and Northern Ireland were equally impressive. A cohort which has experienced a level of disruption unprecedented since the second world war has emerged with its hopes and dreams intact. A record-breaking 44.3% of entries in England were awarded A* or A in teacher-assessed grades overseen by examination boards. Almost 250,000 18-year-olds have been accepted on to degree courses in the UK, up 17% from last year. Although the country is not out of the Covid woods yet, there are legitimate grounds for these students to believe that their post-pandemic future starts here.

The use of teacher assessment meant that the buildup to results day was dominated by the theme of grade inflation. In the end, grades did go up again but by less than the jump between 2019 and 2020. Given the unique circumstances, this discussion was always a red herring. The Joint Council for Qualifications, representing the examination boards, was satisfied that the grades were supported by the quality of the students’ work. After the pressures placed on teachers and students over the past year and a half, this is a remarkable achievement that should be celebrated. Crucially, ministers must start planning now to ensure that the class of 2022, which has also endured a year of disruption, does not become the victim of an unjust drive to push down grades next summer.

The results do throw up areas of legitimate concern. The attainment gap for students on free school meals and in areas of high deprivation has widened, as has that for black candidates. More generally, the pandemic has deepened pre-existing educational inequalities. The government’s refusal in June to properly fund a recovery package for English schools, leading to the resignation of former catch-up tsar Sir Kevan Collins, urgently needs to be revisited. Meanwhile, the gap between private and state school attainment remains a testament to the power of money to influence outcomes in our education system.

In the autumn, booming numbers of undergraduates will pose a challenge for some universities in terms of space and staffing levels, and ensuring basic Covid precautions. Students will rightly demand a far fuller experience than has been possible during Covid, and a significant return to in-person teaching. The government should take these factors into account when it publishes its green paper on the future funding of higher education, expected next month. The Treasury is reportedly determined to significantly reduce costs, but to do so in the current context would be rash in the extreme. As a generation attempts to make up for time lost to Covid and forge its future, universities need supporting, not undermining. Having got through the chaos and isolation of the last two years, that is the least that this supremely resilient cohort of pupils deserves.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Politicians and academics in the US have begun to talk of Researching While Chinese American, in a deliberate echo of the phrase Driving While Black. There is a long, ignoble history of failed espionage cases against such scientists. But the Trump administration stepped things up when it launched the China Initiative, vowing to aggressively pursue the theft of trade secrets and identify researchers who had helped to transfer technology to Beijing.

Though one man was jailed after pleading guilty to making false statements to federal authorities this spring, its first trial has rightly faltered. Anming Hu’s prosecution for fraud, over claims he hid ties to China, ended in a hung jury and a mistrial. One juror later declared that the FBI owed him an apology, after agents admitted they had falsely accused the former University of Tennessee researcher of being a spy. Yet to the shock of academics, Asian American advocacy groups and others, prosecutors plan to retry the Chinese-born Canadian citizen.

The concerns go beyond the treatment of Professor Hu to the broader strategy, and the general suspicion it evinces of those of Chinese ethnicity in science and technology, by singling out one country’s espionage. Though other cases have been dropped, 90 members of Congress have now urged the department of justice to end what they believe is the racial profiling of individuals of Asian descent. While cases like this are most alarming to academics, business people and others who fear that their lives could be similarly upended, they send a broader message that at best some citizens are not seen as quite as American as others, and at worst, that they are viewed as enemies within. A similar signal is clear when analysts, politicians and others of Chinese birth or descent in western countries face a greater level of scrutiny for their actions or statements, with insinuations or outright accusations that they may be working for another country’s interests.

As political competition intensifies, and concern grows about China’s behaviour internationally, such suspicion is likely to grow. It is important to be alert and thorough in assessing the risks posed by Chinese espionage or its covert influence operations. But stereotyping of and animosity towards those with Chinese heritage is both wrong and counterproductive. The suspicion is all the more painful at a time when those of east and south-east Asian descent have faced soaring abuse and violence sparked by the pandemic. The US has seen a spate of horrifying attacks; in the UK, it is estimated that communities have experienced a three-fold increase in hate crimes.

In the UK, Chinese agents have reportedly been applying for visas under the scheme for Hong Kong’s British National (Overseas) passport holders, designed to aid those fleeing Beijing’s crackdown. Vigilance is essential, and will help to protect those who are genuinely escaping the repression. But necessary care in processing cases should not be used to justify bureaucratic delays which risk their ability to leave Hong Kong.

Still less should such concerns fuel wider suspicion. It goes without saying that discrimination is intrinsically wrong. It can hit those who have left China for their opposition to the leadership. It also risks bolstering Beijing’s claim that the world is not critical of the leadership’s abuses, but hostile to the Chinese people. That is not in anyone’s interests.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The sixth report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was published against a glowing backdrop of orange skies, as vast wildfires sweep through Greece and California. In western Germany, thousands of homes remain without running water or electricity following the devastating floods of July. In Yakutsk in Siberia – the coldest winter city on earth – residents were warned last month to stay inside as forest fires filled the air with toxic smoke, following heatwaves that began in the spring.

Eight years in the making, authored by the world’s leading climate scientists and approved by 195 national governments, the report confirmed the meaning of the evidence before our eyes: the cumulative impact of human activity since the Industrial Revolution is “unequivocally” causing rapid and potentially catastrophic changes to the climate. The future that environmental scientists foresaw with alarm, when the IPCC produced its first report three decades ago, has arrived.

Without an accelerated reduction in greenhouse gases during the next decade, the ambition of the 2015 Paris climate agreement to limit global heating to 1.5C will not be met. The price of failure will be a world vulnerable to irreversible and exponential effects of global heating: there will be worse floods more often, more terrible and frequent heatwaves and devastating and repeated droughts.

The science is irrefutable. Less certain is the strength of political will to act upon it. An awesome burden of responsibility now rests upon this generation of leaders as humanity finds itself at a fork in the road. The actions taken or foregone during the next 10 years will define the parameters of the possible for future generations. A step-change is required, but across the world green rhetoric continues to translate into policymaking at a pace which is fatally slow. China has committed to the target of net zero emissions by 2060, but continues to build coal-fired power plants both at home and abroad. Along with top carbon-emitters such as Russia and India, it refused to endorse the 1.5C goal at an April summit convened by the American president, Joe Biden. As Mr Biden’s special envoy for climate, John Kerry, has said, if countries such as these cannot be persuaded to enact faster reductions over the next decade, the target looks unachievable.

02:16 One month in the global climate crisis and what it means for Australia, with Lenore Taylor – video

At this treacherous turning point in history, Britain finds itself both uniquely placed and unprepared to host the crucial Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. The government’s climate chief and Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, has tried to use the IPCC report as a means of concentrating minds. In an interview at the weekend, he said that the world was almost “out of time” in dealing with global heating. But ahead of arguably the most important summit held on British soil since the second world war, delay and equivocation have become the government’s trademark response to the greatest challenge of our times. The publication of a net zero strategy, due in the spring, has been delayed until the autumn amid fears over the possible cost. Some Tory backbenchers have begun to lobby for a slower transition, based on the false presumption that poorer families will disproportionately bear the burden of change.

A fair transition to net zero is indeed imperative. With the right forms of intervention and subsidies, it is also eminently achievable. The experience of the Covid-19 pandemic has taught us that the most daunting challenges can be met by political leaders who recognise that exceptional times require exceptional measures. But thus far, there is little sign that Boris Johnson’s government is willing to treat the climate crisis in the same way. The stark conclusions of the IPCC study, and Britain’s vital convening role at Cop26, make that position indefensible. The science is unequivocal. The verdict is clear. There is no more room for manoeuvre, delay or procrastination in dealing with a crisis which is this generation’s responsibility to address.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Conservative party hooked British capitalism to the state’s life support system for the past 18 months. So it takes chutzpah to think, as business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng does, of putting the free market at the heart of a post-Covid recovery. Yet lengthening NHS waiting lists, hiking consumer energy bills and welfare cuts when poverty is rising all betray a mindset that regards the re-legitimation of state intervention as threatening a way of life rather than securing it.

What the Thatcherite wing of the Conservative party desires is a restoration. For them this is an opportunity to go back to 1979 and use tried-and-tested ways to stabilise prices, crush labour and discipline poorer nations. These rightwingers yearn for higher interest rates, to prioritise financial returns on assets and the use of creditor power to squeeze the global south.

Such ideologues are likely, in part, to be disappointed. The US president, Joe Biden, does not see the world their way, saying this April that “trickle-down economics”, associated with Ronald Reagan, didn’t work. The president aims to show that the state can do good, and the early results are promising. His Covid-related aid boost will push the share of Americans in poverty to the lowest level on record. Mr Biden’s treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, professes a “free market” scepticism. She has promoted the social benefits of running the economy “hot” by maximising the use of all available resources. Her inspiration is the economist Arthur Okun, who in 1973 argued that governments increasing employment would foster “a process of ladder climbing” in the job market that would reduce inequality and stimulate productivity growth. Ms Yellen has stuck to this playbook in office.

Perhaps the greatest pushback against the return of laissez-faire dominance in economics comes from China. Beijing has surpassed the US in some key technologies. Mr Biden’s economic team is blunt about needing to use the state for more “targeted efforts to try to build domestic industrial strength … when we’re dealing with competitors like China that are not operating on market-based terms”.

The state is, clearly, not powerless against global capital. During Covid it paid for millions of workers without breaking a sweat. Contrary to conventional thinking there was no threat from rising deficits to interest rates. Thatcherism was defined by Nigel Lawson as “increasing freedom for markets to work within a framework of firm monetary and fiscal discipline”. This saw the state put in service of business interests rather than mediating between labour and capital. It also left Britain woefully unprepared, and ill-equipped, for the pandemic. A Thatcherite approach will not produce a fairer distribution of growth. It will militate against support during downturns and plans to “level up” the regions. Ministers ought to outline a new role for the state rather than relying on failed ideas about what the market can do.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When I arrived in Hong Kong in 1987 as the Observer’s south-east Asia correspondent, the foreign editor said he saw it as being a base, not the kind of territory that would generate much news but it was a safe place to be, communications were good and I was unlikely to have any visa problems. I thought I might stay a couple of years and move on. Thirty-five years later, I have, with great sadness, moved on and no one in their right mind can possibly assert that Hong Kong is a safe place for journalists.

The white terror – the term used to describe the ruthless elimination of the opposition in Taiwan following the imposition of Kuomintang rule and more recently taken up by the opposition in Hong Kong to describe similar events in the city – is relentless, swooping down not just on journalists, but on prominent opposition leaders, teachers, lawyers and, recently, speech therapists who had the temerity to write a children’s book about sheep that dared to answer back; they have been charged with subversion.

It was famously said that Hong Kong was the only part of China where no citizen need fear the midnight knock on the door by the secret police. Things have changed: Hong Kong’s newly formed national security police division prefers the dawn raid to midnight arrests, but what has changed more substantively is that the Chinese Communist party’s infamous means of control are becoming routine in a place where liberty had been the norm. More than 10,000 people have been arrested for political offences, a staggering number in a population numbering just over 7 million. The election system has been undermined; even the banks have been complicit in freezing the accounts of dissidents. There has been a widespread purge of teachers and teaching materials and, closer to home for me, the media have become prime targets for suppression. Even support for the unusually successful Hong Kong team at the Tokyo Olympics has been the subject of criticism by those intent on currying favour with the masters in Beijing, who are only interested in team China.

The judiciary, whose independence has been a cornerstone of Hong Kong’s success as a global business centre, is being transformed. Judges in national security cases are hand-picked by the head of government, the constitutional right to trial by jury has been abolished and mind-blowing sentences are being doled out to those found guilty of politically related crimes.

Apologists for the crackdown say that it would never have happened had Hongkongers not dared to challenge the world’s biggest dictatorship by pouring on to the streets in their millions in 2019. For months, the protests dictated the news as government officials retreated to their fortified offices, leaving the police to take control. The truth is that China was never comfortable with relinquishing control and didn’t need much of an excuse to renege on promises of autonomy for Hong Kong.

As someone who has not only been a journalist but also founded several businesses in Hong Kong, it seemed to me that this place had a unique ability to bounce back and survive the fiercest of storms. The realisation that, at least in the near term, this resilience has been decisively crushed made me contemplate the previously unthinkable – leaving.

Can Hong Kong survive this rampage obliterating the remnants of liberty? The answer is almost certainly no, unless survival is seen through the eyes of China’s rulers who really do not care whether Hong Kong remains as an international business centre. They don’t care because they think that Shanghai can do the job much better and is not tainted by Hong Kong’s colonial past.

The rulers are not bothered by the mounting exodus of people from Hong Kong because, as they point out, there are plenty of people on the mainland to replace them. Indeed, this policy of replacement is one widely seen in other “restive” regions of China, notably Xinjiang and Tibet, where the local population has been overwhelmed by Han Chinese from other parts of the country.

The worst of the local sycophants, who are jumping that bit higher to please their masters in Beijing, are meanwhile busy advocating the suppression of Cantonese, a language with deeper historical roots than Mandarin, now officially called Putonghua (the common people’s language). They have successfully advocated greater censorship of films and theatre to purge them of unduly Hong Kong-oriented content and, like all apologists for authoritarian rule, they are obsessed with symbolism, deeply worried over how the national flag is raised and sleepless over the idea that Hong Kong’s regional flag might be seen flying higher than the five-star red flag.

As a presenter of the last surviving current affairs TV programme produced by Radio Television Hong Kong, the public broadcaster, I had the misfortune to witness the growing censorship at first hand. A new director of broadcasting was installed, who brought in a stratum of commissars who censored our programme at the planning stage, as soon as filming began and sometimes made cuts minutes before going to air. There were so many red lines to be observed that, as one commentator put it, they more closely resembled the Red Sea.

In the past, people fled the Chinese mainland to Hong Kong in tiny boats; now the flow has reversed. Heartbreakingly, 12 young people were caught and given heavy punishment for trying to reach Taiwan. A prominent online media organisation has just announced that it is quitting Hong Kong to find refuge in Singapore – yes, the same Singapore where media censorship was the stuff of stories I used to file for the Observer.

With the tide turning so rapidly, my departure hardly matters, but it is carried along by waves that are rising by the day.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Boris Johnson and Sir Keir Starmer both pitched up in Scotland last week for two-day trips that were supposed to show that the two leaders have important things to say about the union and the big issues that face the UK. On the surface, Starmer had a more successful visit: unlike Johnson, he didn’t decide to launch his own Edinburgh fringe show complete with the sort of jokes that would empty even the smaller-capacity venues that this year’s Covid-secure event is running. The prime minister’s quip about Margaret Thatcher giving Britain an “early start” in decarbonisation by closing so many coal mines is the only thing anyone will remember of this foray north of the border. Then again, the only thing of note that Starmer managed to say was that he thought Labour should be proud of what Tony Blair, the only Labour politician to have won an election for the party since the 1970s, had achieved. It might challenge some in his movement, but it’s hardly radical stuff.

Both men have a clear grasp of the big issues facing the country. Neither seems able to say anything that remotely matches up to those challenges. Johnson’s climate spokeswoman, Allegra Stratton, has been doing the heavy lifting on the need for governments to be far more ambitious as the Cop26 summit in Glasgow approaches, but she also found herself being sucked into performing her own one-woman fringe show with a monologue on how it’s not that easy being green. While Stratton has been candid about the problems with the electric car charging network for a family such as hers, Johnson’s contribution to the debate has been to set everyone off on an angry row about the damage his own party did to mining communities in the 1980s.

It’s not just climate, though. Johnson recently spent a week focusing on crime and Starmer has been trying to improve the way Labour talks about the matter. Both have seen the polling showing that it is one of the biggest issues for voters after healthcare. Once again, both have only responded with a small offer. Johnson’s “Beating Crime” strategy was thin and derided by police chiefs as “gimmicky”. It included policies that have been around since the dawn of political gimmicks, including greater visibility for people carrying out community sentences and a named police officer for each neighbourhood. It’s a wonder that another stock nonsense policy, declaring that homeowners who defend their properties against burglars will receive better protection in law, didn’t make it in there too. Despite repeated pledges to better support victims, the government hasn’t yet made clear how it will resource policies that will mean rapists are more likely to be brought to justice, nor have they responded to campaigners’ pleas for better legislation preventing “digital strip searches” of victims. Then there’s “levelling up”, which Johnson tried recently to turn from a nebulous concept into part of his political legacy. The tagline for his fringe show here would be “with hilarious consequences”, as everyone came away from his “big” levelling-up speech none the wiser as to what it meant, only that the prime minister thinks that it’s important and good for prosperous areas in the south of England as well as northern and Midlands seats.

What’s going on? Why is everything so small? Johnson’s political career has been wound around big moments, from Brexit to Covid. He’s not a politician who delights in the little things; unlike Theresa May, he didn’t spend years enjoying public service in local government before moving to the national stage. Many commentators have attributed his coal mines quip to him still having the mindset of a columnist who can make sardonic jokes that are taken in the spirit in which they are intended. Perhaps he still approaches policy in the same way as a journalist who has the luxury of pointing out problems without the responsibility of having to work out how to solve them and then implement that solution.

His colleagues in government still think Johnson is ambitious for radical thinking. He recently sat the cabinet down and gave them a lecture about being ambitious. One minister who was there paraphrases it as: “He said, you guys are incredibly powerful but sometimes you don’t realise how powerful you are because it’s easy to get boxed in by the confines of the Whitehall machine. Now you’ve got the power. Let’s get out and use it. Climate change was one of the things he listed and big infrastructure projects.”

If he’s relying on his ministers to come up with the big ideas, he needs to lecture them some more. And work out how to deal with one of the biggest blockages that he didn’t think to mention when talking about politicians being “boxed in”: the Treasury.

It was the Treasury that was responsible for that “levelling-up” speech being so thin. One cabinet minister observes: “They had hoped to have enough to pull out the levelling-up white paper and give the big speech on it, but they ended up just doing a small speech. Everything is taking longer than they’d hoped. There’s no sense in putting stuff out in a big plan that the Treasury keeps blocking.” This minister and many others blame the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and his colleagues for holding up policies, batting down request after request for a policy to be funded with the not-unreasonable response that “this is subject to the spending review”. But Johnson should know that the spending review in the autumn will not suddenly bring a cornucopia of well-funded, exciting policies. He has already clashed repeatedly with Sunak over the cost of big ideas – as well as smaller policies – and the chancellor is determined to win more battles and limit spending in the coming months. The climate crisis issue is obviously much harder than whether the public or, indeed, Johnson’s colleagues will embrace electric cars in the near future. But Stratton was right to highlight the problems with the UK charging network for people taking long journeys: most motorway service stations have only two charging points, maintained by one company and are not supported at the weekend, meaning that if you find one out of order, you are stuck without help.

Once again, this is an example of the government not matching up to its initially ambitious language: a strategy on building a charging network has taken much longer to be drawn up than expected. Johnson’s defenders point out that Britain is still leading the way on plans to ban new petrol and diesel cars by 2030, while Joe Biden has only set a target for 50% of new vehicles in the US to be electric by that date. But there’s a lot of work to be done before that ban seems realistic.

Then there’s the difficult conversation with the electorate that everyone in government is swerving about the cost of the green measures necessary to cut emissions from domestic housing. Powerful and well-organised backbenchers such as Steve Baker are far ahead of ministers in their thinking on how the price of green boilers will go down with the public. They’re prepared to talk about it, but so far ministers aren’t.

There’s no real pressure on the climate or indeed anything else from Starmer. The Labour leader has fallen into the same trap as Johnson of thinking that because he’s talked about something in a speech or an interview, he’s definitely taking it seriously. But what green policy has Labour unveiled in recent months that’s had the Tories worried? Nothing. Even Ed Miliband enjoyed more success with his energy policies when he was Labour leader, forcing David Cameron to come up with an energy price cap in response to his own proposals for a freeze on bills.

Johnson is lucky to have Starmer, who was supposed to give a “big vision” speech at the start of this year but who has ended up generally agreeing with the government but in a special, disappointed voice. They delight in the differences in their personalities, but both men are more similar than they’d admit. They’ve had an extraordinary two years in the job, tackling some of the biggest issues any leader could imagine. But both seem to have run out of puff, suggesting in the things they say that the challenges this country faces are quite small and easily solved.

Isabel Hardman is assistant editor of the Spectator
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When riots happen, they are typically explained as an expression of the madness or badness of crowds. Rioters are condemned for the violence and destruction that occurs, which has nothing at all to do with the actions of authority, or with society at large. Years later, what was blindingly obvious is belatedly acknowledged: the previous riots were actually connected with social issues. Rioters had genuine grievances. Government policies played an important part. Yet when the next riot happens, the pattern repeats itself. The media and politicians suggest that this time it’s really different, and the mad, bad crowd is entirely to blame.

When the 1981 and 1985 riots took place in Brixton, both were dismissed as an expression of the atavism of crowds. They were simply “mobs on the rampage”, according to one Daily Telegraph headline, and had nothing at all to do with racism, inequality or policing. As the home secretary, Douglas Hurd, put it, the riots weren’t a cry for help, but a “cry for loot”.

By 2011, it was widely accepted that both the 1981 and 1985 Brixton riots were rooted in the inequality and mistreatment experienced by the black community. But once again, in the minds of politicians, the riots taking place in front of them were different. The then prime minister, David Cameron, confidently asserted that the riots that had started in Tottenham in north London after the police shooting of Mark Duggan were “criminality pure and simple”. His justice secretary, Ken Clarke, claimed that 75% of those involved had a criminal record; that the riots were a matter of “criminals on the rampage”; and that the rioters were a “feral underclass”.

The claims surrounding the 2011 riots have since been comprehensively debunked. If most of those arrested during those riots had criminal records, it was because the police concentrated on people already known to them to make arrests. Few of the rioters had convictions for theft or violence; most were for trivial and statutory offences. As the BBC home affairs correspondent, Dominic Casciani, concluded, the figures cited by Clarke showed that the rioters, on the whole, were not serious criminals.

If close inspection of what happened rules out the official version of events, it also reveals the factors that sparked the riots. The closure of youth services and curtailing of employment opportunities as a result of austerity were an important part of this story. Indeed, deprivation was the strongest predictor of whether or not a London borough saw rioting. But it was the interactions between deprived communities and the police that stood out in multiple ways. Riots were more likely to happen in London boroughs with more police stops and searches, where there were more negative attitudes to the police.

The riots kicked off in these boroughs after an episode that exemplified the communities’ sense of unwarranted and brutal treatment by the police. Duggan was shot dead, the police claimed there had been an exchange of fire, and when the family demanded answers, the police failed to engage with them. It was a similar story in 1981, when the police’s treatment of Michael Bailey sparked the Brixton uprising, or when the police shot Cherry Groce four years later, leading to the 1985 Brixton riots.

In popular mythology, riots are mindless and indiscriminate eruptions. The evidence from historical and contemporary studies refutes this picture, and shows they typically have a pattern that reflects the collective understandings of the communities involved. As the historian William Reddy once remarked, the targets of crowds “glitter in the eye of history” as an indication of how crowd members see their world. And in 2011, the police, police property and those associated with the police were all prominent targets. Even when these weren’t clear targets and rioters incinerated or looted property, an important motivation was demonstrating the impotence of the police in preventing such attacks. For once in the rioters’ lives, power relations were reversed and the police were dancing to their tune.

Likewise the geographical spread of the riots from London to other towns and cities in England can’t be understood without grasping the role of policing. Often the spread of riots is framed as a process of “contagion”, as if once people see others doing something, they can’t help but do it themselves. But this can’t explain why riots spread to some places and not others.

After analysing police crime data, archive sources and conducting interviews with rioters, the Economic and Social Research Council’s interim report in 2019, of which I was one of the authors, identified three key processes that explain the spread of riots in 2011: one was where people in another location identified with those who had previously rioted, shared their anger at Duggan’s death and their hostility to the police, and rioted in solidarity with their peers. Another involved those who did not identify with previous rioters but still shared their antagonism at the police and, seeing the impotence of officers, felt empowered to challenge them. Finally, there were situations where the police feared the occurrence of riots and intervened forcefully in response to minor incidents, escalating pre-existing tensions into open conflict.

Even if we now understand the 2011 London riots as a response to the unequal policing of an unequal society, the danger is this understanding has arrived too late. Arguments that the rioters were simply criminals or a mindless mob did their job at the time, deflecting blame from the government and state for long enough to avoid addressing the nature of a society where many people feel that violence is one of the only ways they can have a voice.

The time to address the inequalities and racism that led to the 2011 riots was 10 years ago, when those riots happened. But the heat has now gone out of the situation, the demand to address such issues has abated, and ministers can blithely advocate for the very policies, such as increased stop and search, that created the conditions for the riots in the first place. And when the next riots roll around – as they undoubtedly will – the government will be able to repeat the same pattern: it will say that this time it is different; that the people involved really are just criminals; and that the rioters are entirely to blame.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Five years ago, I began to notice that the perpetrators of some of the worst terrorist attacks had something in common. A high proportion shared a history of assaulting wives, girlfriends and other female relatives, sometimes involving a whole series of victims, long before they attacked total strangers.

In the summer of 2016, for example, when just two terrorist attacks in Florida and the south of France left 135 people dead and hundreds injured, both perpetrators claimed to be Islamists. But I was struck by the fact that each had a horrific record of domestic violence.

A year later, there were four fatal attacks in the UK and all six perpetrators turned out either to have abused women or, in one case, to have witnessed his father abusing his mother and sister. There were striking similarities between the histories of Darren Osborne, the rightwing extremist who drove a van into worshippers leaving a mosque in north London, and Khalid Masood, the Islamist who staged an attack on Westminster Bridge. Both men had criminal records for violent offences – and both had abused women.

I thought these cases challenged conventional wisdom about terrorism, which holds that it is all about ideology. Many fatal terrorist attacks actually appeared to be an escalation of violence that had been going on, sometimes for years, against members of the perpetrator’s family. I was convinced that the police and MI5 needed to change the way they assessed the risk posed by suspects, treating a history of domestic violence as a very significant red flag.

When I raised this with the authorities, however, I encountered scepticism and disbelief. So I decided to write a book, using published sources to piece together a woeful catalogue of men who had humiliated, beaten and sexually assaulted women long before they became notorious as terrorists. It was published in 2019 and this time senior figures at counter-terrorism policing and the Home Office listened.

They commissioned groundbreaking research using data on just over 3,000 referrals to the Prevent programme in England and Wales in 2019 – adults and children who had caused concern to teachers, social workers and family members because of a possible vulnerability to radicalisation (V2R). The results of what came to be called Project Starlight have not yet been published, but I have been given access to them – and they are stunning.

Almost 40% of adult referrals had a history of domestic abuse either as perpetrators, witnesses or victims – or a combination of all three. This is likely to be an underestimate, given that domestic violence is one of the most under-reported crimes, but it provides some idea of prevalence for the first time. The comparable figure for children is 30%, another likely underestimate because under-16s were not routinely questioned about domestic abuse in the home.

There were many more men than women among the sample and the research showed another significant difference between the sexes: male referrals were more likely to be perpetrators of domestic abuse, while the women were more likely to be victims. But what is really shocking is the extent and seriousness of the violence disclosed in family histories. “Incidents recorded ranged from children witnessing domestic abuse in their households to people being convicted of the attempted murder of their partner.”

As I expected, the link is visible across ideologies, from Islamists and rightwing extremists to the fifth of the sample where no known ideology was identified. This confirms my theory that terrorism is at least as much about male violence as ideology, suggesting that angry young men are attracted to extremist ideas that appear to “justify” their grievances. The route from victim to perpetrator is not inevitable but it is well known, and the research reveals that almost 16% of adult V2R referrals had been victims of domestic abuse, nearly three times higher than the estimated national figure.

Take the tragic case of the Deghayes brothers from Brighton. After enduring years of violence at the hands of their father, 18-year-old Amer Deghayes fled to Syria where he joined a terrorist organisation, the al-Nusra Front, in 2013. Two younger brothers followed and were killed within months of their arrival. Another brother, who had remained in Brighton, was convicted of drugs offences and stabbed to death in 2019. The cost of violence in the home is unacceptably high.

Another reason why extremist organisations appeal to aggrieved men is, I’m afraid, their misogyny. When the Project Starlight researchers looked for a link between V2R referrals and hate crime, they did not find it – but they did find one with woman-hating. Indeed so-called incels – bitter young men who blame women for their inability to get sex – have carried out fatal attacks in the US and Canada.

A recent horrific case suggests that counter-terrorism officials need to be alert to the possibility that extreme misogyny is in itself a form of radicalisation. Last month a 19-year-old man was convicted of the murders of two sisters, Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman, in north London. At his trial, it emerged that Danyal Hussein had been referred to Prevent in 2017 after using school computers to access far-right material.

He appeared in front of a Channel panel, the statutory body that assesses the risk posed by individuals, but was discharged a few months later with no continuing concerns in relation to extremism or terrorism. Yet Hussein would later draw up a “contract” with a “demon” in which he promised to kill six women – and only women – in six months in return for winning the lottery. He refused to give detectives his passwords, so it is impossible to confirm a suspicion that he may have accessed incel sites on the web. But in a note that echoes the incel obsession with not feeling sufficiently attractive to women, he pledged to “offer some blood” in exchange for making a girl fall in love with him.

All this demands a revolution in how we think about terrorism, domestic violence and misogyny. The Project Starlight report rightly includes a raft of recommendations, calling for much wider awareness of the link between violent extremism and a history of domestic violence. “All counter-terrorism case officers should consider checking for potential links to a domestic abuse-related incident,” it says.

But this may not be straightforward when so few incidents lead to convictions. A recent report revealed that three-quarters of domestic abuse cases reported to the police in England were closed without the perpetrator being charged. Some organisations have come up with welcome innovations – Croydon in south London, for instance, has a specialist social worker sitting on Channel panels, leading to the disclosure of previously unsuspected domestic abuse in the history of V2R referrals.

But the Cinderella status of crimes against women can no longer be tolerated. The connection between private and public violence is now crystal clear – and the cost of continuing to ignore it is way too high.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Iran’s water bankruptcy has been in the news lately, prompting deadly protests in Khuzestan province that also garnered the attention of global media. But this kind of problem is neither new or unique in the country. Drying rivers, vanishing lakes, shrinking wetlands, declining groundwater levels, land subsidence, sinkholes, desertification, soil erosion, dust storms, air, water and waste pollution, biodiversity loss, deforestation and wildfires are among the other familiar signs of Iran’s environmental devastation.

Khuzestan, in south-west Iran, is known globally for its rich oil and gas resources. But this wealthy province’s contribution to Iran’s development is not just its oil and gas revenue. Khuzestan is also water-rich compared with most of the country. So, its large rivers have been blocked by gigantic dams to store water for agriculture, industrial and domestic uses and hydroelectricity production. Considerable amounts of water have been also transferred from its rivers’ tributaries to dry regions in central Iran.

As a researcher, this is one of the rare moments that I wish all my projections were wrong

Excessive manipulation of the natural environment for economic purposes has pushed Khuzestan’s ecosystem to breaking point. The water-bankrupt province can no longer satisfy the needs of farmers, industries, cities and villages, and fragile wetlands ecosystems that, once dried up, turn into dust sources and punish the innocent Khuzestanis with paralysing dust storms.

What Khuzestan and the rest of Iran is experiencing today is not unexpected. Once you drain your checking account (surface water) and exhaust your savings account (groundwater), you are left with a lot of creditors (water rights-holders) whose demands cannot be satisfied. You are then water bankrupt and the dissatisfaction of the claimants can trigger major conflicts.

The amount of water Iran uses has been more than its amount of renewable freshwater in most parts of the country for many years. Lots of experts, including me, have been warning about the national security risks of this situation for years. As a researcher, this is one of the rare moments that I wish all my projections about my home country were wrong.

This year’s major drought has come after two excessively wet years that filled up the reservoirs and gave life to the wetlands. But mismanagement of the water that was gained and a lack of preparedness for subsequent dry conditions caused drinking water and power outages, disruption to agricultural water allocations, and vanishing wetlands – all of which affected livelihoods and triggered anger.

The Khuzestan protests also have an important social justice element. Ethnic Arab populations are expressing their serious frustration with what they consider a “systematic” or “intentional” discrimination that has resulted in underdevelopment in their rich province. Khuzestanis are also questioning why “their” water must be transferred to other regions while they are suffering from thirst.

Obviously these problems were not created overnight, but through decades of unsustainable development, rooted in poor planning, lack of foresight and ineffective environmental governance. A chronic problem of this scale doesn’t have a quick fix. So, as in the past, the government will mainly focus on anger management, sticking-plaster solutions – such as compensating the farmers for income losses and ensuring more regular deliveries of drinking water – as well as making promises, while hoping that the problems disappear soon with some rainfall.

Many have asked what the role of climate change is in this situation. Climate change is real and immediate action is essential. I have fought a costly fight for this belief as a researcher in the global north and a former decision maker in the global south. I am not a climate change denier, but I am extremely concerned about the unintended consequences of constantly emphasising the role of climate change in extreme events.

Climate change is making Iran warmer and drier. It also increases the frequency and intensity of extreme events such as droughts. So it could have played a role as a catalyst, but certainly must not be sold as one of the main causes of the problem.

We in the climate change community tend to climatise extreme events with a natural dimension such as the wildfires in the US and Canada, the floods in Europe and China, or the drought in Khuzestan. We do this in the services of a good cause: getting the attention of the decision-makers over an existential problem. But this can be misleading and counterproductive.

The fact is that Iran would have experienced today’s problems at some point as the result of local anthropogenic changes regardless of global climate change. Climatising extremes can be a gift to most decision-makers who don’t want to accept liability for their bad decisions. They will tell you that there is not much they can do. If they’re from the developing economies, they will also remind you that they are the victims of a global catastrophe created by the advanced industrial nations.

Even if climate change stopped and Iran cut its carbon emissions by 100% right now, its water bankruptcy and many other environmental problems would not be solved immediately. This does not mean that we should give up the climate fight. But alongside that global struggle, we must remember that local decision-makers are liable for avoidable failures of environmental management that result in the degradation and suffering we are now seeing in Iran.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Given the steep rise in economic inequality in many parts of the world since the 1980s, one might have expected to see increasing political demands for the redistribution of wealth and the return of class-based politics. This didn’t quite happen – or at least not straightforwardly.

To make sense of the big picture, we studied the long-term evolution of political divides in 50 western and non-western democracies, using a new database on the vote that covers more than 300 elections held between 1948 and 2020.

One of the most striking results that emerges from our analysis is what we propose to call the transition from “class-based party systems” to “multi-elite party systems” in western democracies. In the 1950s and 60s, the vote for leftwing parties in western democracies was “class-based”, in the sense that it was strongly associated with a lower income and less educated electorate. Since then, it has gradually become associated with more highly educated voters, giving rise in the 2010s to a remarkable divergence between the effect that income and education has on how people vote. People with high incomes continue to vote for the right while people with high levels of education (such as those with university degrees) have shifted to the left. This separation is visible in nearly all western democracies, despite their historical, political and institutional differences.

What explains this remarkable transformation? First, the classic answer invokes the increasing prevalence of identity politics. As questions related to environmentalism, gender equality, the rights of sexual and ethnic minorities and, more recently, immigration have taken a growing importance in political debates, new green and anti-immigration parties have risen in the polls. While income continues to differentiate social democratic parties from conservative parties, it is education that most clearly distinguishes the supporters of green and anti-immigration parties today.

A second mechanism that can potentially explain this long-run evolution has to do with the process of educational expansion itself. In the 1950s and 60s, the majority of voters had primary or secondary education at most. In this context, parties seeking to reduce social inequalities could simply aim to ensure everyone went through primary and secondary school. With the rise of tertiary education, things have become more complicated. Leftwing parties, which were once seen as defending greater equality of access to the education system, have increasingly been viewed as parties defending primarily the winners of the higher education game. This arguably contributed to growing resentment among those who do not benefit from it, and a shift of some of them towards anti-immigration parties or abstention. As a result, the voting bases of social democratic parties have become increasingly restricted to the most educated parts of the electorate.

A third related mechanism involves the ascendancy of a global ideology that puts private property interests above all else, abandoning any sense that capitalism can be radically transformed. The moderation of traditional leftwing parties’ platforms since the 1980s (think of New Labour), as well as in some cases their shift to promoting neoliberal policies, directly contributed to the decline of class divisions being perceived as politically salient, the subsequent demise of these parties, and the rise of identity-based conflicts.

Regardless of its causes, the consequences of this profound transformation are quite clear. As political systems have effectively come to represent two kinds of elites – the well-educated and the rich – they have left little space for the expression of the interests of the most disadvantaged citizens. Abstention, in Britain as in the majority of western democracies, has skyrocketed among low-income and lower-educated citizens in the past decades. In a remarkable book, Geoffrey Evans and James Tilley show how this “political exclusion of the British working class” was triggered by political parties and the mass media giving an ever-decreasing attention to questions of inequality. Class is not dead, as three political scientists emphatically stated 15 years ago: it has been buried alive.

There is, however, at least one object of political conflict that continues to clearly divide voters along class lines in one part of the world: Europe. Our analysis showed that in every referendum held in the European Union since the 1970s, low-income and less well-educated voters have converged in expressing their opposition to further supranational integration. In some sense, this is not surprising. In a union focused almost exclusively on the liberalisation of human and capital flows and the imposition of stringent fiscal rules, there is little to gain for those workers who most suffer from the shocks induced by the unregulated global capitalism of the 21st century. Brexit represented the culmination of this long-run process. In 2016, only 35% of the poorest 10% of UK voters voted remain, compared to nearly two thirds of those belonging to the richest decile. For the first time in several decades, many citizens who had been both politically and socially left behind – including those who bore the burden of the post-2008-crisis austerity measures – were able to voice their concerns.

Many worry that in this age of globalisation, economic insecurity and cultural anxiety has allowed “populism” to irrevocably take root in our political systems. Our findings suggest that the groundwork for this may have been laid, in part, by the rise of a new form of “elitism” over several decades. Tackling the political crises faced by western democracies will require giving back a voice to the many citizens who do not feel represented by existing democratic institutions. Above all, it will require designing sufficiently ambitious and credible platforms to convince them that globalisation and technical change can serve the interests of more than a narrow minority.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Among the public services performed by journalism is alerting readers to scams, and the newspapers are currently full of them. When HMRC rings up, threatening a court case unless you press 1 on your keypad, slam down the phone. Texts from Royal Mail asking for money are about as kosher as marketing from Charles Ponzi. And if an email arrives from someone purporting to be from the sainted Martin Lewis, gushing over some new platform for trading bitcoin, it’s a hoax.

Politics is also rife with scams ­– except that you can’t depend on these being exposed by the press. The biggest and most pernicious whopper doing the rounds today is about Boris’s Big State. It runs thus: the prime minister is an utterly alien breed of Tory. He loves public spending and big government, those things abhorred by Conservatives ever since Margaret Thatcher took charge of the party five decades ago and made it her central mission to roll back the state. The Iron Lady’s legacy is endangered by the blond Nero.

Versions of this story can be spotted everywhere. In the Spectator, headlines warn that “the big state is back”. Telegraph columnist Fraser Nelson balks at “the rise of big-state Conservatism”. There is even panic around the Downing Street cabinet table, with David Frost – he of the ever-unravelling Brexit deal – huffing and puffing against “the intellectual fallacy” of a big state. And when Boris Johnson takes on Rishi Sunak over this autumn’s spending review, it will inevitably be painted as Big State v Small State: the most electorally successful Conservative since Thatcher battling one of her true believers.

Take all that seriously, and I can offer you London Bridge at a very reasonable price.

What’s wrong with this picture isn’t how it depicts Johnson, who clearly enjoys spending more on rail lines, tunnels, and anything else that demands a hard hat and a camera crew. No, the real misrepresentation is of Thatcher and what she actually did. This is greater than a run-of-the-mill falsehood. It is an out-and-out con: a lie used to swindle the public out of both money and options.

True enough, Thatcher wore her anti-state feelings on her sleeve. One of the very first white papers published by her government in 1979 claimed public spending lay “at the heart of Britain’s economic difficulties”. It wasn’t just a financial crusade – it was a moral one. Government was Nanny, and taxes reduced individual freedom.

And yet, over the course of her 11 years in power, neither the tax taken by the government nor the amount it spent actually fell. Thatcher’s enemy may have been supposedly big government, but under her it got even bigger.

Let’s start with taxes, because if there’s one thing everyone knows about Mrs T it is that she cut them. Except she didn’t. Although she grabbed front pages for slashing income-tax rates, especially for top earners, she also jacked up national insurance contributions, and VAT for shoppers. The result is freshly laid out in a paper in the Cambridge Journal of Economics (CJE), which states: “The total value of central government receipts was 30.4% of GDP in 1979; by 1990, this proportion had risen to 30.9%.” Taxes actually went up under Thatcher, and the increase fell hardest on the less well-off.

On public spending, reputation again doesn’t fit the record. Over her first four years in No 10, only a few programmes got cut, most notably foreign aid, even while she shovelled cash into domestic policing and an overseas war. Far from being the opposite of Johnson, Thatcher’s combination of free economy and strong state is not so far from his own instincts. The overall result, noted by Kevin Albertson and Paul Stepney in the CJE, is that after inflation, “total managed expenditure rose by 7.7% from 1979 to 1990”. Even flogging off BT and British Gas and all the other national utilities, and shifting those running costs and wage bills into the private sector, couldn’t stem the rise.

Measured against national income, public spending did fall in the late 1980s, writes historian Jim Tomlinson, “as the economy recovered from the slump at the beginning of the decade”. But, he notes, “When the economy returned to recession in the early 1990s [under John Major], the ratio again rose.” However large Thatcher’s boasts, and whatever the propaganda in the Spectator and the Telegraph, no miracles were worked here: there was no great lasting shift.

Thatcher did not roll back the state. Instead, she changed whom it serves and what it can do, in ways that still shape our world. Under her, high earners won big and finance became the UK’s boss industry. At the same time, the state began using tens of billions in public money to pay for Thatcherism’s consequences.

The biggest of all her privatisations was of public housing, with at least 1.5m council homes eventually sold off at a vast discount, costing the public about £200bn in today’s money. Couple that with the scrapping of rent controls, and fairly soon the bill for housing benefit exploded, with the state paying landlords to house tenants. Similarly, breaking unions and driving down wages meant taxpayers subsidising low-paid work through benefits. Under Thatcher, that was family credit; today it is universal credit.

These weren’t screw-ups, but a deliberate and profound transfer of money and power to the already well-off. Thatcher’s most notable achievement was how she normalised this, “persuading the public to change economic expectations and assumptions”, as the political scientist Ivor Crewe wrote soon after her 1987 landslide.

Those same expectations and assumptions course through this summer’s debate over Johnson’s thinking. Those warnings about a big state, predicated on a lie about Thatcher’s rollback, are ministers and commentators effectively policing the prime minister. The belief that income tax rates can never go up was hardwired into politics by Thatcher and her chancellor Nigel Lawson, and has effectively removed the possibility of proper funding for both the NHS and social care. The sense that the state is always failing has been repurposed to justify everything from academy schools to Downing Street’s cronies getting billions in Covid contracts.

This is what a 50-year scam looks like. The pandemic and its aftermath means Johnson will inevitably run a bigger state than either Thatcher or David Cameron, but he will do so within limits effectively set by her. His government will give taxpayer money to civil engineering firms and property developers, while ensuring that free school meals and an uplift to universal credit are deemed unaffordable.

Most newspapers will urge him to spend less, to shrink the state. But the rest of us shouldn’t focus on whether the state will shrink – because, just as under Thatcher, it won’t really. Instead we should ask for whom the state will shrink – and who is in line for an almighty payout.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On Thursday 8 April, Emmanuel Macron announced the closure of the prestigious École Nationale d’Administration, France’s elite school for turning out senior civil servants and politicians. The president’s announcement sounded familiar – he had already pledged to reform the ENA, a school renowned for its conservatism and aversion to change, back in 2019 – but this time it’s final: Macron said that the time had come to abolish an institution that is widely regarded as a symbol of elitism and inequality.

With just a year until the next presidential election, Macron is neck and neck in the polls with Marine Le Pen. The ENA abolition looks, therefore, as if it’s part of a strategy to reconnect with “the people”. It’s easy to forget, given the pandemic, but before France entered lockdown in March 2020, it had been experiencing the most sustained anti-elite movement for generations in the form of the gilets jaunes (yellow vests) protests. Macron has certainly has not forgotten this.

The president does not want to dispense with the idea of an elite school altogether but to build something that allegedly works better. A new school called the Institut du Service Public, a kind of “public management school”, will replace the ENA. Unsurprisingly, Jean-Louis Debré, once a close ally of Jacques Chirac, declared that this was a “populist” measure (by which he meant it was pandering to public opinion).

His father, Michel Debré, the first of Charles de Gaulle’s prime ministers, founded the ENA in 1945. Its aim was to train students drawn from all walks of life through entrance exams so jobs in the French civil service could be assigned on merit rather than wealth and personal background.

In reality, the school turned out to be a close-knit club for the upper-class, rather than a force for democratisation. The elitist recruitment pattern has worsened over the years: by 2014, 70% of students came from the upper classes, as opposed to 45% in the 1950s. ENA graduates – called énarques – land the best jobs in the civil service, but also in business and frontline politics. Alumni include several presidents, the past eight prime ministers and current CEOs of top business and banking firms. There is even a term, pantouflage (from the word for slippers), referring to the practice by which civil servants find lucrative work in the private sector – the énarques are emblematic of this tendency, which accentuates the public perception of an incestuous old boys’ network.

One may think of énarques as the French counterparts of Oxford PPE graduates. Insofar as they are both effectively finishing schools for the ruling class, the comparison makes sense, although the specifics are quite different. In the UK, private education and elite universities are a fact of life. In France, the ideology of republicanism – which comes from the French Revolution – insists on the notion of equality of treatment for all and on the delivery of state-of-the-art public services owned and run by the state. The ENA is a public institution whose funding almost wholly comes from the state. This makes the way it favours students with high economic and cultural capital not just embarrassing, but a seeming contradiction of the state’s republican ideals.

To get in, candidates spend a year prior to applying to the school in a classe préparatoire, an extremely demanding course. The written exam (concours externe) tests a wide range of subjects and disciplines. Only a minority of candidates make it to the second round, which includes oral exams that essentially test their elocutionary skills. Then comes the dreaded grand oral, a long ordeal in front of a jury during which candidates are asked all kinds of puzzling and provocative questions designed to test their capacity to think on the spot.

It all has the effect of giving richer candidates who have the right social skills the edge over candidates from more modest backgrounds. Once in the ENA, it is essential to graduate in the top 10%, if graduates want to be able to choose from the most prestigious roles in the French state. The rest may be assigned to mediocre positions. Former graduates often complain about the teaching, which has a reputation for being dull and conservative, and describe the institution as a bastion of upper-class snobbery.

Back in 2006, Nicolas Sarkozy (who did not attend the ENA) mocked the “sadist or idiot” who had seen fit to include exam questions for ENA candidates about Madame de la Fayette’s Princess of Clèves, a 17th-century novel. Sarkozy’s mockery alluded to the idea that énarques are trained to discuss subjects as varied as politics, economics, history, arts or literature but can do so in only a superficial manner.

The modernisation of the ENA should therefore involve a comprehensive overhaul of the school’s recruitment process and exam procedures, as well as a dramatic modernisation of the curriculum so it reflects the challenges of the real world. But does Macron really want this? Only he knows. Would it appease the yellow vests and people angered by his economic policies? Though the reform may be welcome and necessary, it will probably not make the slightest difference to them: énarques and ordinary citizens would carry on living on different planets.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

As a climate policy researcher, I am often asked: what is the biggest obstacle to decarbonisation? My answer has changed profoundly over the last couple of years. I used to point to the lack of affordable green technologies and an absence of political will. Today, I point to something else. Something less tangible, but possibly more challenging: the absence of a green social contract.

The green revolution is already unfolding, driven by a stunning reduction in the cost of green technologies and by a global momentum for climate neutrality by the mid-century. So, if cheaper green technology and an unprecedented political green ambition are rapidly converging, what could go wrong? Unfortunately, the situation is not as simple as it seems. Decarbonisation will reshape our economies and our lifestyles. Nothing will be left untouched in the process: the green world will be profoundly different from the one we know today.

But such a radical transformation also raises questions about who should bear the cost of climate action, both within and between countries. The cost of climate action can not disproportionately fall on the most vulnerable, exacerbating inequality. Climate action should be designed in a way that improves social equality. And this is precisely what a new green social contract should be about.

The French experience with the gilets jaunes – Yellow Vests – movement represents the clearest example of the perils and political headwinds that governments worldwide face as they try to wean their citizens off fossil fuels. The French government was right to introduce a price on carbon in transportation in 2018. But it would have immediately translated into higher petrol and diesel prices, hitting hardest people living outside French cities who were already feeling the pain of stagnating incomes and lacking the same public transport options as urban residents.

Had the design of the carbon tax included compensation mechanisms to cushion the blow for the most vulnerable, the backlash could have been prevented. This is exactly what a group of economists including 28 Nobel laureates and four former Federal Reserve chairs – among them Janet Yellen – have been calling for in the United States: the introduction of a robust carbon tax, together with a compensation system to ensure that the most vulnerable benefit financially by receiving more in “carbon dividends” than they pay in increased energy prices.

This discussion illustrates how important it is to include equity and fairness considerations into the design of climate policies. Even in Europe, the global climate policy frontrunner, support for climate measures is broad but shallow. In a recent survey conducted in eight European countries, the Open Society European Policy Institute found that nearly all voters were happy to buy less plastic, though far fewer were keen to pay more for fuel or flights. In short, as climate policies become stronger, new gilets jaunes-type movements could emerge across the continent. The usual suspects here span the coal mining regions of Poland, that are highly reliant on carbon intensive industries, to those cities in which mayors have declared war on diesel cars.

Populists and culture warriors may well find in climate policy their new flagship issue, arguing that urban elites are driving the policy but the cost ultimately falls on the shoulders of “ordinary” citizens. This risks making it politically more dangerous for mainstream parties to really go green, as parties on the extremes offer voters an easy alternative. But a new green social contract could interrupt this political vicious cycle.

Equity and fairness considerations go well beyond national boundaries. As developed countries scale up domestic climate actions, they will probably introduce measures – such as carbon border taxes – to ensure that their industries are not undercut by competitors based in countries with weak climate policies. Already in the initial stages of development in the European Union, such measures were also pledged by Joe Biden as part of his election campaign. Boris Johnson is now considering using his G7 presidency to try to forge an alliance on carbon border taxes.

However, carbon border taxes could affect the economies of the poorest countries. A recent survey conducted by the Konrad Adenauer Foundation on the perceptions of policymakers in the Asia-Pacific region revealed how carbon border taxes are perceived as protectionist and discriminatory towards developing countries. As with domestic carbon taxes, this problem can be prevented by factoring equity and fairness into the design of the measures. The poorest countries could be exempted from border charges for example. Another possible solution would be to use the revenues from carbon border taxes to scale up international funding for green projects in these countries. This discussion should be at the core of the international dimension of the new green social contract.

At the national level, countries can learn from France, which eventually reacted to the gilets jaunes crisis with the launch of the Citizens’ Climate Convention – an experiment in direct democracy aimed at identifying climate solutions rooted in social equity and fairness. Internationally, the same principles could be placed at the core of the forthcoming Cop26 UN climate talks in Glasgow. Such actions are fundamental to ensure long-term social support for the green transition, and to prevent its derailment – which would have catastrophic consequences for the planet.

Simone Tagliapietra is a research fellow at the Bruegel thinktank and an adjunct professor at the Catholic University of Milan. He is the author of Global Energy Fundamentals (Cambridge University Press, 2020).




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Amid the crises of the last year, certain members of Emmanuel Macron’s government have managed to identify a new threat to French society: “Islamo-leftism”. During a recent interview, the French minister of higher education, Frédérique Vidal, declared that “Islamo-leftism corrupts all of society, and universities are not impervious”. She criticised “radical” academics for always “looking at everything through the prism of their will to divide”, and announced that she would be requesting an investigation into university research on these subjects. While the meaning of the term is elusive, the political intent behind Vidal’s statement was clear. “Islamo-leftism”, which Vidal has associated with research on race, gender and social class, is indicative of a broader culture war that is sweeping both the political and academic establishment in France.

Vidal is not the only politician in Macron’s government to have recently used the term. In a radio interview about the tragic beheading of a high-school teacher who had shown his class the Charlie Hebdo cartoons ridiculing the Prophet, Jean-Michel Blanquer, the minister of education, declared that “Islamo-leftism wreaks havoc in universities”, and blamed France’s oldest national student union for being “the intellectual perpetrator of the assassination”.

In France’s heated political climate, the ill-defined neologism has found an audience among mainstream politicians. The growing public presence of minorities demanding that their rights be respected, together with a burgeoning interest (particularly among younger scholars) in ideas and theories that help analyse religious prejudice, racial discrimination and social injustice, have disturbed a comfortable belief in the supposedly universalist values of the French republic. In response, a reactionary movement has emerged in France that crosses ideological lines between left and right, combining anxiety about an envisioned future with nostalgia for an imagined past.

Although Macron distanced himself from Vidal after a scathing backlash to her proposed investigation, his apparent disapproval seems feigned; indeed, the French president has also singled out scholars working on racial discrimination and the stigmatisation of Muslims. Days before huge demonstrations took place against police violence and racism that resulted in multiple unpunished deaths of Arab and Black men across France, Macron accused universities of encouraging “the ethnicisation of the social question” and “breaking the republic in two”. Three months later, he announced a new law against Islamist “separatism” that is designed to exercise greater control over Muslim schools and mosques. Although an Elysée official said the bill is “not against Islam”, but rather “against people who in the name of a wrong or reconstructed vision of a religion behave in a way contrary to the republic”, many French Muslims feel the new law will unfairly target them.

It has been clear for some time that Macron’s machiavellian calculation (the French president wrote his undergraduate dissertation on the author of The Prince) is that leading his party on the tails of the far-right will help him win against Marine Le Pen’s Rassemblement National in the second round of the 2022 presidential election, which polls predict to be very close. Yet a narrowly political reading of terms such as Islamo-leftism misses the broader picture. The term is a signal not only to conservatives, but to an influential segment of French intellectuals.

In recent years, a lively reactionary movement has taken off among French intellectuals, targeting research in a long list of fields – from ethnicity, race, gender and intersectionality to colonialism, decoloniality and Islamophobia. This movement is best understood as a rejection of the evolution of society, politics and ideas, and an endeavour to re-establish the old social and political order of things. It has rallied mostly senior or retired scholars, and while their targets are distinct, all are concerned with the same menace: the advent of what is often called “identity politics”.

From their perspective, race studies, research on racial discrimination and the idea of white privilege all pose a threat to the universalist values of the French republic. Some even see these ideas as forms of anti-white racism. They regard analyses of France’s colonial past (which has long been a blind spot in French history and sociology) as divisive and ideological. Meanwhile, organisations such as the influential La Manif pour tous, which was founded in 2012 to oppose France’s gay marriage bill, have taken a strong stance against education programmes covering gender studies.

Curiously, France’s culture warriors believe that these new ideas and critical theories are imported from US campuses. Yet race relations were initially studied in Britain, while the concept of “decoloniality” was created in Latin America. And, ironically, many of the ideas that have been developed in North America were influenced by French theorists. A remarkable feature of this movement is its disregard for the international literature nourishing these new ideas. Instead of understanding them, it appears more interested in caricaturing them.

A revealing example of this intellectual moment is the recently published book Race et Sciences Sociales by the sociologist Stéphane Beaud and the historian Gérard Noiriel. These two respected scholars lament what they see as the substitution of “class struggle” with “race struggle”. They scorn the “gender bandwagon”, are dismissive of intersectionality and criticise the “racialisation” of social problems and public discourse.

Their book begins and concludes with the death of George Floyd. Of Black Lives Matter, they write that the movement obscures “the power relations structuring our societies”,and therefore accentuates divisions among working-class people (a remarkable argument, given that Black Lives Matter has been more involved in deconstructing and denouncing power relations than any other social movement in past decades).

By asserting the primacy of class, and an idealised account of republican values, France’s culture warriors devalue the ideas and movements that help to better understand – and act against – current social injustices. Allegations of a menacing Islamo-leftism have revealed an improbable convergence between Macron’s En Marche and Le Pen’s Rassemblement National, on the one hand, and a reactionary segment of France’s intellectual world on the other. Comparisons have been drawn by some between the term Islamo-leftism and Judeo-Bolshevism; both identify the leftwing followers of a particular religion. The latter term was however used in the 1930s to cast European Jews as dangerous subversives. Although history never repeats itself, witch hunts are never a good sign for democracy.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On 20 March 2019, Thierry Baudet provided Dutch television viewers with two surprises. The first was news of his landslide victory in that day’s senate elections. Baudet’s far-right Forum for Democracy (FvD) was a newcomer in parliament, holding just two seats out of 150 in the lower house. But that day, from scratch, Forum gained 12 of the senate’s 75 seats, putting it on a par with the governing liberal party (the VVD) led by prime minister Mark Rutte.

The second surprise was Baudet’s victory speech. “The owl of Athena spreads her wings as evening falls,” he started, and across the country, jaws dropped and drinks were spilled. The Netherlands is not a country noted for oratory. Our politicians would rather downplay their intellectual prowess than borrow from Greek mythology.

Back then, the future must have looked promising for the dynamic young leader: if he could win the Senate elections, could Baudet win the general elections in March 2021?

Most commentators thought he had a chance. For many years the far right of Dutch politics had been served by Geert Wilders’ PVV (Freedom party). Wilders is not known for quoting political thinkers, and tends to be coarse in his speech, for example speaking about imposing a “head-rag tax” on hijab-wearing women. For the better educated, socially conservative, small government-minded voter who is not a fan of immigration, voting for Wilders is not an option. The “civilised right”, as it’s often called in the Netherlands, would either continue to vote VVD or for one of the conservative Christian parties.

But Baudet seemed a palatable alternative. He served the same smörgåsbord of nostalgia, nationalism and anti-immigrant xenophobia as Wilders, but he presented as a more clean-cut, decent, thoughtful figure. He had international links through his party’s youth movement to Europe’s populist or far-right figures from Orban to Le Pen. His Jordan Peterson-style discourse appealed to young men at universities. The Dutch media immediately loved him (or loved to hate him); after Wilders’ arctic landscape of ideas, here now finally were some political theories for pundits to dissect.

One word, however, stuck out from that victory speech, even for Baudet’s supporters.“Like all those other countries in the boreal world,” he said, “we are being demolished by the people who should have been protecting us.”

It was difficult not to interpret “boreal” as anything but a dog whistle to the extreme right, for whom the word is code for “white”. Baudet Baudet has always denied he is a racist and insisted that “boreal” was just another way of saying “northern”. People seemed to give him the benefit of the doubt. Or at least his poll numbers were growing, as was membership of FvD and its youth wing. He assembled an electoral list including seasoned establishment politicians and young upcoming conservatives. The party looked like a serious contender.

Then it all fell apart – first gradually, then suddenly. The slow decline was a direct result of the pandemic. Voters Baudet might have stolen from the liberal party rallied behind Rutte who, early on in the crisis, began enjoying a 75% approval rating.

Baudet questioned Rutte’s increasingly strict lockdown policies as a “corona dictatorship”, then questioned the virus itself. Wasn’t it just a little flu? Wasn’t the World Health Organization trying to control the political order?

The more seasoned politicians in his party started to get anxious. Embracing conspiracy theories would lose them the ear of “the civilised right”.

And then it all blew up in a Death Star kind of way. In November, antisemitic remarks from the Forum youth wing’s WhatsApp groups were leaked to the press. Instead of investigating the claims of antisemitism, Baudet expelled the whistleblowers.

This did not sit well with others on his electoral list, and a few days later it was leaked to the press that Baudet had said that George Soros “invented” Covid, and that “practically everyone” he knew was an antisemite.

In the controversy that followed, Baudet stunned everyone by stepping down as party leader but then reversed, demanding a party referendum on his position. Flabbergasted, most of the party’s remaining candidates now wanted him out altogether. It was mayhem. In one of the more media-savvy moments, they had the locks changed to the party headquarters, so Baudet couldn’t come in again.

When the party leadership gave in to the referendum the more seasoned members simply quit. As did many Forum politicians in local councils and in the Senate. Of the 12 senators who won seats in the 2019 election, only two are still attached to his party.

More leaked WhatsApp conversations followed, this time of Baudet himself allegedly making racist remarks. On live TV Baudet disclosed that he’d had a romantic entanglement with Eva Vlaardingerbroek, a young woman on his electoral list, who was engaged to a French associate of Marine Le Pen. The TV show then played an audio clip of Vlaardingerbroek speaking about her disappointment in Baudet’s antics and what she claimed was “callous racism”. Baudet looked briefly shaken and in a small voice said that he had to “readjust himself to this news”.

The introspection didn’t last long. Instead of backtracking, with the elections less than a fortnight away, Baudet has now gone into full Trump mode. His anti-lockdown, anti-vaxxer rhetoric has become more extreme, more conspiracy minded, more anti-media, even suggesting that his followers use “creative” solutions to optimise proxy voting to the party’s advantage.

Since last week he’s even been donning a baseball cap.

The one thing that was constantly said about Covid last year, was that it was a great revealer; it revealed the gap between rich and poor, the employed and the unemployed, the old and the young. Covid has also now revealed what Baudet really is; not just the flamboyant and outspoken intellectual that he wanted people to believe he is, but a conspiracy-mongering antisemitic populist, willing to undermine facts, health care, the free press and even democracy, to remain a focal point in Dutch politics.

Is it working? Half of Forum voters now believe Covid was developed to suppress the civilian population.

The problem for Baudet is there are not too many Forum voters left. He is marginalised in the polls and the media have moved on. Don’t be fooled by overblown reporting of the recent anti-lockdown, anti-curfew riots which are not a factor in the election. Baudet’s radical turn has lost him the support of more mainstream voters, because that’s also what Covid revealed: that the Netherlands is not a country for baseball caps and a paranoid style of politics. In times of crisis, we like to stay close to what we know. So the mainstream Rutte, in charge for 11 years now, commands a lead in the polls that seems insurmountable by any party.

Baudet’s demise has helped Wilders’ support to recover. His party is expected to take 20 seats, more or less the same level of support he’s had for a decade. But these are seats that are next to useless, since no mainstream party is willing to work with him, just as he is not willing to work with them. Wilders seems happiest when he is far away from government responsibility.

Baudet will probably keep his current two seats in parliament, if he’s lucky he might gain a couple. But he’s no longer a contender.

Then again: like Trump, Baudet doesn’t believe in the polls.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What term do you want to search? Search with google
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What term do you want to search? Search with google
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What term do you want to search? Search with google
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@With the Tokyo Olympics now in the rear-view mirror, it’s useful to reflect on how one of the most interesting athletes at the Games has been treated.

When the lovable shot putter Raven Saunders, who is a black, gay woman, won a silver medal, she used the occasion to cross her arms in an X – a gesture of solidarity at “the intersection of where all people who are oppressed meet”. There are two ways we might expect the Olympics to approach this.

In the first scenario, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) – whose main mission, it seems to constantly remind us, is “building a peaceful and better world” – realises this is a winning moment. Is there any message more on brand with building a better world than standing in solidarity with all oppressed people?

The IOC president, Thomas Bach, a former Olympic fencing medallist, seems to truly believe in the mission. He has described his personal experience of the “magic” of the Games for fostering peace and progress – “the unifying power of sport”.

There’s no avoiding the fact that the Olympics is full of slogans and gestures. Medallists increasingly bite down on their medals – perhaps once reflecting an authentication of their metal content, but these days just a request from photographers hoping to get a lucrative shot. If you watch those podium moments in the UK, they are likely to be accompanied by an official BBC epithet that declares “Hate Won’t Win”.

The second scenario of how the Olympics approaches such a person is, I’m afraid, a more cynical one. In this version, the IOC is a corporate giant trying to sell a product.

Like other grandiose sporting conglomerates, it brokers lucrative broadcasting deals, negotiates eye-watering advertising contracts and enjoys a brand that makes others weep with envy.

If this were the case, you might conclude it’s doing pretty well. The IOC’s much lauded “commercial transformation” has seen its sponsorship revenues jump from $500m in 2000 to approaching $3bn today. McDonald’s sponsorship ended in 2017 after 41 years, but Coca-Cola sponsorship continues (are we really still meant to believe elite athletes drink Coke?), and the IOC has added digital companies such as Alibaba and Airbnb to its list of “partners”.

In this context, you would expect the IOC to look at an athlete like Saunders and see, in cold, capitalist terms, her potential to market its product. She was after all one of the most impressive people competing in the Games.

Fans love her colour-block hair (half green, half purple), brilliantly coloured sunglasses and charisma – stalking around the arena, talking to herself, performing cute moves when the mood takes her, and naming and owning her inner Hulk who, she explains, just “takes over”. If increasing its share of global audience is the IOC’s goal, people like Saunders are just throwing their authentic and compelling real-self performances in for free. As a gay, black woman, defending her humanity goes with the territory.

And yet. Tokyo proves yet again that the IOC is neither capable of achieving its stated aims – the progress of humanity – nor its real ones, understanding the global marketplace. Instead of supporting, protecting and celebrating athletes like Saunders, the IOC has actually doubled down on penalising them.

Saunders, like the esteemed list of principled athletes before her, is being investigated for breaking the rules, though the IOC announced it had “fully suspended for the time being” the review on hearing of her mother’s death. Instead of questioning the Olympic charter’s notorious Rule 50 – subtitled “Advertising, demonstrations, propaganda” – the IOC clarified it this year, leaving no doubt that “gestures of a political nature, like a hand gesture or kneeling”, are off limits.

Put to one side for a moment the irony that this clarification is in itself a gesture – a clear intervention against the Black Lives Matter movement that has seen athletes of all kinds taking a knee.

The IOC, despite having decades to do so, is yet to learn the truth about faux neutrality. It didn’t learn it in 1936, when remaining “neutral” on the Nazi regime meant legitimising Hitler.

It didn’t learn it in 1968, when it penalised John Carlos and Tommie Smith for their hands punched into the Mexico City sky. You are likely visualising that protest, because it became an iconic statement of anti-racism and black liberation for the ages. Yet the IOC has never apologised to Carlos and Smith, nor to the world for intervening against their cause.

Even harder to stomach is the fact that, today, the IOC has the audacity to promote these “legends” on its Olympic channel, for “one of the most iconic moments in the history of modern Olympic Games”. It seems activism has its uses for strengthening the Olympic brand, with the comfort of hindsight.

Bach didn’t learn it in 1976, when he attended his first Olympics, in Montreal, as a promising young fencer. From his telling, Bach found Montreal a dreamy experience, rudely interrupted only by the impact of African nations withdrawing their athletes. Bach fails to mention is that these nations withdrew in a protest aimed at boycotting apartheid South Africa – hardly a trivial move.

And if Bach truly cares for the opportunities available to Africans, he may note that sports boycotts against South Africa were one of the most effective in accelerating the demise of apartheid, which deprived millions of black people of the most basic of rights, let alone access to competitive sport.

Appearing “neutral” on matters of oppression has hardly become a better idea over time. Apart from the intellectual dishonesty of describing the affirmation of existing power systems as “neutral”, there is no evidence whatsoever that it makes anything better or more peaceful. Beijing 2008 did not improve China’s human rights record, in Xinjiang or Hong Kong. It’s not the words of Bach’s selective memory that ring true, but those of psychologist Jonathan Haidt: “Sports is to war as pornography is to sex.”

That hasn’t stopped athletes reminding us of the best of humanity. As thanks for which, Saunders remains under investigation, despite the “suspension”. Defending her humanity on the podium was a violation of the rules.

Does an athlete need to be bereaved before her right to expression is protected? It’s hard to know where to even begin unpicking the messages that sends.

Is the IOC remotely interested in building a better world? If so, it should applaud athletes who further its mission by championing causes of humanity and progress.

If not, it’s no big deal, just another corporate entity that uses big ideals to market its products. Unfortunately, this is something with which I suspect we are all intimately familiar. And besides, we do love watching sport. In which case, the IOC can spare us the grandiose messaging, which, seen clearly, takes empty gestures to a whole new level.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Will began his heroin addiction as a prison inmate: he was 21 years old and behind bars when he first smoked the drug. The story of his life up to that point, and ever since, was one of abandonment and neglect by the state. Naturally bright, he was diagnosed with autism, ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder at an early age, and was excluded from school aged 12. No other schools were willing to take him, concerned as they are about damaging their league table positions, so Will’s formal education ended there and then.

A couple of sessions at the overwhelmed and under-resourced child and adolescent mental health services led nowhere. Later in life, when Will was ready to go to rehab – a big step for a person suffering from drug dependency – he was told he first needed to detox and unless he could afford to go to the Priory (he could not), he would only be eligible for such support if he quit his job and signed on. Left to sink or swim, Will sank, and turned to petty crime to fund his addiction.

When it comes to drugs policy, hypocrisy and cowardice reign supreme

“I just think of the wasted years,” says his mother, Pam, her voice cracking with love for her son. “If in the early days of his addiction he could get help, and was able to access rehab and decent, well-funded services, he’d have saved the country so much money in the long run. He wouldn’t have gone to prison: he’s incredibly productive when he’s not using. He’s a grafter, smart, clever.”

Will’s tightly knit friendship group had all been excluded from education, too, and all but one of them suffered from addiction. Some have died; more faceless statistics for society to forget.

Pam is convinced that without the love of his family, her son would be another statistic, one of the record numbers of annual drug deaths for society to occasionally tut at but otherwise ignore. Many drug-dependent people do not have a family safety net (one of Will’s friends slept in a stairwell aged 12, his foster family not bothering to register him as missing).

Johan is another such example: a recovering cocaine user who began self-harming and attempted suicide after being haunted by flashbacks of childhood sexual abuse. “My counselling was state-funded, textbook-style counselling,” he tells me. “They ask a question from a form. Nothing really there for me to use as medicine, so to speak. This isn’t the NHS’s fault by the way. I love the NHS, but they’re crippled.”

His story is like that of many drug users in the UK who have been abused and unloved by their parents, tossed into a society offering judgment and condemnation rather than care and compassion. In the last six years, £26m has been slashed from England’s youth drug and alcohol services. If that doesn’t seem much, bear in mind it’s 37% of an already woefully inadequate budget .

One social worker in north-east England tells me about a father who had stopped using crack for a year and recently rang her, full of distress, after being placed in a recovery group whose members were still using class A drugs. “It’s totally inappropriate for where he is in his recovery,” she tells me. “Sadly, the service that is supposed to help people with recovery does not have the resources for what he needs.”

Many structural problems predate austerity, of course. “It’s not just about funding,” James Nicholls, chief executive of the drug reform charity Transform, tells me. “It’s about the splitting away of mental health services from drug treatment, which has been known about for decades but never resolved.”

What should be treated as a public health emergency is instead dealt with as a criminal disorder. Exactly 50 years since the “war on drugs” was declared, the US has spent over $1tn on the “fight”, with only far higher rates of drug use, addiction and death to show for it. This damaging policy has gifted criminal enterprises a profitable near-monopoly on the drugs trade and destabilised countries from Afghanistan to Mexico.

Like many of his colleagues around the Cabinet table, Boris Johnson has indulged in drug-taking. Yet he enforces the criminalisation of people – disproportionately young black men – for the same offence. This week he opposed the Scottish government’s wishes to open drug consumption rooms. Evidence from Denmark and Canada shows this would save lives, but facts – or indeed human lives – do not seem to matter in this “debate”. Politicians of all stripes know prohibition has failed but fear the wrath of the rightwing media if they say so: like the Labour lord Charlie Falconer, who in 2018 declared “I am sorry for supporting the war on drugs”, and now sits in the shadow cabinet of Keir Starmer. The latter however remains committed to the “war” – and to refusing to disclose whether he has ever taken drugs himself.

But when it comes to drugs, hypocrisy and cowardice – not evidence or human wellbeing – reign supreme. “The government machine keeps getting stuck on drugs policy,” Niamh Eastwood, executive director of the drugs charity Release, tells me. “It’s almost impossible to have a rational conversation.”

Is there any hope that reason could triumph? A recent government-commissioned report by Dame Carol Black – who emphasises deprivation and poverty as key factors behind drug misuse – called for a more health-based approach, emphasising treatment and recovery, and highlighting the corrosive impact of cuts.

Whether this will represent a turn towards an approach centred around public health rather than criminal justice remains to be seen. There is other pressure, too: Transform is leading a campaign to review the punitive 1971 Misuse of Drugs Act, and has secured the support of more than 50 MPs to undertake a root and branch reform of our failed drug laws. But sadly we remain far behind the decriminalisation model pursued by Portugal, which led to a dramatic fall in drug deaths.

Political and media elites have banished reason from drugs policy, condemning our most traumatised citizens to broken lives. A humane approach would be far better for society, and far less costly than treating drug addiction as a criminal disorder. Yet this seems irrelevant to the political consensus, which values moral condemnation over the most rudimentary common sense.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Moira Hunt hasn’t seen her mother in over 18 months. Hunt and her husband, Shane, live in the UK but are from Australia, where Moira’s mother is about to be admitted to hospital. In her 70s, she has had to cope with the pandemic and her own illness without her daughter by her side. Shane has also, despite a family crisis, been unable to go back to Sydney to see his father and relatives.

Moira and Shane can go home, but would need to shell out £10,000 each for plane tickets, and then another A$3,000 (£1,600) for hotel quarantine, even though they are fully vaccinated. As of last Friday, they also have to prove that they have a “compelling reason” to travel. Shane can just about stomach the separation, but the unfairness of the financial element has made it a bitter pill to swallow. “If you have disposable income and disposable time, if you aren’t a normal everyday member of the public, you’re fine. When you realise it all comes down to money, it becomes harder to accept. It makes the emotional toll even harder to bear.”

You will hear a different version of this story in most countries across the world. Border closures, strict and expensive quarantine rules, and costly airline tickets have effectively trapped millions since the beginning of the pandemic. The conditions these people are in, and any support they have access to, depends entirely on where they were when the music stopped. Some were trapped visiting their families, so they were saved from being separated, but then had to navigate the stress of losing jobs or academic places due to their absence. Migrant workers in the Gulf laid off during the pandemic are stuck indefinitely without income or rights to benefits. Families with roots and branches between western countries and their red-listed nations across Africa, South America and Asia are split by lack of flights and lack of resources.

The result is a global loss of life milestones – weddings, births, graduations. Also lost are the little things that accumulate into heavy burdens – the first steps of a first grandchild, the bloom of a new relationship frozen by distance at the start of the pandemic. Not knowing the scale of what was in store has made it all harder to cope with. When sharing stories of my own separations with others in a similar situation, the one thing we all had in common was the fact that it crept up on us.

When the first restrictions started in March 2020, we assumed it was going to be a short, sharp bout of pain, before things reverted to normal. Many even booked travel tickets, then rebooked and rebooked, before giving up. “We spent most of 2020 second-guessing,” Shane told me, but now “we’ve had to give up that sense of: well, maybe Christmas, maybe in the new year, maybe we’ll make the next round of birthdays”. If anything, it has been 2021 that has heralded the most severe and complex travel and quarantine restrictions.

Trying to figure out how to meet quarantine and travel requirements and save money feels like playing snakes and ladders – one right move will advance you another few steps, and one wrong move sends you hurtling back to square one. Every stage reveals another layer of complexity, another tier in a privilege hierarchy that this pandemic has sharpened. At the top of the pyramid sit the holders of “high-value passports” who don’t need visas to travel to most places and who live in countries with high vaccination rates. At the bottom are those who live in countries with no access to vaccines in the foreseeable future. Political conflict also plays its part: when Egypt was placed on Britain’s red list earlier this year, UK-based Palestinians visiting Gaza were trapped, as Egypt is the only port of entry and exit.

Relatives embrace at Heathrow’s terminal 5 last week. Photograph: Tolga Akmen/AFP/Getty Images

These are tolls to be added to the others we have all paid in the past 18 months. Like the other policies we have become accustomed to, from wearing masks to social distancing, there are justifications for travel restrictions. Most of them stem from scientific modelling and an abundance of caution – a reasonable mixture to follow in a pandemic. If we are to minimise the spread of the virus it makes sense to limit movement, within countries and between them. But it’s becoming clear that, in many cases, such policies are not being revised in line with the progress made in reducing infection and rolling out vaccinations. Something murkier is afoot. It’s hard to shake the impression that there is a desire not to return to normal rates of ebb and flow, but to use this opportunity to make it permanently harder to move around, particularly if your starting point is in the global south.

The bluntness of this enforcement reaches even those who have been vaccinated, some of whom still cannot easily return home to countries with strict travel measures. They are collateral damage in a display of quarantine theatre. Rigid border rules reassure domestic audiences that the problem is external, which provides a false sense of security when virus management at home is poor. At various points over the past year, the US and the UK banned entry from countries with far lower infection rates than their own.

Border regimes in general, and western ones in particular, are built to be inflexible. They run on the principle, “if in doubt, keep out”. In a pandemic, these large, lumbering bureaucracies are incapable of the modulation and nuance required to create fair, sensible mechanisms. The outcome is a crude and cruel system that has relegated the human toll of separation to the bottom of government priority lists.

And despite the universal pain of these policies, there is little political pressure on governments to revise them. Toughening up borders is a popular measure at the best of times, let alone when we are told virus variants are at the gates. While people might demand easier access to their favourite holiday destinations, there’s no political capital to be gained in loosening restrictions for less glamorous places, ones associated in the popular imagination with poverty and migration inflows.

With this inbuilt inertia, another threat looms – separation without end. “Living with the virus”, in the familiar phrase, might mean a world in which reuniting with friends and family is a perk, rather than a right. This is not a return to “normal”. It is the hoarding of it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@We have a slow food movement and a slow travel movement. But we’re missing something, and its absence contributes to our escalating crisis. We need a slow ecology movement, and we need it fast.

The majority of the world’s species cannot withstand any significant disruption of their habitat by humans. Healthy ecosystems depend to a great extent on old and gnarly places, that might take centuries to develop, and are rich in what ecologists call “spatial heterogeneity”: complex natural architecture. They need, for example, giant trees, whose knotty entrails are split and rotten; great reefs of coral or oysters or honeycomb worms; braiding, meandering rivers full of snags and beaver dams; undisturbed soils reamed by roots and holes. The loss of these ancient habitats is one of the factors driving the global shift from large, slow-growing creatures to the small, short-lived species able to survive our onslaughts. Slow ecology would protect and create our future ancient habitats.

At the moment, we’re going in the opposite direction. Self-serving nonsense cooked up by governments and their advisers, such as “natural capital accounting” and “biodiversity net gain” treat one habitat or feature as exchangeable for another. Don’t lament the twisted old oak we’re felling: we’ll plant 10 saplings in plastic rabbit guards in its place. Then we’ll call it a “net gain”.

But there’s no substitute for an ancient tree, or an ancient anything else. Big old trees are the “keystone structures” of forests, on which many other species depend. The very trees that foresters have tended to weed out – forked, twisted, lightning-struck, rotten, dead – are those that harbour the most life. For example, a single species of bracket fungus, which grows on rotten branches (dryad’s saddle), harbours 246 species of beetle.

Bats shelter in splits in the trunk. Forks hold tiny pools of water or pockets of soil. Jagged wounds where limbs have sheared, burrs and excrescences, scrapes from which resin bubbles, ivy, vines, lichens and mosses, tangles of twigs and derelict nests, peeling bark and fire scars are all crucial wildlife habitats. But the most important features of ancient trees – and many other habitats – are holes.

Between 10% and 40% of the world’s forest birds and mammals need holes in trees in which to nest or roost. Many other animals – amphibians, reptiles, invertebrates – depend on them. But these species suffer from a void of voids, an absence of absences.

Holes take many forms: hollow trunks or branches, galleries mined by insects, cavities dug by woodpeckers. Woodpeckers are keystone species, whose tunnelling makes homes for other nesting birds and mammals. They appear to spread fungal spores on their beaks in the same way that bees spread pollen, and this helps create the soft wood into which they can drill. The trees they need are big, old and rotten.

But almost everywhere, trees like this are disappearing. Research in Poland, France, Scandinavia, the Balkans and the Carpathians shows that forests unmanaged by people have far greater numbers of crucial features than even those whose trees are harvested in the most sensitive ways. In France, for example, the number of broken forks increased by nearly 300% in the 50 years since forests were last harvested, and holes made by woodpeckers by 500%.

A study in Australia showed that, following a major wildfire, the great majority of trees with holes were wiped out. It will take up to 120 years without further disturbance for their full ecological complexity to recover.

Our tidy-minded forestry and our habit of treating trees as interchangeable are devastating to wildlife. “Replacing” an old tree is no more meaningful than replacing an old master. The same applies to all ecosystems. When a trawler ploughs through biological structures on the seabed, they can take hundreds of years to fully recover. When a river is dredged and straightened, it becomes, by comparison to what it once was, an empty shell.

So what would a slow ecology movement look like? As Henry David Thoreau said, we are rich in proportion to the number of things we can afford to let alone. To the greatest extent possible, we should allow our complex natural architectures to recover. This means keeping trawlers out of all the places farcically listed as “marine protected areas”, most of which are nothing but lines on the map. It would mean, in nature reserves, less reliance on grazing by livestock, which tend to keep living systems in a state of arrested development. It would mean letting rivers run free.

Wherever possible, we should allow the trees killed by ash dieback and other diseases to remain standing. If one good thing arises from these plagues, it could be an increase in the amount of standing and fallen dead wood, both of which are crucial habitats. “Salvage logging” – removing dead or dying trees – is one of the most damaging human activities. Perhaps it also means a general preservation order for all trees, living or dead, greater than 100 years old: you would need express permission to fell one. It would mean a new and deeper respect for the entanglements of nature.

We need to create today the knurled and wizened ecosystems that only our grandchildren will see. Restoring the living world means restoring complexity, and complexity takes ages to develop. So it’s time we began.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@We have so much to worry about, it’s a relief that at least one big source of angst is no longer there to keep us up at night. Given how much psychic energy so many – inside the US and out – once devoted to him, how he came to invade even our dreams, there is solace in the fact that these days we need pay no more attention to Donald Trump. Right? I’m afraid not.

True, the great orange spectre has disappeared from the social media timelines, exiled by the emperors of Facebook and Twitter, reduced to starting his own blog to get around the ban – an effort that, like so many Trump enterprises before it, was quietly abandoned in failure. It lasted a month.

So each morning no longer begins with a peek through splayed fingers at the phone to see what fresh horror Trump has committed. But just because he is out of daily sight does not mean he should be out of mind. Tragically, to the world’s most powerful democracy and all those who, for better or worse, are tugged like the tides by its lunar pull, Trump still matters. He cannot yet be consigned to the past, because he is affecting the present and looms over the future.

The clearest evidence is the expectation that he will win the Republican presidential nomination for a third time and be the party’s next choice for the White House. You need only take a look at admittedly premature polls of the putative Republican field for the next election: he’s at the top, every time, with 76% of Republicans viewing him favourably. It was scarcely a shock when the Trump-backed candidate beat better-qualified rivals to win a Republican congressional primary in Ohio this week. Not for nothing does the former Bush speechwriter David Frum say of Trump, “Unless he’s dead or otherwise unable by then, he’s the likeliest 2024 nominee.”

The single greatest predictor of whether an American has been vaccinated or not is if they voted for Biden or Trump

At the risk of haunting your dreams all over again, that is a daunting prospect. For election day 2024 will be just a few days shy of Joe Biden’s 82nd birthday. If the president runs, he would be asking to remain in the Oval Office until he is 86. Many Americans would hesitate before granting that request. (At a mere 78, Trump will be able to run as the youth candidate.) But if it’s not Biden, if it’s Kamala Harris – or, frankly, almost any other Democrat – Trump will be able to hum the familiar culture-war tunes that brought him victory in 2016 and took him perilously close in 2020.

But let’s say that scenario is both too distant and too gloomy. Let’s say that, for whatever reason, it pans out differently. Even then, there is little scope to relax. Because even if Trump never returns, Trumpism is already in the American bloodstream.

Some hoped that the 6 January attempted insurrection might finally break the spell, disenchanting those Republicans who had remained loyal to Trump in the belief that, even if he was gross, crude and bigoted, extravagantly selfish and self-regarding, he was ultimately harmless. The optimists reckoned that the sight of the head of the US government rousing a mob to storm the US Capitol – a mob bent on using force to overturn the results of a democratic election – would finally persuade most Republicans that on this critical point their political opponents were right: Trump did, after all, pose a grave threat to the republic.

But it has not worked out that way. Republicans in the House voted against impeaching Trump for his crime, while Republicans in the Senate voted to acquit him of it. Dissenters have been ostracised. Even her pedigree as the daughter of a conservative hardliner has not protected Liz Cheney, expelled from the House leadership for standing against the great leader. Riding high instead are the conspiracy theorist Marjorie Taylor Greene and her comrade Matt Gaetz, the latter reportedly under investigation for sex trafficking, because they pass the only litmus test that matters: loyalty to Trump.

The baseless claim that the 2020 election was stolen, that Donald Trump remains the true president and that Biden is a usurper, was once merely the stuff of Trump’s fever dreams, a psychological mechanism to protect his ego from the truth of defeat. But “Stop the Steal” is now an article of Republican faith. Nine months on, a majority of Republicans believe Trump won and Biden lost, against all the evidence and a string of court judgments finding every claim of voter fraud to be groundless.

It seems nothing will shift the conviction of the faithful, not even the latest confirmation that it was Trump, not Biden, who was determined to rob the people of their democratic will: “Just say that the election was corrupt [and] leave the rest to me,” Trump told his acting attorney general last December, according to a newly released note taken by the latter’s deputy. Meanwhile, an Arizona state senator has called for election officials to be held in solitary confinement.

The Republican tribe cleave loyally to the other defining feature of 2020 Trumpism: the refusal to believe in the reality of Covid and to do what’s needed to thwart the virus. And so the single greatest predictor of whether an American has been vaccinated or not is whether they voted for Biden or Trump last November. As of last month, 86% of Democrats had received at least one shot; among Republicans it was only 45%.

That’s no surprise when Republican politicians compare the vaccination drive to the Nazi persecution of the Jews or to the KGB knock on the door and when Republicans at state level have forced out public health officials for pushing the vaccine too energetically.

Of course, these twin tenets of Trumpism are conjoined. What they share is disdain for expertise and contempt for facts, whether the experts be scientists or election officials and whether the facts relate to the nature of a virus or the sum total of votes cast last November. Trumpism demands instead that the facts bend the knee before the mighty helmsman. It is truth that must defer to the ruler, not the other way around.

Occasionally, you see a Republican who understands what’s happened to their party. There’s a snippet of video in which it pays to watch the face of the governor of Arkansas as an anti-vaxx heckler shouts down a briefing from a state medical official. In that moment, the governor seems to know that his party no longer believes in science or democracy, that the virus of Trumpism has infected its every organ. Whether or not Trump himself returns is almost secondary. The disease has already devoured the political party that constitutes half of America’s body politic – and it’s not done yet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Are we nearly there yet? It is the backseat question that haunts long journeys, except in Britain’s pandemic road trip the impatient whine comes from the driver. Boris Johnson was itching for a release from the moment the ordeal began. He was absent from early meetings of the government’s emergency response committee, unpersuaded that Covid-19 counted as an emergency. Only when presented with dire consequences did he engage with the need for a lockdown, writhing into submission like a toddler being strapped into a car seat.

Now the prime minister feels the journey must be nearly over, but finds it hard to judge this without a definite destination. The virus will not surrender and give him the satisfaction of declaring a victory day. Impatience for life after Covid does not resolve the problem of how fast to go. Infection rates are promisingly low, but simulating pre-pandemic normality too hastily risks reversing those gains.

There is no perfect calibration of the rules, only judgment calls of the kind that Johnson is notoriously ill-equipped to make. There are few neater illustrations of his incoherent governance than a traffic-light system for managing overseas travel that expanded from the traditional three colours to a shaded spectrum, unknown in any highway code, that included green, green watchlist, amber, amber-plus and red.

The same problem bedevils vaccine passports. They exist in the hazy netherworld between things that are briefed to the press and actual government policy. Johnson is reported to be irritated by what he sees as a lackadaisical uptake of the jab in younger people. He is also ideologically indisposed to anything mandatory, and afraid of rebellious Tory MPs whose convictions on that front are non-negotiable.

This leaves ministers treading an awkward line between invitation and coercion. The idea of denying unvaccinated university students access to lectures was floated then dismissed. There is confusion about the practicality, ethics and parliamentary arithmetic involved when the state compels people to have injections that they might otherwise refuse. Dominic Raab characterises the government’s approach as “a little bit of coaxing and cajoling”. That implies something less enforceable than law.

The public has been more tolerant of the state micromanaging its movements over the past 18 months than the Tory MPs who claim to speak for the nation. Jacob Rees-Mogg says vaccine passports are “not a British way to behave”. He objects on the grounds that “ancient freedoms” would be imperilled. That is only true if the law ends up badly written by a government that cannot be trusted with extraordinary powers – a valid concern with Rees-Mogg in the cabinet. He was Johnson’s main accomplice in the plan to unlawfully dissolve parliament as an expedient to accelerate Brexit.

In that instance, outraged remainers were frustrated by British complacency when the constitution was violated. With Covid regulations, it is the Tory libertarians who are disappointed that the public will not meet them in highest dudgeon.

Compliance with Covid rules has been generally strong and self-policing. The initial decree to stay at home was obeyed to a degree that surprised even the ministers who issued it. The threshold of national goodwill was tested not by the draconian law but the perception that it was selectively applied. Dominic Cummings’ excursion to Barnard Castle and Matt Hancock’s extramarital office snog were tangential to the business of government, but those episodes damaged Johnson more than any other feature of his pandemic record; more than the deaths that might have been avoided by better decision-making from Downing Street.

The prime minister does not escape blame for the fatalities, but that anger is strongest among people who were ill-disposed to Johnson before the pandemic. The same goes for corruption. Voters who were already primed to think the worst of any Tory government find their sourest expectations vindicated by the chronicles of venality: contracts awarded to cronies; Whitehall capture by lobbyists; secret cliques of high-rolling donors; cash for access; opaque funding schemes for the prime minister’s flat and foreign holidays.

None of the chumocracy charges have detonated with the force of stories that lockdown rules were flouted. That isn’t surprising. The Cummings and Hancock adventures were personal – a punch in the guts to everyone who had abstained from hugging their grandchildren or buried their dead by Zoom.

But there is a slow burn to sleaze. The common theme is arrogance with power and a view that following the rules is for little people and mugs. The whole business of VIP fast lanes for public procurement and backstage passes to Whitehall cuts against a sense of orderliness and decency that is baked deeper into British culture than the abstract freedoms that Rees-Mogg would trace back to Magna Carta.

In the hierarchy of things that cost a government its support, a law that is unsound in principle comes below a feeling that the rules are arbitrary. A recent dip in Tory poll ratings is doubtless connected to the sense that the government is making it all up as it goes along. And that comes below the greatest offence of all, which is that rules are not what they seem, applied slyly in a way that lets cheats prosper.

The prime minister is sincere enough about liberty and too inattentive to detail to make a consistent authoritarian. His is a more infantile brand of tyranny that demands control yet is afraid of responsibility. It is a trait that flows not from any doctrine, but from the temperament that sees rules as a personal discomfort and treats duty as an invitation to defiance. Johnson wears the responsibilities of his office much as he wears his clothes: askew for theatrical effect.

That performance is integral to his appeal, but the quality that voters first find attractive in leaders can be a predictor of their undoing. There was a maverick charm in disregarding protocol and cutting legal corners when the purpose was getting Brexit done. The same ethos is more obnoxious when applied in service of Tory donors or indulgence of rule-bending allies.

No violation of constitutional principle could appal the British spirit more than queue jumping. That tendency may not be the most prominent aspect of Johnson’s government, but it is a persistent enough feature to breed resentment over time. It is a problem that will outlast the present policy dilemmas of the pandemic. The current challenge is choosing the right rules. But the origin of uncertainty and incoherence, as with corruption, is a prime minister who is himself governed by the principle that rules do not really matter.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A car shaped like a giant hotdog has just crashed through the glass storefront of a menswear shop. As a crowd assembles to figure out what happened, a man dressed in a hotdog costume appears and begins a loud and concerted effort to identify the person who caused the damage. Bystanders point out to him that he is clearly the culprit, a charge he forcefully denies in ever more aggrieved and preposterous ways.

It is a scene from the US sketch comedy programme I Think You Should Leave. If you’ve been on social media this year, you may have seen the much-memed picture of Hotdog Guy saying, “We’re all trying to find the guy who did this.”

The absurdity of this scene may be familiar to anyone following the news these days. British politics is dominated by arguments about who is to blame for the state of British politics, conducted by the very people who made British politics this way. Hotdog Guy perfectly encapsulates our predicament. We’re standing in the middle of the wreckage, watching those who caused it zealously look for the guy who did this.

For all of the leading participants in our long national nightmare, everyone else is to blame. The rhetoric of the right is an upbeat blend of buck-passing for today’s crises – caused by Labour governments of the distant past, naturally – and cheerful fatalism about the disasters that await in the future, when we will simply have to suffer what we must. Those who used the language of treachery and putsch to describe anti-Brexiters are now appalled at the “divisiveness” of social justice protests.

Meanwhile the leading voices of the sensible liberal centre, infuriated by the antics of these shifty charlatans, are similarly preoccupied with pinning the blame on everyone else for their repeated failure to defeat these shifty charlatans. Notorious “spinner” of the truth Alastair Campbell blasts Boris Johnson for lack of a “moral compass”, as this era of hard-Brexiting Tory supremacy becomes the exclusive fault of Dominic Cummings and his liars. Others, such as Peter Mandelson – a man who was forced to resign from the cabinet twice – blame loss of voter confidence in Labour on Jeremy Corbyn and his Lexiters. These are the same people who brought us the Iraq war, and whose primary political project in recent years was the hopeless campaign for a second referendum, which barely laid a glove on the Conservatives while it pummelled Labour.

Their participation in this loud blame game serves only to highlight how little the losers from the Brexit years understand their role in the current crisis. There has been no honest reckoning with the consequences of decisions made in this pivotal period. No post-match analysis beyond slating the other players and damning the referee.

And so we cycle through an identity parade of suspects to find what or who let this happen. The guy who did this might be apathetic voters who don’t do their homework. The guy who did this is Brexit, which broke our politics. The guy who did this might also be the the two-party system and its structural limitations in an increasingly fragmented electoral marketplace. The longer the list of things the Tories are getting away with grows, the more you will hear this talk about the illness in the system. There is nothing that can be done, you see – the patient is too sick to accept the cure.

What cannot be admitted in these laments is that many of those wailing loudest regarded Johnson’s continuing rule as the lesser of two evils, and played their own part in the precipitous decline of our democratic standards. In the past year, in the face of the government’s colossal Covid failures, newspapers such as the Times are full of earnest opinion columns about Johnson’s disappointing record, with very little acknowledgment of their passionate backing for his election. “The fun has gone,” we are told by the likes of Matthew Parris, as “voters who trusted the PM have grown resentful” of him (with no reference to who told them to trust him).

The current political terrain may suit the right better than the left, but this is in part because the right has worked assiduously to shift that terrain in its own favour. As Stuart Hall wrote after Margaret Thatcher trounced Neil Kinnock’s Labour in 1987: “Politics does not reflect majorities, it constructs them. And there is no evidence that Labour’s commitment to traditionalism can construct such a majority.” The right has constructed its own majority by closing borders, “taking back control”, waging culture war and fastidiously avoiding solutions for the economic shifts that generate such profitable resentment.

The answer to this cannot be more lamentations on the unfairness of it all, or misguided pride in our refusal to fight on these terms. Almost no one has come out well from Britain’s unedifying years of Brexit politics – whose central drama still pits sore winners against sore losers. But it’s time to ask harder questions about how we got here. The unpalatable truth is that many actors across the political spectrum made this mess, not just Boris Johnson or Dominic Cummings. And our unmeritocratic consequence-free public culture ensures that members of this self-reproducing elite, along with their failed ideas, remain at the centre of our politics.

In the years between the financial crisis and the Brexit referendum, many people who should have known better sheepishly adopted the right’s rhetoric on “uncontrolled immigration” and the “deficit crisis” – which merely served to keep tilting the ground in the wrong direction. These errors are still being repeated.

Keir Starmer’s Labour has mostly rehashed and reheated the same rhetoric about patriotism and borders that plays to Conservative strengths, topped with a dollop of “They go low, we go high” blather. Labour’s main strategy is waiting for the government to topple under the weight of its own failures and contradictions, as seen in Starmer’s many line-manager warnings for Johnson to “get a grip” on this whole Covid thing before he’s sent a formal warning, copied in to HR.

Instead of blaming and waiting, Labour needs to mount an independent offensive to build its own majority by providing solutions to the problems caused by slashed benefits and extractive overlords. It needs to make its case on its own terms, not just as the obviously nicer alternative to Johnson’s evil sheriff.

The Tories have no use for taking responsibility; what government does? But those who hope to vanquish them do, if they are ever to stop repeating the mistakes that freeze them out of power. Until that happens, we are just watching an argument among many men in hotdog suits. But only one is getting away with it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

If you were wondering when the widely predicted post-Brexit dystopia might move beyond the imaginings of TV scriptwriters and into the real world, we suddenly seem to be a lot of the way there. Supermarket shelves are either understocked or completely empty. The populist loudmouths who now try to make the political weather have been taking aim in the past week at the Royal National Lifeboat Institution and its supposedly “woke” lifesavers.

Meanwhile, the Johnson government’s descent into whip-crack law enforcement continues apace. Last week’s announcement of a new “crime reduction plan” was centred around the permanent relaxation of restrictions on “suspicionless” (in other words, often arbitrary) stop and search, which had a clear performative aspect: ministers blithely batting away the fact that black people are a staggering 18 times more likely to be searched than white people under these specific powers, presumably to demonstrate a wretched kind of toughness. Johnson also launched plans for chain gangs dressed in hi-vis jackets.

The proposals were grim but not that much of a surprise. It is, after all, an iron rule of British politics that when governments sense a slide in popularity and start to lose direction, these are the kind of announcements they reach for.

In 2008, the rudderless government led by Gordon Brown oversaw the introduction of high-visibility “community payback jackets”, and developed a fondness for endless promises to take action against “yobs”, while seeking to extend the state’s powers to detain people without trial.

Eight years earlier, Tony Blair had floated the harebrained idea of marching miscreants to cash machines and summarily fining them – before his authoritarian instincts roared into the foreground thanks to the so-called war on terror. In the Thatcher and Major years, the doctrinaire economic liberalism the former brought to Conservative thinking was always accompanied by a repressive iron fist that tended to land on people already experiencing prejudice and insecurity. It all embodied the very British dissonance of an establishment that rhapsodises about its love of freedom while habitually doing whatever it can to curtail it.

As with many of his predecessors, the crucial point about Johnson’s authoritarian manouevring is that it mixes cynical posturing with a coherent drive to weaken basic liberties. The police, crime, sentencing and courts bill is on its way through parliament, and seemingly on course to introduce biting new restrictions on the right to protest and on the freedoms of Gypsy and Traveller communities.

As if to underline the government’s frantic pace, the nationality and borders bill has just received its second parliamentary reading, and looks set to further victimise refugees, partly via the Kafkaesque idea of making arrival in the UK without permission a criminal offence. In late July, the government clarified moves that will limit judicial review of ministerial decisions; the Home Office is pushing for extensions to secrecy laws that would have a dire effect on investigative journalism; on and on the list goes. What is afoot is perhaps crystallised by the way that ministers’ apparently rising enthusiasm for vaccine passports dovetails with their proposals for voter ID, and threatens to create the kind of society where exercising even one’s most basic rights is contingent on other people’s diktats.

The timing of all these things is hardly accidental. Since March last year, we have lived with the draconian provisions of the Coronavirus Act, vastly increased police powers including huge on-the-spot fines for breaking regulations (black and minority ethnic people were found to be 54% more likely to receive fines than white people), and the repeated imposition of new restrictions with no parliamentary scrutiny.

Most liberal voices have been conspicuously quiet, seemingly clinging to the idea that Covid is such a dire threat to life that no response to it could ever be disproportionate, and that if the loudest voices against those state powers are Tory libertarians and conspiracy theorists, it is best to stand on the opposite side.

We now see that the government has seized its chance: it wants to sustain and expand the most authoritarian elements of its newly acquired powers, while measures that were more constructive and progressive – and which gave people the assistance they needed to live within Covid rules – bite the dust. The furlough is on its way out, along with the weekly £20 increase in universal credit. The government seems little interested in building on the kind of community spirit that got many of us through the most miserable phases of lockdown. But the most repressive aspects of the state are going to balloon.

If you want a vivid illustration of flailing authoritarianism and its acceptance, take a look at Australia. There, the government’s lamentable record on vaccination has fused with an emphasis on insanely harsh restrictions. In Sydney, for instance, it was confirmed last week that soldiers will be involved in imposing new lockdowns, as the country pursues the impossible goal of “zero Covid”.

The areas of Sydney that are now facing the most punitive measures are largely home to working-class and ethnic minority communities, and there have been loud complaints that the policy amounts to a huge act of racial profiling. Yet the reporting too often suggests that its opponents are exclusively rightwing libertarians. Many Australians, meanwhile, are quietly thinking about what life under such rules means for people who are already marginalised and insecure, along with how fragile the most precious aspects of free societies sometimes turn out to be.

The politics of crackdowns thrive when millions are encouraged to feel besieged and imperilled, a condition that looks set to endure. As well as the pandemic, the summer’s floods also suggest this could be our future. And there’s a huge political danger: the prospect of the climate crisis and the environmental damage that threatens more pandemics remaining unchecked, while governments endlessly crack down on the instability these things let loose and the communities who are most affected.

Who will oppose those in power? In the UK, belief in the sanctity of the rule of law and civil liberties runs across some of the Conservative right, parts of the Labour left and elements of the Lib Dems and Greens; but the supposed mainstream tends to either scoff at such ideas or meekly look the other way. As a result, many of us now have a familiar sensation: feeling scattered and lonely; and in such surreal, doom-laden times, wondering what on earth will happen next.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Many things have disappeared from British politics since it became mostly about the pandemic. One of the most important has been the idea that the interests and grievances of people under 40 are worth a lot of attention from the main parties.

During the Jeremy Corbyn era younger voters enjoyed rare influence, reinvigorating Labour and frightening the Conservatives. Even when that period effectively ended at the 2019 election, Labour beat the Tories among voters aged 18 to 24 by an unprecedented 43 percentage points. The sea of young faces at Corbyn rallies looked like a mass awakening that would have consequences.

Yet since then our politics has aged again. The Conservatives under Boris Johnson have prioritised elderly people and treated the young with contempt. From the culture wars to the chaos in schools, benefits cuts to the climate crisis, the government’s message to younger Britons has been consistent: you don’t matter. Meanwhile Keir Starmer’s Labour party has followed a milder version of the same strategy, concentrating on the often older voters it has lost while offering its younger supporters little.

But the desire of many young people for a different Britain has not gone. Beyond parliamentary politics, even people on the right acknowledge it. Earlier this month free-market thinktank the Institute of Economic Affairs published Left Turn Ahead, a survey of young people’s attitudes towards capitalism and socialism.

“Younger people really do quite consistently express hostility to capitalism, and positive views of socialist alternatives,” it found. The common argument that “they will grow out of it”, the survey continued, “is simply not borne out by the data. There are no detectable differences between the economic attitudes of people in their late teens and people in their early 40s”. These attitudes might be “a preview” of “mainstream opinion in Britain tomorrow”.

Despite this eye-catching conclusion, the IEA’s report has received relatively little attention. It doesn’t fit the prevailing view, on both the left and the right, that Britain is in a conservative phase that still has a long time to run. There is also a widespread, in some ways contradictory, assumption that young voters have always been leftwing – that their discontent with the status quo is nothing new.

But that assumption is mistaken. At every general election from the late 1970s to the early 1990s, and again in 2010, as many or more under-45 voters chose the Tories as Labour. The radicalisation of the young, which has also happened in other parts of Europe and the United States, is a new feature of 21st-century western politics.

One reason for this radicalism’s spread and persistence, despite its lack of electoral success, is that it is rooted in everyday experience – in particular, the modern experience of work. Zero-hours contracts, exploitative internships, graduates stuck in cafe jobs, a decade of stagnant wages, general precariousness. Work for all but the most privileged young employees is a daily reminder of capitalism’s diminishing rewards.

These malign trends affect older workers too – which may be why, at the last election, Labour won more votes than the Tories from working Britons. But older workers may at least have savings or property, acquired when work was more rewarding. Only the under-45s have spent their entire working lives in the “flexible” labour market the Conservatives created and New Labour largely accepted. No wonder many young voters feel alienated from both parties.

So the launch by Labour earlier this week of a “new deal for working people” could be significant. Not just as the beginning of an answer to the charge that Starmer has no policies, but also as a set of possible reforms to Britain’s increasingly Victorian work culture, and as a way for Labour to reconnect with the young electorate it needs to remain a viable party in the long term and have a chance of returning to power.

Given Starmer’s caution up to now, Labour’s proposals are surprisingly ambitious. They include “the right to flexible working for all workers … from day one of employment” – unless there is a conclusive reason that a job cannot be done flexibly or remotely. This flexibility could mean working hours arranged “around school runs and other family and caring responsibilities”. Labour envisages work “fitting around people’s lives rather than dictating their lives”.

The party also wants to create “a single status of ‘worker’ for all but the genuinely self-employed”, and to abolish the current qualifying periods for basic employee rights such as sick pay, holiday pay, paid parental leave and protection against unfair dismissal. It wants all workers to “have stable, secure employment”, and the right to “disconnect from work at home outside of working hours”.

Labour claims these measures would “fundamentally change our economy”, and it is hard to argue. The balance of power between employer and employee would be significantly altered. Yet this idea has not provoked the kind of outrage this week that you might expect. The employers’ organisation the CBI said that, like Labour, it wants “an inclusive economy”, and criticised the party’s proposals only in limited terms, as “overly prescriptive”.

Labour people involved with promoting the policies see the lack of controversy as a success. One source says: “When we talked about work under Jeremy Corbyn, we sounded too radical and endlessly triggered the rightwing press. It was a disaster. This time, we’re not going to lead with our chins.”

While the detail of the proposals has been laid out by Angela Rayner and Andy McDonald, two relatively leftwing figures, the broad case for them has been presented by Starmer in studiedly conservative and patriotic language: that a job should provide “dignity and security”, and that Labour “can make Britain the best place to work”. Thus his party hopes to appeal both to young voters and older ones. “Whether you’ve got a mortgage on a semi in Barnsley or you rent in Kentish Town”, says the Labour source, “you’re currently getting done over at work.”

The problem with Labour’s approach is that inclusivity can become blandness. In confrontational times, as both Corbyn and Johnson came to understand, getting attention and mobilising voters often involves naming enemies. This week, Labour’s work policies got far less coverage than the government’s cartoonish hi-vis crime measures.

If Labour doesn’t win back young people soon, these voters have alternatives. The Greens are already higher in the polls than they have been for years. Protest groups such as Extinction Rebellion have compelling causes and novel tactics. Even the Conservatives could conceivably appeal to the young again: they’ve done it before.

Young voters have decades to decide their political trajectories. Starmer has far less time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Britain’s new high-speed railway will not – repeat: not – get to the north of England. It will go back and forth from London to the Midlands and its chief beneficiaries will be London commuters. All else is political spin.

This became certain last week as the government’s internal major projects authority declared phase two of the HS2 project, to Manchester and Leeds, effectively dead. While the already-started London-to-Birmingham stretch is still marked at “amber/red” for “successful delivery in doubt”, anything north of Crewe has been designated “unachievable”. Its multitudinous issues “do not appear to be manageable or resolvable”. This comes not from the arms-length National Infrastructure Commission or last winter’s Oakervee report, both agreeing that going beyond Birmingham should be “reviewed”. This was the verdict of an arm of the Treasury and Cabinet Office.

Since HS2 has always been politics-driven – no rail strategy ever gave it priority – it has raced past every red light for a decade. By far Europe’s biggest infrastructure scheme, it has finally been overtaken by its own extravagance. The pandemic has sent commuter numbers plummeting and wrecked any remotely plausible rate of return.

The only way of conveying the scale of Johnson’s vanity in this vanity project is to convey its opportunity cost, a projected £106bn (and rising) over 20 years. That is the price of hundreds of new NHS hospitals or thousands of new secondary schools. It is seven times the cost of the education Covid recovery project proposed last spring but rejected by Johnson as too costly. It is the same additional annual cost to 2040 as the projected new social care scheme – still considered too expensive. HS2 is in that spending league. These are real choices.

This one train line will consume the equivalent of Britain’s entire projected railway investment budget during its two decades of construction. Even the initial phase to Birmingham, at roughly £70bn, is twice the £40bn cost of the “northern powerhouse” rail system, which every infrastructure pundit agrees should be built first. Yet that system is now in serious danger of being delayed or never completed. HS2 is a glaring “levelling-down” of the north.

The railway’s route was projected as a nostalgic echo of Robert Stephenson’s first line from Euston to Birmingham, travelling between Birmingham’s as yet non-existent Curzon Street station and a Euston station that does not link with HS1 and the Channel tunnel (and is not even on the new Crossrail). No one boarding a train in the north will be able to travel directly to France. As for Curzon Street in Birmingham, it is a mile from the New Street interchange and the west coast main line. This makes absolutely no sense.

Even Lord Adonis, for whom HS2 was the holy grail, accepts it should probably now stop at Acton’s Old Oak Common hub. Meanwhile arguments, some of them court cases, continue over the trains themselves. They are not planned to tilt, which means that any time saved on a new track to Birmingham will be lost on winding track further north. A re-signalled King’s Cross line could even get to Scotland faster. HS2 is more a taxpayer-funded theme park than a railway.

The project has long been out of control. It is a spending black hole: figures in 2018 showed its latest boss Mark Thurston having to be paid over £660,000 a year, with 15 of his colleagues on over £250,000. A quarter of all HS2 staff, over 300 people, received above £100,000. The Commons public accounts committee declared it to be “badly off course” and lacking even the most “basic financial controls.” This is despite the outlay of £600m annually on consultants, including £35m on the “big four” accountancy firms.

It is never too late to stop a dud project, but it requires ever more courage to do so. Not a mile of track has been laid – the only tunnels have been built by Swampy. What is intriguing is how HS2 has mutated from from a transport project to political machismo – “infrastructure” that is good in itself. Like Johnson’s garden bridges and crony PPE contracts, the more extravagant they are, the more they can be described as “world-beating”.

A recent Institute for Government seminar on HS2 received a devastating report on this whole saga from Professor Stephen Glaister of Imperial College. A Whitehall official present was heard to reflect that, in the light of Covid constraints, the railway could forget any other serious investment. Greater Manchester’s mayor, Andy Burnham, was an uncritical backer of HS2 when he thought it would get him fast to London. He will now find Birmingham blessed with cash that might have renovated his dire northern powerhouse rail network three times over – money he may now never see.

Rishi Sunak claims to want to start saving, not spending. Yet as long as HS2 sits in his budget he is hamstrung. He cannot tell doctors, nurses or teachers that he “cannot afford” their desperate requests. If he can afford HS2, he can afford anything. The truth is that this staggering vanity project survives for one reason. It looks good from London.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Over the past 18 months, the world has been amazed at how slippery an enemy Covid-19 has proved to be. The virus first detected in China at the end of 2019 has mutated on a regular basis. Vaccines need to evolve because the virus is changing to survive.

The shock to the global economy from the pandemic has been colossal, but things are now looking up – especially for advanced countries. Some are surprised by the pace of recovery, but they perhaps shouldn’t be, because alongside new variants of the virus there has been a new variant of global capitalism.

This matters. For decades the Austrian variant of political economy – the small state, non-interventionist, trickle-down, free-trade, low-tax model based around the ideas of Friedrich von Hayek – was dominant. It replaced the Keynesian variant because in the 1970s a free-market approach was seen as the answer to the challenges of the time: inflation, weak corporate profitability, and a loss of business dynamism.

Not even the biggest fan of capitalism would say it is a perfect system, merely that – so far at least – it has proved more durable than its rivals. And the flexibility to adapt to changing circumstances is a big part of that. The state is now a much more powerful economic actor than it was before the pandemic, much to the disappointment of the free-market thinktanks which are home to Hayek’s disciples.

Change was coming even before Covid-19. In retrospect, the last hurrah for the Austrian variant was the aftermath of the 2008-9 financial crisis, a period when the economic orthodoxy insisted on austerity to balance the books.

The upshot was weak growth, low investment, stagnating living standards and a backlash from voters. Central banks found it impossible to raise interest rates from their rock-bottom levels, because so many people on low incomes were relying on debt to get by, and higher borrowing costs would have tipped them over the edge.

At the other end of the spectrum, corporate and personal taxes were cut, and the rich got richer. The big tech giants, minnows themselves in their early days, used their market power to prevent new startups from posing a threat. Voters started to get the impression that the system only really worked for those at the top: and they were right. The populist backlash was aimed primarily at governments, but the real problem was that capitalism was starting to eat itself.

There were signs of a shift, from the middle of the last decade onwards. Donald Trump was no believer in free trade and was proud to call himself “tariff man”. The unexpectedly strong performance of Jeremy Corbyn at the UK general election in 2017 – with his powerful anti-austerity message – moved the dial too. It led then prime minister Theresa May to pledge an end to the policy. Boris Johnson’s shtick at the 2019 election – and subsequently – has all been about levelling up, not about trickling down.

This process has accelerated since the start of 2020, both at a domestic and global level. Governments of left, right and centre have intervened in their economies in ways that would have been unthinkable two years ago: paying wages for furloughed workers; keeping businesses afloat through grants and loans; preventing landlords from evicting tenants; and generally throwing financial caution to the wind. The world has been fighting a war against Covid, and in wartime the power of the state always increases.

It has not just been about governments spending and borrowing more, though that is part of the story. Fiscal policy – which covers tax and spending decisions – has taken centre stage for the first time since the Keynesian model ran into trouble in the mid-1970s. Central banks have become bit-players, and are having to fend off the accusation that their prime role is to print the money needed to cover the vast sums finance ministries are spending. The European Central Bank, previously tough in acting against the threat of price rises, has said it will tolerate more inflation before raising interest rates.

The race to the bottom on tax is coming to an end. US president Joe Biden has said he will pay for his latest spending plans by raising income tax on Americans earning more than $400,000 (£290,000) a year. At least 130 countries have signed up to plans, put together by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, for a minimum global corporate tax rate. Critics say the proposal doesn’t go far enough, but it is a significant moment nevertheless.

Meanwhile, the International Monetary Fund is telling member governments that they need to tackle the entrenched power wielded by a small number of dominant companies – or risk stifling innovation and investment. The IMF says the tech giants are a case in point because “the market disruptors that displaced incumbents two decades ago have become increasingly dominant players”, and they “do not face the same competitive pressures from today’s would-be disruptors”. But it is not just the tech sector. The IMF says the same trend towards falling business dynamism can be seen across many industries.

The building blocks of new-variant capitalism are already there. Governments are going to tax and spend more, and they will use regulatory powers to weaken monopolies. There will be selective use of nationalisation – as happened with UK defence manufacturer Sheffield Forgemasters this week.

Governments will borrow money to invest in infrastructure projects and to increase the budget for science. Industrial and regional policies will be back in vogue. The idea is to harness the power of the state with the dynamism of the private sector and, as was the case with Keynes, to save capitalism from itself.

There will be pushback, and it would be naive to think otherwise. This is evolution not revolution, and many of the weaknesses of the old order – insecurity at work, for example – remain untouched. Enemies abound. The mixed-economy model is anathema to those who think state intervention is either unnecessary or harmful, and to those who think the demise of capitalism is merely a matter of time.

The new variant of capitalism may prove to be a dud, but for now it has things going for it. These are times that call for a multilateral, collaborative approach, in which rich countries dig deep to help poorer nations, and themselves in the process.

Failings of the old model were exposed in the run-up to the crisis, while the benefits of a more hands-on approach have been demonstrated during the pandemic response. Unsurprisingly, there is appetite for a different way of running the economy. The reason a new variant has emerged is simple: there is a need for something stronger and more resilient than the old model.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A decade ago, the emergence of mass food banks in the UK could genuinely be described as shocking. The image of families queueing in their local church for a box filled with pasta and beans has not only since been normalised, it has spread.

This does not simply mean the number of food banks has grown in recent years – there are now more than 1,300 such places in the Trussell Trust’s network, compared to fewer than 100 in 2010, as well as hundreds more independent ones – but also that these have opened the door for other types of donation centres, each set up by community groups and charities in response to growing need.

As squeezed social security, low wages and high rents have left 2.4 million people in destitution, everything from clothes banks to hygiene product drop-off points have cropped up nationwide. When your zero-hours contract doesn’t pay out, you get your shampoo from a donation bin instead of Boots. If you have cancer and have been rejected for disability benefits, fruit and veg comes not from Tesco but your local food bank. Nowadays, Britain has an entire ecosystem of charity to meet our basic needs: donated dignity filling in where the state once stood.

The pandemic has, all too predictably, made things worse. Almost one in eight adults in the UK have received support from a charity since the coronavirus crisis began in March 2020, according to the Covid-19 Support Fund; more than half of them had never expected to need such help before. Demand for food aid has hit an unprecedented high, with the Trussell Trust handing out 2.5m parcels during the pandemic’s first year. Meanwhile, the Hygiene Bank – a network that provides toiletries for people who can’t afford them – reports it has distributed over 400 tonnes of products over the last 12 months, up 155% from the previous year.

While Britain’s richest 10% increased their wealth by an average of £50,000 during the pandemic, the poorest struggled to afford deodorant. The Hygiene Bank says that, over the past 12 months, due to a lack of money or resources, people have used washing-up liquid to wash clothes; brushed their teeth without toothpaste; and stayed at home because they didn’t have any period products. Some even removed the contents of a nappy so that it could be reused. The modern term for this is “hygiene poverty” but really, it should just be called obscene.

As hardship has increased in recent years, so have the ways we found to describe it. Fuel poverty. Food poverty. Period poverty. Such language falsely suggests the problem is confined to one area, as if destitution doesn’t arise from systematic economic inequality, but from soap being too expensive. The truth is that millions of people simply do not have enough money to live on.

The increasing use of charity to address this not only normalises the idea that large numbers of people are destitute in one of the richest economies on Earth – it shores up the idea that government has no responsibility for it. It is Victorian-style politics repackaged for the 21st century, in which those on the bottom rung of society are deemed worthy of scraps of charity but not entitlement from the state. Forget contracts for private firms, this is the new outsourcing – where ministers fail struggling families and then hand them over to the local food bank.

This is not only wildly inefficient – piecemeal charity can never replicate a social safety net – it is also dehumanising. Poverty has long brought shame to those who endure it, and few things could feel more shameful than being forced to ask for donated soap in order to be clean.

The end of government coronavirus support in September is only going to bring this into sharper focus. Furlough ending, as well as the £20 uplift to universal credit being pulled, on top of cuts to funds to help tenants facing homelessness, will create a perfect storm in which large swathes of the population risk being plunged into insecurity. Research by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation found the £20-a-week cut to universal credit alone will leave out-of-work families with children barely half the income needed to achieve a socially acceptable basic standard of living, while those with a job who rely on benefits as a top-up to poverty wages will fare little better.

The Conservative response to these challenges is now so familiar it verges on cliche. Just look at Tory MP Andrew Rosindell who defended the benefit cut on the grounds there are some people “that quite like getting the extra £20” but “maybe” don’t really need it. And yet sooner or later, there is going to have to be a push to do better, not least because middle-class people are now also queueing in food banks.

If Covid has shone a light on the ills of 10 years of Tory rule, it has also highlighted that only sweeping reforms will change it. The gap between reality and Boris Johnson’s “levelling up” rhetoric could hardly be starker. It is only concrete action that can lead us down a different path: on housing, disability, insecurity at work, and the gaping holes in our welfare state. A government that leaves millions of the public unable to even eat or wash has, by any definition, failed. Poverty is indeed a mark of shame – but one solely on ministers’ shoulders.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Major climate changes inevitable and irreversible – IPCC’s starkest warning yet, 9 August) paints a grim picture, with global temperature rises of 1.5C degrees or more beyond pre-industrial levels predicted unless urgent action is taken in the next few decades. The report contains a lot of detail about what this would look like, but it is summarised by Prof Tim Palmer as “hell on earth”.

With such serious danger to be avoided, you would expect that our government would be taking appropriate action to prevent this. Some of the actions it is taking are promising, but its “jet zero” strategy for flying is madness. Its own Climate Change Committee recommends managing passenger numbers in some way to allow only slow growth of about 0.7% per year from 2018 to 2050, as well as investing in aircraft and fuel technology. The jet zero strategy throws away this carefully planned advice, choosing instead to allow airports and airlines to expand as much as they like and hoping for miraculous improvements in technology.

I will be delighted if all the technological fixes proposed become a reality and we can enjoy air travel without damaging our planet, but until those fixes are in place, why are we gambling with our children’s future by allowing passenger numbers to grow unchecked? Why would any government propose something so irresponsible and dangerous? The answer is because it thinks that is what the people, its voters, want. I therefore urge readers to engage with the consultation on the jet zero strategy, which is open until 8 September at www.gov.uk, and say that you value protecting human lives over the unlimited opportunity to travel by air.

Alex Radice

Bradford

The 2015 Paris agreement set a warming limit of 1.5C, but failed to put a price on carbon globally. The result was that coal-rich nations started burning their coal reserves as fast as possible, before carbon taxes become prohibitively expensive. In addition, gas extraction and meat production have contributed to rapidly rising levels of atmospheric methane. This combination pushed world temperatures above 1.2C in 2020.

The World Meteorological Organization has predicted a 90% chance of breaching 1.5C in at least one year between now and 2025. Business as usual means that the underlying trend will reach 1.5C by 2030. But the problem does not stop there, as temperature changes are not evenly distributed. Over Europe, the increase is already 2C, and over the Arctic, temperatures have risen by more than 3C since 1900. This is why the Arctic is destabilising, and also the reason why Greenland is melting faster than predicted by the IPCC.

Unless a mechanism for putting a price on carbon globally is agreed at Cop26 in November, there is no possibility of preventing global heating from becoming irreversible and unstoppable.

Dr Robin Russell-Jones

Founder, Help Rescue the Planet

Surely one immediate action that this government should take is that all new housing should have solar panels, heat pumps and electric charging points fitted as standard. Air travel should be limited for all, and rather than continue spending billions on high-speed rail and ripping out yet more ancient woodlands, upgrade and improve existing rail lines. As a country we spend far too much time and money on living in the past and we need to live for the future. As to those damned flags, utter nonsense.

Helen Adams

Leeds

Governments keep pledging to act on climate change in the future because they fear the electoral consequences of implementing changes now. But we need urgent action, and there are policies that would be both effective and popular. First, close tax loopholes and clamp down on tax havens to pay for carbon scrubbing and reforestation. Second, greatly increase taxation on carbon-intensive activities and return that revenue equally to us all as a “green dividend”. Third, leave more money for public services by cancelling all planned new roads and airport expansions.

Richard Mountford

Hildenborough, Kent

It is only too easy to castigate China as perhaps the most powerful carbon emitter that is about to open up new coal mines. Why is it in this position? Because it has created the most efficient global market, cheaper than most others. And who buys all its goods, and whose insatiable appetite for even more means that China has to find more and more energy to supply these needs? Why, you and me of course. We have simply transferred the problem from our own backyard to China’s. It is time that we take personal responsibility and recognise the full implications of our actions.

Val Mainwood

Wivenhoe, Essex

I take great issue with the IPCC report where it blames human activity for the catastrophe facing humanity. The world’s population is approximately six billion. OECD reports have shown that over 74% of global GDP is accumulated by 18% of the world’s population. The issue is the overproduction of fossil fuels by the major global powers, not by the poor and vast majority of the world’s citizens. This must stop.

Paul Doran

Dublin

The IPCC report makes clear that we need to face societal changes on a scale not seen since the second world war. To make sure that everyone does their bit, we should introduce carbon rationing. Every person should have the same annual carbon allowance and every time they make a carbon transaction (booking a flight, buying a steak or filling a petrol tank and so on), the carbon cost is deducted from their ration. Those with leaner lifestyles, not running a car for instance, can sell their excess ration to others via an official trading site. Each year the ration is reduced, taking us all on a pathway to net zero.

Ian Cairns

Seaford, East Sussex

In the run-up to Cop26, it is alarming to constantly find the mantra “electric cars” being offered as a universal panacea. Information easily sourced from UK government websites shows that electricity accounts for only 20% of our total energy demand, while, averaged over the year, only about 33% of our electricity comes from renewable sources. Put together, these two figures mean that just 7% of our total energy demand is derived from sources that do not produce CO 2 . If we are serious about achieving net zero and halting climate change we need to do much more than just buy a shiny new car. In fact we need to make immediate, wide-ranging and dramatic changes to our lifestyle. I suggest that there is “net zero” chance of that.

Bernard Haigh

Butleigh, Somerset

If humans don’t reduce their population size, Mother Nature will do it for us, with a vengeance.

Chris Cussens

Berrick Salome, Oxfordshire
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Fifty years ago, a form at my school (Letters, 9 August) was a supposedly anonymous attempt to assess the extent of smoking among pupils. Against the question “Sex”, someone had written “Yes, please”. There was then a witch-hunt to find the culprit. Analysis of handwriting narrowed it to me and one other boy. While I agreed with the sentiment, it was not me, Sir.

Clive Mowforth

Coleford, Gloucestershire

I agree with Benjamin Weissman that emojis enrich our language (Emojis aren’t debasing language – they’re enriching it, 10 August). They’re succeeding where Esperanto failed.

Stan Labovitch

Windsor, Berkshire

As a nation, we have always been proud of the status of the NHS as the world’s leading healthcare system. Your report on the latest ranking from the Commonwealth Fund (NHS drops from first to fourth among rich countries’ healthcare systems, 4 August) discloses that the NHS has lost the top ranking through poorer access to care. There is a danger that Covid-19 will be used as an excuse by politicians for the deteriorating performance, so it is important to note that much of the data in the report was gathered before the pandemic. A future return to the top of the rankings seems unlikely.

Dr Michael Morgan

Oakham, Rutland

Ten of the best actors with chemistry and no Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn (From Brangelina to Bogart and Bacall: the best on-screen chemistry, 6 August)? Arguably, the best of them all.

Clyde Jeavons

London
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As a televison documentary film-maker, I first became aware of the wonderfully wild mathematical mind of Rowland Morgan in the 1990s through his weekly Guardian column Digitations. I was intrigued and got in touch. And thus began an enjoyable collaboration in which Rowland came up with a number of characteristically inventive programme ideas, almost all of which sadly did not get commissioned.

Among the ones I most regret we did not make was Factulator, an innovative and educational ecological game show involving teams of teenagers, which combined a variety of entertaining studio challenges with alarming figures about the planet’s future. Another, Daylight Robbery, proposed to investigate the astonishing but true economics of crime, the ever-mounting problem we claim to deplore but really can’t get enough of, whether in fact or in fiction.

One that did was a multipart series for Channel 4 of graphically based one-minute films, down from the five minutes originally proposed, called E-lection Thoughts, to be shown during the run-up to the 1997 general election, about important topics that politicians were failing to address. They were further reduced to 30 seconds, and unforeseen editorial interventions gradually watered down Rowland’s most arresting propositions to the point where his statistical firecrackers became rather damp squibs that got lost in the ads.

But Rowland got The Guinness Book of Records to acknowledge “the world’s shortest commissioned TV series”, giving it at least some sort of record-breaking success.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@UK Sport has a strong, proven and ongoing commitment to equality, diversity and inclusion (Letter, 2 August). For the first time at a summer Olympics, Team GB contained more female athletes than male. And Britain’s women produced a host of trailblazing performances in Tokyo.

Laura Kenny became Britain’s most decorated female Olympian and the first British woman to win gold at three Olympics. Hannah Mills is now the most decorated female sailor in Olympic history, and Emily Campbell was the first British woman to win a weightlifting medal. And who can forget the 13-year-old skateboarder Sky Brown, Britain’s youngest Olympic medallist?

UK Sport has been supporting BMX since 2005. While there was a time when women’s BMX wasn’t in receipt of funding at the start of the Tokyo cycle in 2017, that only lasted one year, following an annual review that saw funding reinstated in early 2018.

For the avoidance of any doubt, the gender of the athletes had no bearing on the decision for them not to be funded. Men’s mountain biking was in an identical position during this timeframe and was also reinstated. Bethany Shriever has been part of British Cycling’s national lottery-funded World Class Programme in this cycle since 2019, and we shared British fans’ pride and joy as she, Kye Whyte, Charlotte Worthington and Declan Brooks fulfilled their dreams in Tokyo.

​None of the trailblazing moments delivered by Britain’s female Olympians would have been possible if UK Sport’s culture and processes were tainted by the slightest hint of misogyny. UK Sport’s commitment to equality, diversity and inclusion will continue through to Paris and beyond.

Sally Munday

CEO, UK Sport

Numerous writers agree with Matthew Engel’s damning verdict on the Hundred (Letters, 6 August). In its defence, it is a brilliant showcase for the women’s game and has given visibility to a number of excellent female players. I’m an activator for All Stars cricket and took my seven-year-old daughter to Headingley last week. It was a great day, her first live cricket experience; she met female players and loved it. We’re enjoying watching the matches as a family. Do I still watch the Tests? Yes. And I hope my daughter will too, after having her love of cricket reinforced by a fun competition and easily accessible format.

The ECB gets a lot of stick, but its efforts to engage young people and women in cricket should be applauded. There’s room for different types of cricket.

Ann Deary Francis

Rothbury, Northumberland

I accept longtime cricket lovers may query the ECB’s expenditure on the Hundred and may find aspects of the spectacle irritating, jarring or unnecessary. But my 10-year-old daughter and her three friends wouldn’t have been at the Oval for the first match if it weren’t for the free tickets distributed by the ECB via the local girls’ cricket team; wouldn’t have appreciated the first-half boundaries as much without the pyrotechnics; wouldn’t have stuck around for the second half without the added incentive of Becky Hill; and so wouldn’t have been on the edge of their seats for the final few balls, and then dancing in the aisles when the Invincibles hit the winning runs.

Aaron Nelson

Camberwell, London
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Psychotherapy over Zoom may not be a panacea, but it has been a boon during Covid-19 lockdowns (Therapy via Zoom should make mental healthcare available for all – it hasn’t, 3 August). I am an integrative psychotherapist and shied away from e-therapy in all forms, as it contravened my idea of the therapeutic frame within which I practised – rich with warmth and empathic relating.

With lockdown, I rapidly trained in online etiquette, contracting, indemnity, and safety and security. Zoom security was helpfully improved early in 2020. Could I be therapeutic digitally?

Only one existing client withdrew. I arranged my room with the computer across the arms of the client’s chair so the view of me, as therapist, was unchanged. Fortuitously, this put the client’s image where they would have been if present. This was a crucial factor, and I realised that I had settled into online therapy when I offered a tissue box to a weeping patient through the computer screen. I had become at ease with Zoom as a medium. I was an online therapist.

The challenges are different – if a client does not have a safe place from which to engage in therapy it will not work. I am sad when this happens, as I normally provide that safety for them. Privacy is also crucial. I have been challenged to deliver therapeutic help to clients in cars and vans, in the park, in bedrooms, and with poor visibility both ways. Though not ideal, the time efficiency of turnaround between clients is beneficial, as is not travelling to see a therapist, for the client. It has been a great experience, enabling clients to access a scarce resource on their own terms. We changed to function safely in the pandemic. The positives of Zoom therapy are here to stay. I envisage maintaining a hybrid practice.

Dr Chantal Meystre

Integrative psychotherapist
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I am sure that your readers will feel relieved at the generosity of our government towards the Afghan interpreters arriving in the UK, as detailed by Chris Philp, minister for immigration compliance and justice (Letters, 8 August).

I am the chair of trustees for a welcome group for refugees that is preparing to welcome families of Afghan interpreters in the near future. The funding package that comes with each family is far more generous than the funding offered for other refugees, until you see that the Afghans will be funded for four months. Four months, in which time they need to find work, learn English, settle the children into school, find their way around a local area, which is totally different from where they lived in Afghanistan, as well as begin to feel safe and process their recent terrifying experiences.

Name and address supplied
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Re Yohann Koshy’s long read on Paul Gilroy (The last humanist: how Paul Gilroy became the most vital guide to our age of crisis, 5 August), his point that “race is a fiction” and that we should look forward discarding the idea of “race” altogether feels exactly right. The geneticist Adam Rutherford has pointed out that in terms of DNA, racial distinctions by skin colour are meaningless. The sooner we can get to Gilroy’s ideal of “humanism” in a post-racial world, the better.

Stephen Orton

Norwich

Only one word for the long read: superb! This is the kind of journalism that distinguishes the Guardian from other publications. Congratulations to Yohann Koshy.

Gus Pennington

Stokesley, North Yorkshire
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It is indeed “surprising” that it has taken researchers and politicians a year and a half to conclude that “the general consensus is now that aerosol transmission is more important than hand or contact transmission” (Covid discoveries: what we know now that we didn’t know before, 6 August). The experience of being infected through choral singing in March 2020 only served to confirm my mother’s mantra: “Coughs and sneezes spread diseases, trap your germs in a handkerchief.”

Martin Willis

Malvern, Worcestershire

Before too much money is spent on the trial (UK launches £4m fund to run fibre optic cables through water pipes, 9 August) it would be prudent to consider what would happen when a valve has to be closed.

Steve Simmons

Blackwater, Hampshire

The staffroom at a school where I taught was much cheered by a form returned by a parent (Letters, 8 August). In the space for their name, which had the plea to please write legibly, they had painstakingly written, in capitals, the word “legibly”.

Bridget Patterson

Woodbridge Suffolk

A note that lives in my memory is the one explaining that mum had been under the doctor and couldn’t get up to get Sean to school.

Jane Lawson

London

Can you find 15 artists in the grid (Wordsearch, 5 August)? Yes. Can you find any female artists in the grid? No. You really should do better.

Vivienne Anderson

Leeds

This article was amended on 10 August 2021 to correct the date of the wordsearch’s publication.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It started next to a caravan at the back of a church. We were going to Morocco – but only if the kids first had negative PCR tests. From a distance, it’s a formality, like checking in online and carefully confirming that you haven’t got a Swiss army knife in your hand luggage. Only when the date loomed up close did the reality kick in that they might actually have Covid and it would be wiser not to get too excited until we had the results.

By then, of course, it was too late. I was already too excited and all that anticipation segued effortlessly into nail-biting dread. My son was also biting his nails, which my daughter hates, but nothing drives her more bananas than when we both do it at the same time. It’s not the biting, apparently, but the melodramatic terror in our eyes. He wasn’t even worrying about the test, he was worried that the testing lady hadn’t got his passport number right and that he would get turned back on a technicality. “She asked me to check it against my passport and I said I had, but I’d only skimmed it.”

“OK. But why?”

“I was being polite. She looked bored.”

He is an infernal idiot, but he does have lovely manners.

When the negative results arrived, I realised something about the business model: the gratitude penalty is priced in. The working assumption is that you will be so pleased to be going, you won’t ever think, let alone mention, what an absolute racket it all is.

Six days later, however, I realised how completely I hadn’t thought this through: we were now in a faraway and beautiful land, and all needed negative results to get home, but the youngest’s had come back from the test centre. It wasn’t inconclusive but rather, “these results will be visible upon receipt of another €100”.

Nothing about that made sense: it was twice the cost of the original test, which we had already paid, but the counting part of my brain had long since ceded to histrionic catastrophising. We wouldn’t be allowed home if she tested positive, that much was clear. But what would happen to us abroad? Would there be government-approved accommodation? How much like a prison would it feel? What if she had it and I caught it from her in quarantine, and then we had to quarantine again, and we had to live for ever in corona exile? It was just another racket, of course, and everyone was negative. The surge of gratitude was so strong it took on an almost masochistic flavour: please, someone, charge us even more money, so that we can be double-plus negative, our downloaded certificates embossed with virtual gold leaf.

The days two and eight test-providers stepped up to this plate magnificently: they have to be government-approved, yet the more government-approved they are, the more their websites look like classic scam operations.

Low headline figures that inexorably land on prices five times higher, peculiar details buried in the small print to indicate that your day two test might not arrive until you have already been home a week. It looks like a loan shark fit-up, to the extent that I became convinced that it wasn’t genuine. Who could be more likely to have their click-throughs hacked than this government?

The people behind us in the airport queue had all their locator forms printed out and stored in matching envelopes, like pros. The vibe was like the last train out of a dicey principality in war-torn Europe. What’s that documentation? Why doesn’t mine look like that? What have they heard that I haven’t?

It is probably treasonous to point this out, but what the hell – once you land, they never check any of these forms. The whole system is kept aloft on the thermals of your own anxiety and untold amounts of cash.

Morocco, though, is absolutely lovely, and we repaid her loveliness by importing an infestation of nits. It’s fine, though – I think we brought most of them back.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@American men have come a long way, baby. They spend more time with their kids than ever before. Most of them say they want egalitarian marriages and better work-life balance. Two-thirds of married fathers have a wife who works outside the home and contributes to the family income, and about four in 10 of those men have a wife who outearns them. So why, when it comes to family planning, are women doing all the work and men doing so little? To put a finer point on it: why don’t more American men get vasectomies?

The contraception gap is one of the most striking and persistent gender inequities. While close to 100% of American women take steps, at some point in their lives, to prevent pregnancy, the vast majority of them shoulder that burden alone. Fewer than one in 10 relied on condom use – a contraceptive method that requires men to take action. And only about one in 10 married or coupled men have had a vasectomy – the rate for single men is far lower.

It’s difficult to understand why. Vasectomies are typically covered by insurance, so cost isn’t the primary factor. Neither is risk, given that vasectomies are overwhelmingly safe. Neither is time or even pain: vasectomies are simple outpatient procedures. The recovery so minimal that urologists have deemed the month of March to be “vasectomy season”: men schedule the procedures to coincide with March Madness, so they can sit on the couch with a bag of frozen peas on their crotch, watching basketball.

For men who have already had children or know they don’t want children, vasectomy is the safest, easiest and most effective method of contraception. It’s also safer and easier to reverse than tubal ligation. It allows men more control over their own fertility. And it gives men with female partners an opportunity to more equally share in the work of planning their families. But for too many men – and even in conversations about family planning and reproductive rights – vasectomy remains an afterthought. There is a built-in presumption that women will bear nearly all of the reproductive burdens, even though reproducing (at least the old-fashioned way) always takes two.

The question of why women are the ones doing nearly all of the work to prevent unintended pregnancy – when an accidental pregnancy requires as much involvement from men as women – is newly salient thanks to questions about whether the Johnson & Johnson Covid vaccine in the US, and the AstraZeneca vaccine in the UK and Europe, elevate risks of blood clots. After a pause to evaluate the evidence, the CDC deemed the Johnson & Johnson vaccine safe, but noted that in a very tiny handful of cases, there was a slightly elevated risk of blood clotting for women under 50. The European Medicines Agency has recommended that the AstraZeneca shot not be given to young people.

Which led a lot of women to ask: what about the pill?

The birth control pill remains very safe, but it also comes with elevated blood clot risk – a higher risk than that of the Covid vaccine. That said, the two aren’t necessarily comparable. Pill-related blood clots tend to be in the legs and sometimes the lungs, not the brain, and are generally treatable.

And no contraception method is without its flaws. Hormonal methods, including the pill, the Depo-Provera shot and the hormonal IUD, among others, come with side effects that can include weight gain, mood changes, nausea and – perhaps most offensively – decreased sex drive, which kind of defeats the purpose of using contraception, so you can have sex for pleasure without risking pregnancy. Anecdotally, a great many women I know are diehard pro-choice advocates for a wide range of contraceptive options, but personally forgo hormonal contraception because of the side effects. And non-hormonal methods aren’t necessarily a solution: The copper IUD, which does not contain hormones, can cause heavy bleeding and severe menstrual pain. (When I asked my own doctor about the copper IUD years ago, she told me to get it only if I was okay with bleeding and being in pain for the next year.)

One answer to the question of why men don’t bear their fair share of the contraception burden is obvious: men also don’t bear the burden of pregnancy, and so there is far less incentive for them to take the lead in preventing it. And it’s certainly a good thing that women have the ability to control their own reproductive capacities without relying on male partners.

Another answer is obvious enough from the list above: there simply aren’t any hormonal or otherwise medical and impermanent contraception options for men. Condoms, unlike hormonal contraception, can prevent the spread of infections. But they require perfect use every time, kind of like the contraceptive sponge and the diaphragm, neither of which is exactly a popular method of birth control in 2021. Many people find they experience decreased sensation with condoms, and they require the interruption of what lots of couples want to be a spontaneous and sensuous moment; they’re not a method where the burden is borne only by the male partner in a heterosexual pairing. While there are multiple drugs on the market that allow men to continue getting erections well into old age, there’s no male pill or male IUD, which tells you a lot about what men demand and what drug companies believe they will use.

But the relative lack of medical options for men wanting fertility control isn’t the whole story. The most popular form of contraception for American women isn’t any of the hormonal options; it’s tubal ligation. And there’s a male corollary: vasectomy.

Yet women are about twice as likely to get their tubes tied than men are to get the snip, even though tubal ligation is more invasive, riskier and harder to reverse.

At the heart of this divide isn’t money or opportunity or anything logical. It’s sexism: the expectation that women will not only bear the work of reproduction, often permanently damaging our health and always risking our lives, but that we will also take on 100% of the pain and risk of preventing it, too. As for men, well, they just join for the fun part.

This divide has existed in our intimate relationships for millennia, so no wonder a lot of men haven’t budged and a lot of women don’t give it a second thought. But concerns about the (overwhelmingly safe) Covid vaccine have opened up a new line of conversation about who takes on which risks and why when it comes to contraception. That conversation should extend beyond concerns about the (also overwhelmingly safe, if not 100% beloved) birth control pill. Men should be asking why they aren’t up in arms about their lack of contraceptive options. More of them should get vasectomies. And the women who expect equality at home should ask whether they’re getting it if the physical toll of planning their families falls on them alone.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Even before Covid arrived, local authority children’s services were struggling to cope as children with more complex and expensive needs have entered the care system. As today’s Guardian investigation reveals, the bandages and sticking plasters that have held a creaking children’s social care system in place are now fraying under the strain of the pandemic, particularly in some of the most deprived parts of England.

The present system cannot financially support children already in its care, never mind those on the verge of crisis who are often not receiving any help at all. Resources are stretched, systems fragmented, and we have an early years system that is patchy and often failing to identify and help struggling families. Too many children start school with developmental problems with speech and language, or live in families with serious but hidden problems around domestic abuse, mental health or addiction. Many are living in poverty, with some even taken into care simply because their family is too poor to look after them – not because they are being abused or harmed.

These children need a joined-up system that offers them support throughout childhood, not just when everything goes wrong. Yet in many parts of the country, they and their families are largely left to fend for themselves.

Partly this is because children’s social care has long been the poor relation of adult social care, another fractured and unsustainable system in need of long-term financing. Yet while the government now accepts the need for urgent reform to improve care for elderly people, it has been far too slow to do the same for children. It says much about the priority children, particularly the most vulnerable, are given in our political system, that these problems have spent so long in the “too difficult” box.

That must change, starting with an acceptance of the scale of the problem and the need for early intervention, and a commitment to reduce child poverty, improve mental health services for children, tackle school exclusions and overhaul how we identify and help children in danger of slipping through the gaps. There are some quick, easy wins – such as banning under-18s in care from being housed in unregulated accommodation, and ensuring the universal credit uplift is maintained for all families with children.

But the whole system of how we care for and provide opportunities to the most vulnerable children needs an overhaul, particularly after Covid has amplified so many existing problems.

The government was right to keep schools open for vulnerable children during lockdown. However, the reality is many did not attend, and many were out of sight of the dedicated professionals who are often first to spot when children are at risk. The surge in referrals as the Covid restrictions are eased gives us some idea of the impact of lockdown on families where there are serious problems.

Add in the crippling rise in costs for councils, a fractured children’s home market, huge backlogs in the family court system and pressures on low income family finances, and we have a perfect storm brewing – one that many parts of the children’s services system will not be able to weather without help.

The outcomes can end up being disastrous and terrifying for those children who are most at risk of exploitation by the ruthless criminals who are so adept at scooping up the vulnerable. More of the same only makes it more likely that additional children end up as the victims of serious violence or sexual abuse.

The urgent task now for the government, councils, charities, and local health and police services is to develop solutions. There is no reason to expect this situation to improve without urgent intervention, thorough reform and a targeted increase in funding.

The government’s independent review into children’s care is a good place to start and I am confident its chair, Josh MacAlister, will produce recommendations that, if implemented, can improve the care system. But it is imperative that ministers act on what is proposed. This crisis cannot be solved on the cheap. Investment – and it is an investment against the higher cost of long-term failure – will be needed alongside a commitment to offer the same opportunities to the most vulnerable children as we would expect for our own. The alternative is an endless spiral of crises that grow ever more damaging, wasteful to children’s lives and expensive to solve.

There are already a lot of good ideas and good practice being tried out around the country, often with some success. Leeds city council’s ambitious city-wide focus on early intervention and support for vulnerable families and children is one example; North Yorkshire county council’s No Wrong Door, which provides new models of support for children on the edge of the care system, is another.

Next month I will launch my own year-long independent commission into how we can turn around the lives of teenagers at risk, hosted by the Oasis Charitable Trust, with the aim of offering government and councils practical, affordable solutions.

But first we need our politicians to wake up. A failed children’s social care system not only lets down children but also stores up expensive adult social problems that can last a lifetime. The over-representation of adults who grew up in care in our prisons, sleeping on our streets and struggling with addiction and mental health problems tells its own story of failure.

With help and support, every one of these children could have a brighter future ahead of them – opportunities that for many will be denied as long as we have a children’s social care system in crisis. No government hoping to level up opportunities in society can afford to ignore the issues facing thousands and thousands of vulnerable children. And no child should have to live with the risk of harm because of a lack of political will to fix a broken system.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There’s a line in Edwina Currie’s Diaries, volume two; it’s August 1992 and her luckless daughter has just flunked her A-levels. “Denstone,” Currie writes of the Staffordshire independent school, “has a lot to answer for.” It stuck in my mind at the time because it was rare, then, to hear that viewpoint so baldly expressed, that when you pay for a private school, you’re buying grades, and if those grades don’t materialise, the school has ripped you off.

In 2021, parents investing in private education can feel pretty satisfied with their return: 70% of independently educated pupils got As or A*s, set against 42% at state academies and 39% at comprehensives. In the scramble to explain why affluent kids should outperform their peers to such a degree, I’ve heard the following hypotheses: they work harder; their teachers are better; poorer students didn’t have laptops or quiet spaces to work in the pandemic; there was less face-to-face online teaching in state schools.

But just logically, leaving all my own prejudices and personal experience of private education aside, when grade inflation is running at 9% in private schools and 6% elsewhere, isn’t the explanation much simpler? Private school teachers, even though they are magic, apparently, are still human: faced with a choice between inflating the odd grade and 1,000 Edwina Curries chewing their ear off, they did what any of us would have done. According to the Sutton Trust, 23% of teachers at private schools reported pressure from parents about their children’s grades, set against 11% of teachers in less-affluent state schools).

It’s just another day in our inverted politics, where what the government says is the exact opposite of what it does. Ministers say they want to “level up”, then stand back and watch as those that already have are given more, and those that have the least are most disappointed. They claim to be on the side of disadvantaged pupils, and then last year literally invented an algorithm with a baked-in bias against schools in poorer areas. They say they will move heaven and earth to make up for lost learning, but can’t find the money to take the advice that they commissioned. Perfectly foreseeable challenges emerge, and there isn’t the ghost of a plan to meet them.

The comfortable analysis is that the education secretary just isn’t up to the job. Certainly, Gavin Williamson appears chaotic and evasive. If rumours surrounding the forthcoming reshuffle are true, Williamson has achieved the impossible, and managed to unite parents, teachers and the cabinet, if only on one view: that he is totally useless.

The much less comfortable conclusion, though, is that underneath what looks like mishaps is a formula of strategic insincerity. There is no natural brake on the government’s rhetoric, as it has no intention of fulfilling any of it. Ministers will continue to bandy about their synonyms and neologisms for “equality”, while charting a course that deepens inequality at an alarming rate, and the insult to our collective intelligence is the least of our problems, however keenly we feel it.

For A-level students themselves, the immediate concern will be university admissions. Overstretched anyway, with a record number of applications, universities said before the results that there would be very little flexibility for students who missed their grades. Competition in clearing is expected to be intense, yet young people have been advised not to defer, since next year will be just as brutal.

In the scrum for places on prestigious courses, which academics fear will favour privately educated pupils, prospective students may be distracted from the underlying reality laid bare by the pandemic. Universities are so heavily reliant on students as cash cows that there is no longer any headroom to worry about their experience of learning. Students had to be on site in 2020, even with no in-person teaching, let alone any socialising, for the extraction of their rents. There was much debate at the time over what this had done to Covid rates, but very little on how it felt at the level of the individual citizen, to be shunted around the country, like numbers in an accounting column.

Educationists are right to worry about the lost learning of the generation coming of age in the pandemic; politicians should be much more worried about this group coming of age as voters. They have been treated as not-quite-legitimate for long enough; not quite important enough to deserve detailed planning and substantial investment. A very small number of parents – 6% – have been able to make up the shortfall with school fees, but that still leaves a large army whose grievances cannot be minimised and ignored for ever.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Andrew Cuomo, the governor of the state of New York, has resigned after the publication of a report by the attorney general which documented that he sexually harassed 11 women and his staff retaliated against one of those women who had the temerity to speak out. (Cuomo denies any wrongdoing.)

Some commentators have taken the opportunity to note that not only did he run a toxic workplace, sexually harass staff and violate state and federal laws in his actions, he also has run the state poorly, despite the reputation he developed during the coronavirus pandemic. But, based in part on my experience of having worked in his administration, it would be more accurate to say that Cuomo has run New York poorly because he ran a toxic workplace, sexually harassed staff and violated state and federal laws.

Start with the number of women whose careers were cut short and harmed by the governor’s actions. That left New York without the contributions of many women who could have made the state a better place but who left because of the abuse. And who are the women who did not get jobs in the government at all because Cuomo may not have found them attractive? What was their contribution to our collective wellbeing that was missed? It is impossible to have worked for the governor and not have noticed that the senior women who worked directly for him predominantly looked alike and notably none of them where non-white.

Similarly, the attorney general’s report meticulously detailed the ways in which the state’s hiring and staffing decisions were based upon Cuomo’s proclivities. On the one hand, the governor had the New York State police change their seniority rules to allow a woman that he had met to be assigned to staff him, even though she was underqualified for the role. On the other, numerous women were given non-substantive jobs in the governor’s vicinity rather than substantive work for which they were qualified. Cuomo was more than willing to use his power to degrade government because of his personal desires, and it did not stop at discrimination against women.

The brain drain as a result of his toxic administration hurt New York. I made it seven months in the Cuomo administration in 2017. I was looking for a new job after two months. But working in an abusive and chaotic environment where nobody cared about policy outcomes was not worth proximity to power. The staff often justified what they went through as necessary for good governance, but I knew otherwise, having just come from the Obama White House, where working long hours was the norm, but so was kindness coming from the top.

While I would not count myself as a large loss for the administration, the number of smart people who walked in the door and realised they could do more good work elsewhere is innumerable. For example, Andy Byford, who was fixing the subways that had withered under Cuomo’s time leading New York, left because working for the governor was so unpleasant.

The report also documented the ways in which a staff obsessed with serving the governor, his wants and his image rather than delivering for New Yorkers leads to bad outcomes. Led by the now departed Melissa DeRosa, the staff were all hands on deck to silence the harassment claims against Cuomo in the middle of a pandemic. They are alleged to have retaliated against Lindsey Boylan and lied to the press hoping to ward off future accusations. That campaign was described by the governor’s office as “fighting for our lives”, which should give us a sense of how much energy was being devoted to issues other than running the state’s government.

Indeed, it’s this media obsession and policy failure that led to Cuomo’s massive popularity amid the pandemic while New Yorkers died at higher rates than almost any other state in the country. If it had to do with television, he and they cared and they could get good headlines. While I think very little of Cuomo, I do believe his Emmy was well deserved. He did an incredible job every day playing the competent foil to Donald Trump, assuring a shell-shocked nation desperate for the mere performance of competence. TV Andrew Cuomo is good at the job of being TV Governor.

When the cameras were off, the image-obsessed staff failed to deliver for New York. New York is second among the US’s states in deaths per capita, and while a fair assessment would note the early timing and geography – nearby New Jersey and Connecticut also struggled to prevent Covid deaths – nothing suggests Cuomo did anything more notable to limit the spread of the virus than other governors. Instead, when his policies potentially led to larger numbers of deaths in elder care facilities, his administration reportedly scrubbed the numbers at his behest. As New Yorkers struggled to get Covid tests, his administration pressured hospitals to provide them for his friends and family. And when news broke of his sexual harassment last year, his administration’s Covid “czar” gauged the loyalty of county officials struggling to get vaccines to their constituents, according to media reports.

That is my memory of working there: seeing people screamed at by his close staff if the temperature was not sufficiently cold for the governor’s events. Cuomo’s administration has constantly failed because it prized loyalty, subservience and shiny objects over making things work. New York received billions of dollars in rent relief money from the federal government this year, but the programme has been marked by dysfunction, with lawmakers demanding details of the awarding of a no-bid $115m contract to a company that was charged with distributing the funds. The state wasted $106m on unused lights for New York bridges, because the governor prized the veneer of infrastructure, all while subways broke down.

Andrew Cuomo is gone. But there will be more politicians who are said to sexually harass their staff and run toxic work environments. We should remember that the harms do not stop at the women they harass or the staffers they abuse, although that should be enough. The abuse is corrosive, the harms leak out throughout the government, and we are all worse for it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s easy to feel despair reading the stark warnings in the latest report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: the window in which warming can be limited to 1.5C is rapidly closing. The forest fires and flooding on our TV screens, and closer to home, are a wake-up call to the realities of a rapidly warming climate.

The IPCC, the UN body responsible for climate science, described the report as a “code red for humanity”, but 30 years of warnings have not brought about action on a meaningful scale.

But fatalistic despair will only deepen the problem. The language of averting catastrophe positions the climate crisis as a single calamitous moment, whereas in reality there are a thousand smaller battles to fight – and each small win will contribute to protecting people from the worst effects of climate breakdown. As Naomi Klein puts it, “every fraction of a degree warming that we hold off is a victory”.

The IPCC report makes clear that the science behind the climate crisis is incontrovertible, and research shows that the UK public agrees. Across cities, towns and rural communities, a majority want to see the government take further action.

The most pressing battle, then, is no longer with the deniers but with climate delayers, who claim to recognise the problem, while seeking to prevent anything from being done about it. They argue that measures to address the climate and nature crises – such as phasing out gas boilers – are too expensive, and that the costs would fall on those on low-to-middle incomes. Consequently, reviews and decisions are delayed while headlines are written of a green agenda “plunged into chaos”.

It is critical that government considers the impacts of climate policies - an approach that makes the lives of families who are already struggling won’t wash and is bound to fail. But the climate delayers’ argument does not stack up. Early investment to address the climate and nature crises can create jobs and prevent needless economic damage down the line. Recent modelling by the Office for Budget Responsibility suggests that debt as a proportion of GDP will be far higher if we delay action compared to investing sooner. Government leadership to support the growth of markets for green technologies now can bring down their costs in future.

If Johnson’s government opts for a path that relies on our existing economic model and asks individuals to shoulder risks and costs rather than share them, those on low incomes will probably lose out. The good news is that policies can be designed not just to protect the lives of those on low and middle incomes, but actually make them better.

That agenda should include grants and loans to support people on low incomes to insulate their homes and install green heating systems, so that they can save on heating bills. It should include investing the additional £30bn per year needed to build the net-zero economy of the future, creating good jobs around the country, and providing bridges to those jobs with a right to retrain. It should include ensuring that everyone has access to nature, using the planning system to transform neighbourhoods into green, social spaces.

Above all, if we are to seize the opportunities of the transition, all people and communities across the UK must benefit, with the greatest return accruing to those who need it most. We can and must choose a path that leads to a fairer future, rather than one which deepens injustice.

The Institute for Public Policy Research’s cross-party environmental justice commission, which published its final report last month, sets out how this can be achieved, based on thousands of combined hours of deliberation by citizens around the country. These discussions offer hope for a popular agenda that would win support for climate and nature policies and improve the country for the better. The delayers are right to raise concerns of who benefits and who loses from the green transition, but wrong to put banana skins under the process. We have the answers we need, now, to secure a fair transition – and it’s time the government chose the right path.

Prior to the pandemic, the environment was more salient as an electoral issue than it has been for 30 years. Voters will be watching the government’s response to the scientists’ “code red” this autumn as the government sets out its spending plans and the UK hosts the Cop26 in Glasgow. To host a successful international conference and show real global leadership, the government will have to back its demands of other countries with a strong green agenda at home. Dither and delay is not an option. Practical policies for a rapid transition to netzero that make the UK a fairer country are a necessity.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On Tuesday, 19 Republican senators, including minority leader Mitch McConnell, joined with Democrats to pass Joe Biden’s $550bn infrastructure bill. In a polarised age, this act of bipartisan politics seems miraculous. To vote for the bill, Senate Republicans had to go against the wishes of Donald Trump, who had warned against handing Mr Biden a victory before midterm polls in 2022. They also U-turned on a core Republican principle: that private investment is superior to government intervention.

Yet the Republicans’ vote was rooted in self-interest. Only four will face the voters next year and the spending was popular, even with Republicans. Crucially Mr McConnell had protected the filibuster. Unless Republicans relented, Mr Biden might have done away with legislative tool that preserves the Senate’s 60-vote threshold for legislative success. Instead Mr Biden thanked his opponents for their courage in backing his proposal. This moment represents a test of Biden’s faith that Congress, and democracy, can still work and get things done.

In many ways this looks like a defining battle for the heart and soul of the Democratic party. The infrastructure bill now goes to the House of Representatives, which has a Democratic majority and a bigger progressive bloc. The House Democratic leadership has said it will only move after the Senate passes a $3.5tn ​​spending bill to reduce poverty, improve elderly and childcare as well as protect the environment. The biggest expansion of the US’s social safety net since the Great Society of the 1960s is needed to help flatten the inequalities wrought by decades of pro-market policies. The same can be said for rolling back the tax cuts for corporations and wealthy households that were Mr Trump’s signature legislative achievement.

It is important to note that leftwing Democrats have had to trim their demand for a $6tn package. But some on the right of the party appear more in tune with Republican arguments that characterise the $3.5tn bill as “reckless”. After agreeing to vote for the bill’s framework, West Virginia’s Joe Manchin said he had “grave concerns” about such a price tag. Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona last month made it clear she could not support a bill that size. They are not the only ones: in the House moderate Democrats would rather take an easy win and dump any attempt to enact big, bold social change.

The criticism the US cannot afford the spending is wrong. The economist Stephanie Kelton wrote that Mr Trump’s tax cuts added $1.9tn to the country’s fiscal deficit with little effect on the country’s ability to spend. The other concern is inflation. Prof Kelton noted many experts thought “Congress could enact both the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the proposed $3.5tn reconciliation bill without exacerbating inflation”.

Perhaps the greatest obstacle to Mr Biden’s ambition is not the politicians, but the ideological orientation of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), which scores the spending and revenues. Under reconciliation rules, measures cannot add to the deficit after a decade. In a sign of what lies ahead, Mr Biden’s treasury team has already claimed that tax enforcement will raise more cash than the CBO projects. The president knows that the New Deal and Great Society programmes passed into law without a CBO score. Mr Biden would like to change America on a such a scale. But transformations like that cannot be bought. They must be fought for.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ceasefires are normally cause for hope, bringing respite and perhaps even peace, if not a full resolution. In Ethiopia there has been no such relief. Just as Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed’s Nobel peace prize was soon followed by war with the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF), so it seems that the ceasefire will be succeeded, as many had predicted, by an intensification of the conflict. On Tuesday, Mr Abiy urged all eligible civilians to join the war.

Nine months of conflict have resulted in thousands of deaths, created tens of thousands of refugees, and led to famine conditions for hundreds of thousands. They have seen war crimes committed by all parties, including massacres of civilians and widespread sexual violence; a report by Amnesty International alleges the systematic rape and abuse of women and girls by forces belonging or allied to the Ethiopian government. The prospect of an escalation is truly frightening.

The TPLF dominated politics in Ethiopia for decades before Mr Abiy’s rise. A political dispute – in which the regional Tigray leadership and federal government declared each other illegitimate – turned into a military struggle when Mr Abiy said he was launching a strike on the TPLF because it had attacked a federal army base. He expected a swift victory. But in June, Tigrayan forces recaptured the regional capital, Mekelle. The federal government unilaterally declared a ceasefire and withdrew troops from most of the region, but aid and services remained blocked, and a spokesman recently declared that the Tigrayan leadership would be driven “out of each and every city”. Humanitarian supplies have only just been allowed in. Electricity and communications have yet to be restored.

For its part, the TPLF has carried the war east into neighbouring Afar (where it may hope to cut off a key trade route) and south into the Amhara region, and is refusing to withdraw. It says it is reclaiming Tigrayan land which Amhara forces occupied when the federal government launched its attack, but it may also hope to open up a supply line from Sudan. TPLF-aligned forces and Tigrayan militias have also been accused of attacks on Eritrean refugees in Ethiopia; Eritrean government forces have fought for Mr Abiy.

If the human toll were not sufficient, this conflict threatens to tear the country apart. Tigray’s leadership is determined to restore the region’s prewar boundaries, while Amhara forces will not cede their claim to the land they seized. The TPLF also needs to reestablish external supply lines – which the federal government cannot afford them to have – and wants to oust Mr Abiy. But the prime minister has just won a landslide victory in elections (albeit with a partial opposition boycott and without voting in some areas), and the TPLF’s actions may bolster his support. At the same time, the conduct of pro-government troops has galvanised previously apolitical Tigrayans into backing the TPLF; many now see this as a fight for survival and feel independence is their only prospect of living in peace. The conflict is hitting external relations too; Sudan has withdrawn its ambassador.

As the situation threatens to deteriorate further, international pressure on all parties is essential. Ensuring the unhindered flow of humanitarian supplies and seeking a real ceasefire must be the priorities. It is hard to see how a proper deal can be reached when neither side appears to want it. But Ethiopia, and the region, desperately need one.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What term do you want to search? Search with google
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s that time of year for a moral panic over examinations, assessments and claims of grade inflation (A-level data shows record grades and biggest gender gap in a decade, 10 August). Underlying this annual soul-searching is a fact that few of us involved in education, let alone politicians, are prepared to acknowledge. We need to recognise, not shamefacedly but honestly, the extent of our limited understanding of school learning. Despite a century or more of research and “measurement”, we still have no firm, reliable or systematic way of assessing young people’s understanding. Our examination technology is crude, partial, inadequate and discriminatory. The mental health of many former students bears witness to that.

The most we can reasonably claim is a largely intuitive and inevitably subjective form of assessment of learning borne out of working closely with our students over a period of time – talking with and observing them on a day-to-day basis. Hence the importance of teacher criteria-referenced assessment and the priority to make it even more effective. This may be uncomfortable to acknowledge, both for some teachers and for most politicians, but it is the reality. This year’s teacher assessed grades should be the start of a much-needed process of development, not an unwelcome interruption of a faulty measurement system which has passed its sell-by date.

Prof Colin Richards

Former HM inspector of schools

You do not need to be a genius to get good grades at A-level, but most young people need to work hard and be well taught. However, much of the debate about teacher-assessed A-level results assumes that only a minority should achieve a good or excellent A-level result. Surely that is a defeatist assumption?

It is possible that the traditional exam system has been doing young people and society a disservice by restricting good grades to a few “high flyers”. In other fields we have the expectation that all learners will achieve excellent levels of competence. None of us would want most airline pilots to be average or below average at their jobs!

Rather than thrashing around for quick fixes to restore the discredited status quo, in which only a few succeed in achieving high marks, policymakers should view the impact of the pandemic on secondary education as an opportunity for a more imaginative and creative rethink. Concentrating on the value and quality of education, rather than on grades and league tables, would be a good start.

Chris Mills

Kingsbridge, Devon

In all this hysteria over grade inflation, doesn’t it occur to anyone that these results might be more indicative of our young people’s true abilities? Teachers have an accurate knowledge of their students’ real capacities – much fairer than a one-off exam on one day of the year, when the student might not be on top form. Our students have worked so hard over the last 18 months and that commitment needs recognising – they don’t need to feel their results are not accurate, and teachers don’t need to be accused of unfairly inflating results.

Dinah Bardgett

Frome, Somerset

The press has deafened us with stories about A-level grade inflation, and the private/independent sector versus maintained schools. As usual we’ve indulged in well-worn stereotyping of boys and girls. Quite rightly, there has been concern about the impact of the government’s shaky response to the pandemic, resulting in lost learning for students. But nowhere is there any particularly searching analysis of the results of students on vocational courses. Shame on all of us. These young people will be the backbone of our economic recovery and as usual we overlook them.

Yvonne Williams

Ryde, Isle of Wight

Once again a shocking number of the highest grade medals have been awarded to our young athletes (Report, 9 August). I do understand our young people have been working hard under difficult circumstances, but Olympic standards are clearly slipping again this year.

David Cotter

Woodbridge, Suffolk
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The British Medical Association survey results highlighting rising levels of abuse against doctors (Over a third of NHS doctors experiencing verbal abuse and threats, says survey, 10 August) makes for difficult reading. GP surgeries have clearly borne the brunt of the public’s frustrations during Covid-19, and it is shocking and appalling that our frontline workers have been facing this sort of abuse.

Sadly, the BMA’s survey results reflect the Medical Protection Society’s own research on abuse against GP teams, specifically during the vaccination programme. Three in four GP surgeries have suffered verbal abuse, with respondents reporting shouting, swearing and emotional manipulation.

GPs are mentally and physically exhausted, with the risk of disillusionment and burnout higher than ever. Wellbeing support must be provided to all GP surgery staff who are feeling overwhelmed and demoralised, and a zero-tolerance policy towards abuse must be enforced across the NHS so that healthcare workers feel their safety is a priority.

Dr Pallavi Bradshaw

Medical Protection Society

“The government is incredibly grateful for the tireless efforts of GPs who have continued to provide care for all of us … throughout the global pandemic” was the Department of Health quote in your recent article (GP clinics at ‘breaking point’ and recovery plan is essential, 29 July).

But GPs do tire, because they are human beings who are tired and distressed by working under constant pressure during the pandemic. But we are afraid to let our patients know that this has made many of us ill.

I have just returned to work after four weeks off sick. The suffering of our patients, with limited resources to help, overwhelmed me. I am not alone: 105% more doctors presented to the excellent Practitioner Health service in March 2021 compared with March 2020.

My partners and wider practice team have been supportive and compassionate. They have allowed me to rest, despite the immense pressure they are under, and I am thankful to them all. On my return, my patients have been caring and concerned. Perhaps I should have trusted them to understand that we are people too.

Anne Noble

GP, Sheffield
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It is not only the big, old “forest trees” that are, as George Monbiot writes, the threatened “keystone structures” for our ecology (The gift we should give to the living world? Time, and lots of it, 8 August). Our cities too, and the green spaces within them, are home to essential canopies of magnificent trees, many well over 100 years old, but equally threatened. “Natural capital accounting” and the business bottom line is here also to blame.

One serious example is the longstanding policy of insurance companies to escape the cost of remedial work on properties with subsidence by blaming it on the root systems of long-established trees nearby. They demand felling, and the essential green cover and all the beneficial ecosystems are lost for ever. If the landowner, normally a local authority, is determined to retain its trees then the insurers pursue them for every cost. Few have sufficient resources. The insurance industry needs to realise that such a policy not only destroys the irreplaceable mature greenery of our cities, but also contributes to the extreme weather events that are generating more insurance claims.

Peter Sparks

Cambridge
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I note that the Department for Transport spokesperson referred to special provisions for dealing with Brexit congestion as “temporary” in the announcement that the provisions are to be permanent (Report, 10 August). I am now assuming that Brexit “teething troubles” will continue for the rest of my life (like the “temporary” UK aid cut) – or until we rejoin the EU.

Mike Cashman

Milton Keynes

Anyone worried about shrinking with age (Study links women’s middle-age height loss with greater risk of death, 9 August) should seriously consider taking up church bellringing. The upward stretch on the spine is extremely pleasant and counteracts the effects of age and gravity. I grew 1cm in my early days of ringing. Besides which, it ticks all the boxes for health and wellbeing. Bellringers live longer.

Mary Jones

St Ives, Cornwall

Perhaps the Guardian could give a more positive spin on news. Your headline implies that women retaining height through middle age can expect immortality.

Roy Grimwood

Market Drayton, Shropshire

If cricket is to be included in future Olympic Games (Report, 10 August), surely novel-writing will follow (Monty Python, 1973)?

Iago Cymraeg

London

A PE teacher I knew became suspicious when he received a note saying “Please excuse Sean from PE today as he has forgotten his PE kit” (Letters, 9 August).

Andrew Steed

Walsall, West Midlands
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s easy to laugh at the anti-vaccine movement, and this week they made it easier still. Hundreds of protesters tried to storm Television Centre in west London, apparently unaware that they were not at the headquarters of the BBC or its news operation – which they blame for brainwashing the British public – but at a building vacated by the corporation eight years ago and which now consists of luxury flats and daytime TV studios. If only they’d done their own research.

Anti-vax firebreather Piers Corbyn was there, of course, unabashed by the recent undercover sting that showed him happy to take £10,000 in cash from what he thought was an AstraZeneca shareholder, while agreeing that he would exempt their product from his rhetorical fire. (Corbyn has since said that the published video is misleading.) “We’ve got to take over these bastards,” he said during this week’s protest, while inside Loose Women were discussing the menopause.

In Britain, the temptation is to snigger at the anti-vaxxers, but in the US it’s becoming ever clearer that the outright Covid deniers, vaccine opponents and anti-maskers – and the hold they have over the Republican party – are no joke. The Covid culture wars have escalated to such an extent that the Republican governors of two states, Florida and Texas, are now actively barring schools, colleges and local authorities from taking basic, common-sense measures against the disease.

They are no longer allowed to require vaccines, proof of vaccination, a Covid test or masks. Any Florida school administrator who demands the wearing of masks could lose their pay. Texas is dropping the requirement that schools even notify parents when there’s a coronavirus case in class. Naturally, the Covid numbers in both states are through the roof. For all Joe Biden’s early success with vaccination, this level of resistance is posing a grave threat to the US’s ability to manage, let alone defeat, the pandemic.

What explains this level of Covid denialism? In the US, the roots of a “don’t tread on me” libertarianism that regards any instruction from government as a step towards tyranny run deep. In the Trump era, it has become a matter of political identity: a refusal to believe Covid is real or that the measures against it are legitimate are increasingly conditions of membership of the right and of good standing as a true devotee of the former president. They are conditions of membership. Besides, Covid denialism offers the lure of all conspiracy theories: the promise of secret knowledge, the chance to see what the sheeple cannot see.

For everyone else, it’s tempting to take pride in being untainted by such thinking. To dismiss the Covid deniers, whether in Florida or west London, as a group apart, irrational, if not downright stupid – refusing to take the steps that will provably protect them, their families and those around them. And yet, the distance between them and everyone else might not be as great as you think.

On the same day that Piers and the placard wavers were out in force in White City, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change delivered its report on the state of our planet. It was its starkest warning yet. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, called it a “code red for humanity”, adding that the “alarm bells are deafening”. The IPCC found that sea level is rising, the polar ice is melting, there are floods, droughts and heatwaves and that human activity is “unequivocally” the cause.

Now, there are some who still deny this plain truth, the same way that some insist coronavirus is a “plandemic” hatched by Bill Gates or caused by 5G phone masts or aliens. Both those groups are guilty of cognitive denial, failing to update their beliefs in the light of the evidence.

But there is another form of denial, what the philosopher Quassim Cassam calls “behavioural or practical denialism”. This is the mindset that accepts the science marshalled by the IPCC – it hears the alarm bell ringing – but still does not change its behaviour. It can operate at the level of governments: note the White House official who on Wednesday urged global oil producers to open up the taps and increase production, so that hard-pressed US motorists can buy gasoline more cheaply. And it lives in individuals, too, in the fatalism that says one person can do nothing to halt a planetary emergency, so you might as well shrug and move on. Which is “to act in the same way as if you were a climate change denier,” says Cassam. “The practical upshot is the same.”

Whether it’s Covid or climate, there is a common defect at work here. It is wilful blindness, a deliberate closing of the eyes to a reality that is too hard to bear – and it afflicts far more than a hardcore of noisy sceptics and protesters. A US poll this week found that a summer of heatwaves, flooding and wildfires – evidence that the planet is both burning and drowning – has barely shifted attitudes to the climate issue. Many, even most, are looking the other way.

Perhaps all this is worth bearing in mind as policymakers grappling with the twin crises try to cajole the wary towards action for both their own and the collective good. In both cases, it pays to peel the committed deniers away from those who are merely hesitant or apathetic, and therefore more persuadable. And, again in both cases, it’s wise to remember that the recalcitrant are driven by an impulse that is all too human: namely, fear.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bloodcurdling shrieks from Downing Street, where Boris Johnson recently beheld a most enraging sight in his magic mirror (bespoke handcrafted rattan, Soane, price on application). Instead of responding to his daily question “Who is the most popular of all?” by reflecting Johnson’s own smirking visage back at him, the looking-glass has been displaying the image of young Rishi Sunak riding his Peloton bike right up in the prime ministerial grill.

Shortly after Johnson appointed Sunak, his relations with the new chancellor were described as “hand in glove”. Unfortunately, Rishi now seems to have tired of the cavity search. The recent leak of his letter challenging Johnson on Covid travel restrictions has enraged the boss whose entire career has been characterised by exactly this type of posturing disloyalty. Amusingly, it seems the prime minister never even saw the supposedly private letter from his chancellor before it was leaked, with Johnson’s defenders saying it should obviously have been put in his red box. Yet even that feels debatable. Hard to say where the best place to put a document you really need the PM to read is. Tinder? Certainly he is said to swipe left on most work-related things placed in front of him.

There is something almost poignant about reports of the meeting in which Johnson ill-advisedly joked about demoting Sunak. “I’ve been thinking about it,” the prime minister is reported to have said. “Maybe it’s time we looked at Rishi as the next secretary of state for health. He could potentially do a very good job there.” Riiiiiight. It’s difficult to imagine the 20 or so other people in the room doing anything other than staring down at their laps in embarrassment, thinking, “Oooooh, big talk.”

For the Conservative party, Boris Johnson without his popularity is a hard sell. Without that … what precisely is this thing for? You sense the pitch meeting would run into problems fairly early on. “OK, Bruce Wayne, but he’s 57, cuts his hair with the bacon scissors and can’t be arsed fighting crime.” “Superman, but he’s weak, can’t fly and tells people he’s going to save them then doesn’t turn up.”

Either way Johnson approaches his August holiday in the position of being wildly less popular than a chancellor who’s on record as describing Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker as “a great night out”. That should really put things into perspective. It must be totally staggering to Johnson to see the great British public falling for an apparently genial politician known to them mainly by his first name, whose true motives they will turn out to have completely misunderstood. Still, that’s showbiz.

There comes a point in every former starlet’s life where they get shunted into the role of wicked queen, and unless he plays this perilous autumn with the statesmanlike acumen of Abraham Lincoln, this could be transition time for Johnson. Or to put it another way: the one bridge he really needs to build is back to his party’s heart.

We know he likes classical texts, so let’s assume he’s familiar with the 1995 cinematic epic Showgirls. Readers of this column certainly should be. Undoubtedly, the prime minister should take comfort in the scene in which understudy stripper Elizabeth Berkley pushes leading stripper Gina Gershon down the stairs, causing her to break her hip and exit the stage. Yet despite Gina being an old trouper who spent years thriving on the limelight, it all turns out to be quite a relief for her. As she remarks philosophically: “There’s always someone younger and hungrier coming down the stairs after you.”

Perhaps the same thought could be crossing Boris Johnson’s mind. There may well come a point, sooner rather than later, where he honestly can’t be bothered getting his tits out again every day, and can see the charm of limping off to earn millions on the lucrative boardroom/North American lecture circuit. Alternatively, we could accept the obvious: that what a man of his age would really like is more time at home with the nappies. The point is, Boris Johnson has options.

Then again, options are not his happy place. For Johnson, to govern is to not choose. Making hard choices is such anathema to the prime minister’s brand of leadership that he defers them continually, serially, and – in the case of Covid strategy – fatally. And so it is that Gavin Williamson remains secretary of state for education for a second abysmal summer running, because removing him in the wake of any of his earlier foul-ups might have necessitated a reshuffle. As any number of Westminster experts like to point out archly, that only creates enemies.

To which the only decent reply is: so what? It says everything about Johnson that he would prefer to keep a proven incompetent in such a crucial role and further let down an entire generation of children than demote him and make a personal enemy or enemies.

It also says pretty much all you need to know about Johnson that his supposed big priority – the Cop26 UN climate conference later this year – is seemingly being chucked together at the last minute and without any effective or joined-up strategy, even as the planet burns. Honestly, what are the chances that a man who lacks the leadership qualities to demote even Gavin Williamson is going to struggle with the somewhat tougher decisions required to combat the climate emergency? You cannot move at the moment for ministers briefing that the choices required to achieve net zero are so hard that only Johnson can make them. In which case, the one thing the form book shows us is that they won’t be made until it’s too late. The only scenario in which it is plausible to imagine Johnson making tough choices on climate breakdown in timely fashion is if he, personally, was living on an ice shelf that was literally, right now, dropping into the sea. Do Soane do ice shelves? Asking for future generations.

There will never be any meaningful vision or strategy or “levelling up” achieved with Johnson at the helm, because he can’t make decisions that he senses might make him unpopular even momentarily, to say nothing of being able to make the truly tough ones that involve a real sacrifice of vanity, and a real adherence to painstaking strategy. In the end, everything is subsumed by carelessness and self-interest. That, ultimately, is the reason we can be sure Johnson would never demote Sunak in the reshuffle of inadequates that he is rumoured to be getting around to at some point, maybe, in the nearish future. He simply wouldn’t have the strength of character.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In recent days, a ferocious wave of fighting has enveloped Afghanistan as the Taliban take more and more territory from the Afghan government. The developing situation makes it extremely difficult to predict how the coming weeks and months will unfold in the country. One thing we do know, however, is that while most media commentary focuses on who has the upper hand militarily, the country inevitably faces a humanitarian catastrophe. Ordinary Afghans are confronted with a triple calamity: dire security, health and economic prospects. These cruel conditions predate the Trump administration’s Doha agreement with the Taliban in February 2020, which began the process of US military withdrawal; they also predate President Biden’s confirmation that full withdrawal will occur by 11 September this year.

Afghanistan entered 2021 already in dire straits, with more than 18 million Afghans – nearly half the population – in humanitarian need. Dwindling international aid, a violent conflict, weak governance and environmental challenges such as droughts have all contributed. The impact of the pandemic last year meant that in January 2021 Afghanistan had the world’s second-highest number of people facing emergency food insecurity.

For more than four decades Afghanistan has been one of the world’s most significant sources of refugees. Millions of Afghans live in Pakistan and Iran and estimates put the total number of Afghans in Europe at almost half a million. Ongoing clashes between the Taliban and the Afghan government push tens of thousands of civilians out of their homes, forcing them to seek safety wherever they find it. More than 3.5 million Afghans are internally displaced but this number is rising rapidly every day as aid agencies struggle to provide help.

Contrary to our popular perception in the west, for Afghans the period of conflict in their country began long before 9/11, starting with the communist coup in 1978, followed by the Soviet military invasion on Christmas Eve in 1979. Yet, even by the complex standards of this long, gruesome war, the current phase of uncertainty in Afghanistan is unprecedented. The Taliban’s fortunes rise with each district, town and province they capture; at the time of writing they have just captured the strategic cities of Herat and Kandahar. The significance of these territorial gains cannot be stressed enough. It could trigger a civil war or the unravelling of the Afghan government, or both. A less likely but more optimistic scenario would be a political deal that leads to the establishment of a new administration – which the Taliban would inevitably dominate.

Against this backdrop, it is reasonable to ask what happened to the vast western investment of money and blood that occurred post-9/11. The answer is multi-layered, and the blame cannot fall only on the Afghan government, although it has been deeply corrupt and dependent on foreign donors. The United States and its allies bear a large share of the responsibility, too. A combination of serious mismanagement and a lack of foresight, and lack of will to pursue effective policies, bequeathed us the debacle that is Afghanistan today.

The US spent a staggering $978bn on the Afghan war between October 2001 and the end of 2019. The absurdity of this becomes clear when compared with the $36bn total US spending on governance and development in Afghanistan over the same period. As the western war machine churned and incoherent military strategies prioritised partnership with a corrupt Afghan elite, ordinary citizens remained on the margins.

The public parks in Kabul are fast filling with internally displaced people who are fleeing violence in their home provinces. Unlike the earlier episodes of this war, however, Afghans are not able to seek refuge in Pakistan and Iran. A “regional solution” for Afghans displaced by the current violence does not exist. Kabul, a densely populated city with nearly 4.5 million residents and meagre infrastructure, is the last resort for thousands of displaced families.

The world needs to brace itself for a humanitarian catastrophe in Afghanistan that is irreversible in the short term. For the UK and other western donor countries, there is an urgent need to play an active role in mediating a political process that results in an end to the conflict with the Taliban. If this doesn’t happen, the collective failure will represent a stain on our humanity, and leave us with a longterm “refugee crisis” as Afghan civilians flee from the tragedy engulfing their country.

Hameed Hakimi is a research associate at Chatham House












@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Since early 2020, the tragic reality of the pandemic has unfolded, killing millions, disrupting normal social interactions, destabilising economies and plunging the world into uncertainty. Between 4.3 and 11.6 million people have died. Amid this deepening gloom, vaccines have brought hope. Their development is a triumph of science; the manufacture and deployment of 4.4bn doses by a handful of developers is astonishing, joyous. In the UK alone, 87m doses have been administered, saving more than 84,000 lives. Globally, the number of lives saved by vaccines is expected to be in the millions.

So why is there still so much suffering around the world? Thousands of people are still dying of Covid every week. Hospitals are overwhelmed and many countries are in despair, urgently pleading for vaccines because they have virtually none. We are in this position simply because the doses we have are not being distributed first to those who are at highest risk of getting seriously ill or worse yet, dying. The vast majority of people who will die of Covid this year could have been saved if we had got this right. Vaccinating those at risk everywhere is in our self-interest. It may reduce the risk of new variants arising, and will relieve pressure on health systems, open travel, resuscitate the global economy, and raise the international authority of politicians prepared to take such moral leadership.

Despite the reality that a million more people are expected to die of Covid across the world by December, and many more live in fear with no chance of getting vaccinated, governments in the west are now considering giving a third booster dose of vaccine to those who have already received two. In a time of great global human need, we need to clearly outline a strong scientific case for giving booster shots. And we must get the timing right; if some need a boost, this must not deny a lifesaving vaccine to those who should be at the top of the list.

The scientific and public health case for large-scale boosting is incomplete and not clear. People experience a fall in antibody levels over time after vaccination, and we know from several studies that a booster will reverse this decline. If really high levels of antibodies are better at preventing minor infection, perhaps there is a case for boosters after all. But the focus of vaccination policy cannot be on sustaining very high levels of antibodies to prevent mild infection. If we focus on antibody levels alone, we could end up vaccinating everyone repeatedly to cope with a virus that keeps mutating. The point of vaccination isn’t to prevent people from getting mild infections; it’s to prevent hospitalisation and death.

As we see in the daily case numbers, the virus that causes Covid can still infect vaccinated people. Cyclically infecting immune individuals is fundamental to the biology of human coronaviruses. This is not in itself a cause for alarm. The vaccines are still providing high levels of protection against severe disease. Our immune systems have been trained by vaccines to respond when exposed to the virus, even if antibody levels have fallen. So instead of being concerned about whether people will be infected, we should be concerned about whether that infection could lead to serious disease, hospital admission, or worse.

The information we need – which we don’t yet have – is the level of antibody or T-cells required to prevent people from getting seriously ill. If this could be measured, and we saw protection dropping towards that level, there would be a clear case for administering booster shots. But we can’t measure this yet. And at the same time, high-risk groups around the world are still awaiting their first shots. All we can do is analyse the clinical data to see when or if there is a point where boosting becomes necessary. This is being watched carefully and closely by public health authorities and the World Health Organization. It will become clear one way or the other, and policy will rightly evolve in response.

For now, we are in unknown territory. We might need to give people booster shots to increase and extend immunity, but we might not. There is precedent in both directions. Just one dose of yellow fever vaccine provides lifelong protection. Conversely, we use five to six doses of tetanus vaccine for lifelong protection, and the flu vaccine is given annually. Where will Covid vaccines sit?

It is highly unlikely that vaccine protection against severe disease will suddenly fall off a cliff and the ongoing pandemic will be catastrophically rebooted. Small mutations in the virus will occur to help it survive better in vaccinated populations. But those mutations don’t render our vaccine immunity impotent. We are still protected from severe disease caused by the main variants that have emerged. So far.

This is not an all or nothing argument. We need ongoing careful analysis of the data to ensure there are no groups for whom boosters are already warranted. On the other hand, for those who don’t respond well to vaccines, more doses won’t help, and access to new treatments is urgently needed.

This is a key moment for decision-makers. Large-scale boosting in one rich country would send a signal around the world that boosters are needed everywhere. This will suck many vaccine doses out of the system, and many more people will die because they never even had a chance to get a single dose. If millions are boosted in the absence of a strong scientific case, history will remember the moment at which political leaders decided to reject their responsibility to the rest of humanity in the greatest crisis of our lifetimes.

Since we have the two-dose luxury of having time on our side, we should not rush into boosting millions of people, while time is running out for those who have nothing. First doses first. It’s that simple.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Recently I spoke with someone who had, in the past, been given a large number of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) treatments. This person thought that the treatment had helped, but that their memory had been permanently affected. I listened reluctantly, thinking of all the other reasons there might be for that – illness, age, medications. It’s easy to blame ECT for difficulties that might have happened anyway. Later, I let myself think about it, knowing that the reason for my unease was that I, too, had undergone a similar number of ECT treatments.

As a psychiatrist, I know that ECT is a rapid and lifesaving treatment in severe depression, when the patient is suicidal, or no longer able to care for themselves. The worse the illness, the better it seems to work, and it can be miraculous. We have all seen patients who are barely communicating transformed by even one or two treatments: eating and talking, and freed of the burden of suffering. It was like that for me. I have had courses over the years to treat psychotic depression, initially when I was pregnant with my first child, and most recently three years ago. In total, I have had around 70 individual treatments. Without it, I’m not sure I would have recovered to be with family or train as a psychiatrist. I will have it again, if I need to.

I think it is a good treatment, but I think it comes with its fair share of problems, which can be unduly minimised by clinicians. This is understandable: as a doctor, you want your patient to have the best treatment for their condition, and finding the words to describe ECT and its adverse effects is hard. Even the basics – an electric current will be passed through your brain, causing you to have a seizure – are terrifying. But the experience itself was, for me, very easy. You get a short general anaesthetic so that you are completely unaware of the seizure, which is, in any case, almost imperceptible due to a muscle relaxant. You wake up, a bit confused, and when that settles, you’re done. During my last course, I experienced this twice-weekly for seven weeks. From feeling entirely hopeless about the future, my mood lifted with each session. This was initially more obvious to others than to me; it took some months for me to feel myself, but the severity of my depression reduced within weeks. Life was worth living.

Views about ECT are polarised. There is good evidence that it works and is safe, although medication is usually needed to maintain long-term remission. But there are people who have been treated with ECT who consider that they have been permanently damaged by it. As a doctor and psychiatrist, I know that all treatments will have potential unwanted effects, and it would be wrong to say that such problems are not possible. But we mustn’t forget that the illnesses that require ECT are horrible, and might also cause damage if left untreated.

Personally, I don’t believe that I am cognitively impaired, although it’s hard to prove. But I have maintained a challenging career and taken postgraduate degrees, and that makes me feel better. But I have felt the downsides of ECT, in a couple of ways, and I can see the dangers of being too reassuring about it.

My memory was significantly affected, each time. A junior doctor told me recently that they were taught that memory problems were unusual and short-lived. But I’ve talked to quite a few others who have had ECT, and they all experienced memory issues. Some may welcome this at a time of great distress and suffering. For me, it’s as though there are big holes in my memory before and during a course of treatment. My daughter was a baby when I first had it, and I’ve lost a lot of her first two years, during which I had a number of courses. I also have no memory, ever, of having consented to treatment. I know I did, but perhaps this is a process that should be repeated? Reminders and reassurance can go a long way.

Even more disconcerting is the feeling of discombobulation – it’s like looking back at a dream period, where you’re not entirely sure what really happened, and I find this troubling. It does improve, in that my ability to lay down memories quickly returns once treatment stops, but there will always be a period of months that is loosened and distorted. It doesn’t come back, not properly, and can leave you feeling not quite sure who you are.

The other problem is stigmatisation. It’s fairly acceptable to admit to taking antidepressants these days, less so ECT. That terrible portrayal in One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest has a lot to answer for, and it probably does pop into people’s minds, even though it’s far from the truth. But the other thing I find hard is that those who oppose ECT can be vituperative, accusing clinicians and others of deliberate attempts to harm. It is very unsettling; when I read their comments, I do find myself worrying that I may yet develop further brain disease. They spread fear and hurt, and it doesn’t help anyone. It’s not just one-way though; clinicians who dismiss or minimise adverse effects too glibly don’t help either, and each provokes the other.

There are no goods and bads with ECT, no rights or wrongs. The decisions should be clinical, not moral. As a clinician, I am satisfied that it’s a very good treatment, but I will never be complacent. As a patient, I feel the same. What I do want is more acknowledgment of the memory problems and associated distress, and more support for people going through treatment. Until we have another better treatment that works rapidly, I think there will be a place for ECT. For most people, the problems will be tolerable if well explained and monitored. And that’s the key. Being upfront about the downsides builds trust. By exploring those things together, the patient will feel reassured, and the doctor will have done their duty. As doctors, we have a duty to explain, and patients have a right to knowledge and reassurance.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A couple dance on top of a bus shelter to the music of a nearby accordion player. Children play in a boat, on a wall in a Lowestoft park. And by the beach huts in Cromer, a hermit crab with a placard reading, “Luxury rentals only” guards a pile of empty whelk shells from a huddle of homeless crabs.

A string of artworks that may or may not be by the pseudonymous graffiti artist Banksy have been discovered scattered along the East Anglian coast, raising the tantalising prospect that like everyone else who couldn’t get abroad this summer, he just went to Norfolk and hung around in bus shelters instead. “Is Banksy in Great Yarmouth?” ran the dream August headline, after a miniature cottage with his name sprayed on one side and “Go big or go home” on another was mysteriously added overnight to the resort’s Merrivale model village. Maybe it’s real, and maybe it isn’t, but it’s absolutely the sort of thing the British seaside is for.

Coastal towns get a miserable rap. Regardless of all that bracing sea air, they’re notorious hotbeds of poor health and low life expectancy (England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, is making tackling health inequalities in impoverished seaside towns a priority, post-Covid) and lagging educational performance. I last went to Yarmouth on the eve of lockdown, to see a school serving a deeply deprived neighbourhood that had been transformed from chaotic to thriving; but the kids still needed more decent local jobs to move into. And while some coastal towns are struggling with the loss of both a once booming industry – fishing in Lowestoft or Grimsby, bucket-and-spade tourism in Skegness or Scarborough – for others, it’s prosperity itself that is the problem.

“Don’t feed the locals; they bite,” read the handwritten sign by a pretty Cornish cove this summer, where holidaymakers were spreading towels around fishing boats drawn up on the shingle. A joke, though only just; second homers and wealthy retirees have long monopolised the prettier bits of Devon and Cornwall, and this year’s holiday feeding frenzy saw reports of landlords evicting long-term local tenants in order to cash in on renting to tourists via Airbnb. A post-Covid exodus of Londoners realising that remote working allows them to earn a city wage from the seaside, meanwhile, risks breeding resentment among priced-out locals along the Kent and Sussex coasts. But these tales of loss aren’t the only ones to be told, as a staycation summer gives fading seaside glories one last chance to reintroduce themselves.

Recently I had some time to kill in Bangor, Gwynedd, although that’s a story for another day. Someone kindly showed me around its botanic gardens, a hidden delight known only to local dog walkers, where luscious fresh passion fruits grow under glass. The town’s high street has arguably seen better days, but it has a lovely pier reaching out towards Anglesey, and for 50p you can spend as long as you like watching the tide come in through the gaps in the boards beneath your feet. There’s a cafe serving rhubarb crumble ice cream, but I was drawn to a line of plaques along the railing, mostly marking departed loved ones, including one for “Florence Magdalen Feasey, who swam the Menai Strait in 1929 aged 15 years.”

There is no mention of a spouse or children; either Florence never married, or rather thrillingly, that one great adventure was the way she chose to be defined. (The crossing from the Welsh mainland to Anglesey is less than a mile but notoriously dangerous, with fast running tides and swirling whirlpools.) Whoever she was, Florence must have been fearless.

And that’s what British seaside towns excel at: surprises. They’re all about the unexpected, the quirky, even the subversive; places for mooching around and stumbling across things, boasting a certain indomitable spirit born of constantly having to think of stuff to do in the rain. And that makes them natural wellsprings of creativity. (It’s probably no coincidence that the maybe-Banksys have appeared just as Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft are jointly bidding to become the 2025 UK City of Culture; art’s role in economic regeneration is not to be underestimated, given the Tracey Emin effect in Margate further down the east coast.)

British seaside towns may never realistically trump the Med as places to spend a sun-soaked fortnight. But they could make perfect short breaks for Britons in a climate-conscious era in which jetting off to Rome or Paris for the weekend feels too wanton, and their residents deserve better than a future oscillating wildly between unsustainable property booms and crumbling neglect.

Two years ago, a select committee report on regenerating seaside towns highlighted the success of Seaminster, a once-shabby resort that learned to make a virtue of its “romance and its grit”, after recognising that behind the tatty amusement arcades and stink of seaweed lay a place of “creativity, unconventionality and misrule”. A journalist who had grown up there was enlisted to promote it. A music festival, film-making co-operative, fast broadband and sustainable energy projects did their bit. Someone even built a sauna on a beach. The only snag, the committee admitted, was that Seaminster was fictional; it had completely made it up. But like the maybe-Banksys, if it was fake it was strangely convincing; a glimpse of what could happen given enough imagination. And who doesn’t long for them both to be real?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A Tory chancellor eager for austerity will struggle to get away with echoing George Osborne’s mendacious old trope that the country has “maxed out its credit card”. Whatever the Treasury’s debts, there is no public appetite for retrenchment, according to the latest Ipsos Mori poll. Two-thirds want to pay higher taxes to go towards social care and easing NHS waiting lists. What’s more, there is virtually no difference between Labour and Tory voters on this. A mere 9% want spending cuts to pay off the deficit.

Voters’ apparent willingness to pay more tax to spend on vital things is encouraging. The NHS always touches a political nerve – as anyone might fall under a bus. But it’s heartening to find that 60% of respondents are prepared to pay higher taxes to reach the net zero target for carbon emissions – and that includes 52% of Tory voters. Not long ago, using the R-word – redistribution – was, pollsters warned, a vote-killer, yet now 51% are ready to pay more tax for “levelling up” regional inequalities. This goodwill fluctuates slightly, but, says Ipsos Mori’s Gideon Skinner, the rejection of austerity that began in 2015 has grown and “the Covid response has encouraged big state action”. Chancellor Rishi Sunak is battling for cuts, so why is he so popular? “Voters still associate him with furloughing largesse,” says Skinner, helped by his “eat out to help out” scheme. But that can’t survive his autumn spending review permafrost plans for three years ahead.

Small-state Thatcherism is being blown back by US intellectual headwinds, as Joe Biden’s $1 trillion infrastructure bill passed through the Senate this week with bipartisan support – with another lavish new deal-style bill on social support to come. All the UK’s political divides are there in the polling, but on spending they are less deep than you might expect. Young people are considerably keener to pay to reach net zero, as their future chances of survival burn up before their eyes. Older people are keener to raise tax for their social care than for the planet. But across the board, a majority want more tax and spend on three essentials: NHS and social care, climate catastrophe and greater equality.

But they are pessimistic that the government will actually do what they want: only a quarter expect an increase in spending. On this, sadly, they are right: the Institute for Fiscal Studies shows spending plans at the last budget cut another 8% from all but three departments.

Here’s the Boris Johnson conundrum: as he raises airy expectations in verbose speeches on climate action or levelling up, he may indeed be influencing voters, Tory as well as Labour. He never mentions any price to pay: voters seem to be ahead of him here. But, swayed by his party’s right wing more than by the polling, he retreats from every hard choice. The FT on Thursday reports that he is backing off his pledge to ban gas boilers by 2035, though domestic buildings cause 21% of UK greenhouse gas emissions and the CBI’s own heat commission says new gas boilers must go by 2025. This week’s analysis by the conservation charity WWF of the UK budget finds Johnson spending many times more on measures that increase emissions than on policies to tackle the climate crisis. Hardly a day passes without data revealing the yawning gaps between his windy “targets” and his actions.

No one was any the wiser on what his “levelling up” meant after his airily policy-free speech last month. But he was good at evoking the shocking depths of deprivation: “A woman from York has on average a decade longer of healthy life expectancy than a woman from Doncaster.” “Why should income per head in Monmouthshire be 50% higher than in Blaenau Gwent?” Why do “two-thirds of graduates from our top 30 universities end up in London”? And a majority agree that these are problems that need solving. But no, no, of course he won’t “decapitate the tall poppies” of southern seats such as Chesham and Amersham in his “mission to unite and level up across the whole UK”.

He may hope emotive rhetoric disguises inaction, as he re-announced small sums and offered tiny gifts, such as £50m for football pitches, nowhere near replacing the 710 cut in the last round of austerity. Preposterous metaphors – “the ketchup of catch-up” – may obscure FT data revealing his £4.8bn “levelling-up” fund funnels cash to Tory seats by ignoring measures of deprivation, so richer Richmond (MP: Sunak) and Newark (MP: Robert Jenrick) rank above Barnsley and Salford for pork barrelling. But opening a new coal mine just as Cop26 approaches, or cutting £20 a week from the lowest earners’ universal credit, would blow against those prevailing winds of public opinion stirred by himself.

In that speech Johnson unwisely referred to how the former East Germany now has a higher GDP per capita than north-east England, Yorkshire, the East Midlands, Wales or Northern Ireland. But he said nothing of what that epic act of levelling up cost the Germans. Over 31 years, charging an annual 5.5% “solidarity surtax” on every citizen, they have transferred $2tn from west to east. The results are phenomenal: the economic power of the east, where only 10% had telephones in 1989, rose from 43% to 75% of the west’s. Even so, young easterners still feel left behind, earning 17% less and filling only 1.7% of Germany’s top jobs. Even if not yet fully levelled up, the east overtaking our poor regions is a fine example of what a country can do to unify and equalise. But absolutely nothing about Johnson or his ministers suggests they intend a fraction of that heavy lifting, just a little window dressing with some Boris-branded show projects. They plan none of the devolution of money and powers that research by the IPPR thinktank shows could achieve better results.

Polling suggests a majority of voters are out ahead of this government, more willing to take these gigantic challenges seriously. How much are they willing to pay? That’s unknowable. But Johnson and his soundbites may be encouraging people to want a far more ambitious country than he and his small-statist cabinet would ever tolerate.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Newcastle city council’s decision to add two plaques to its memorial to the Boer war of 1899-1902 has triggered a feverish reaction. One plaque will contextualise the colonial history of the war; the other will reflect the views of local residents. No sooner was the change announced than the right’s “whack-a-woke” culture warriors descended upon the city. But the council’s engagement with the legacy of the Boer war – and Britain’s blood-soaked role in it – should be welcomed by anyone who values serious and honest engagement with history.

The monument in question lists the names of 370 fallen soldiers from the north-east, participants in a war in which more than 20,000 imperial combatants died and many more suffered. It is only one of many similar monuments that shape Britain’s urban landscape. Some celebrate military heroes; others, such as the one in Newcastle, focus more on ordinary soldiers and volunteers. It features a figure symbolising Northumbria gesturing upwards towards a beneficent winged statue of Victory; to locals it is known as the “Mucky Angel” – as clear an indication as any that the meanings of public statues change over time, not least when they hide in plain sight.

Almost all historians are agreed that this conflict was not a “good war”. It was nevertheless a consequential one for all sides. For the British, it capped the era of Victorian high-imperialism and prompted profound political introspection. For South Africans it amounted to an undeclared civil war that defined the contours of a newly emergent nation state. It was a war for South Africa.

British imperialists had long hankered after the gold and diamond mines of South Africa. Oxford historian and conservative moralist JA Froude thought the methods used by the British to gain control of the diamond mines in the 1870s were “perhaps the most discreditable in the annals of English colonial history”. Whether or not mineral wealth is sufficient explanation for the war, it is hard to imagine that Britain would have committed so many resources in the absence of these riches. The war formed the subject of JA Hobson’s influential theory of capitalist imperialism. It inspired volunteers from around the world to join the fight against British imperialism. Newspapers, journals, films and celebrity testimony added to the drama. The relief of the besieged town of Mafeking in May 1900 prompted rowdy, jingoistic celebrations and gave rise to a new word: to “maffick”. The commander of the British forces, Robert Baden-Powell, became a national hero and went on to found the Scout movement.

Among the black population in Mafeking was Sol Plaatje, whose published diary of the siege details life in a racially segregated town where rations were not dispensed on an equal basis. A talented writer, translator of Shakespeare into Setswana, and a founder of the African National Congress, Plaatje participated in delegations to Britain in unsuccessful efforts to persuade British politicians to honour black loyalty and patriotism with citizenship rights. Mahatma Gandhi, who served the British cause as a stretcher-bearer in Natal, then a separate British colony, also learned important political lessons about the fragility of imperial promises from his time there.

During the guerrilla phase of the war, which commenced after the occupation of Pretoria in 1900, the Boers used their commando skills to fight behind British lines. In response, Lord Kitchener adopted scorched earth policies. Farms were destroyed and Boer women and children forced into concentration camps. Starvation and uncontrolled outbreaks of disease accounted for the deaths of some 30,000 women and children – far exceeding the number of Boer men killed in battle. As many as 20,000 black South Africans, often Boer servants, also died in concentration camps under British control. Outrageous comments by Jacob Rees-Mogg in 2019 defending the camps exemplify the tenuous grasp on history displayed by many of this government’s most fervent culture warriors.

The myth of the white man’s war carried over into a white man’s peace. With the conclusion of hostilities in 1902, a shattered South Africa entered an era of reconstruction. Oxford-educated elites sent to administer the country helped to devise the ideology and structures of racial segregation that, after 1948, were made even more systematic as apartheid. Britain basked in the glow of its magnanimity and benefited by trading sovereignty for the maintenance of vital economic interests. Jan Smuts, a leader of the Boers, helped to formulate the Commonwealth and took South Africa into two world wars as a British ally. The principal losers from reconstruction were black South Africans whose franchise, citizenship and land rights were sacrificed in the name of white unity – as fragile as that turned out to be.

In Britain, anxieties about the fitness of working-class recruits and volunteers fed into broader political initiatives designed, in today’s parlance, at “levelling up”. This was the premise of Edwardian “social imperialism”, which created a favourable environment for free school meals, maternity benefit and health insurance. The horrors of the concentration camps as reported by Quaker pacifist Emily Hobhouse had a discernible effect on the liberal conscience.

The Boer war has been all but forgotten by many in Britain. But its legacy – the arrogance of Britain’s imperial past, the suffering inflicted upon South Africans, and the social reforms it engendered on British soil – merit remembrance. The preparedness of Newcastle council to reconsider public monuments while honouring its dead can only be applauded.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“There’s going to be no circumstance where you’ll see people being lifted off the roof of an embassy of the United States from Afghanistan,” Joe Biden declared earlier this year, referencing the fall of Saigon at the end of the Vietnam war. The Taliban are not yet at the gates of Kabul. But two decades after the US toppled the Islamist militants, it is scrambling to evacuate its nationals, as are its allies. On Wednesday, US officials warned that Afghanistan’s government could fall in as little as 90 days. Since then the Taliban have seized Herat, Kandahar and Lashkar Gah; on Friday they took four more provincial capitals.

Such developments have a momentum of their own. The Taliban have captured more equipment as troops have surrendered, and as others turn tail, fewer see the point or hope in staying on and fighting. As resistance collapses, even the British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, is seeking to distance the UK from its great ally, describing the Trump-negotiated withdrawal agreement as a mistake and a “rotten deal” which Britain tried to resist. Members of the wealthy Afghan political elite, many of whom prospered by plundering the country, have already departed or will do so with ease. But Afghans have been betrayed not only by their military and politicians, but by the long-term mistakes of the US and its allies and the abrupt and ill-planned rush for the exit.

For all the costs of the US intervention, it allowed the emergence of a generation who hoped and strove for a better and freer future in their country – and who now face losing everything. While Taliban representatives in Doha attempt to rebrand themselves as more moderate, fighters on the ground are forcing girls into marriage and women from their jobs at gunpoint. A humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding, with more than 3.5 million Afghans displaced, but the UN appeal is less than half funded.

Civil society activists, who are highly vulnerable to Taliban retaliation, must be given refuge abroad. Others, too, desperately need shelter but understand they are unlikely to find it. Shockingly, even as the Taliban sweep through Afghanistan, six EU nations have been seeking to force refugees back to the country.

The Taliban want international recognition as a government this time, not the pariah status of the 1990s. But even if they truly engage with the multiparty talks in Qatar, it is unclear whether forces in Afghanistan will comply with their negotiators in Doha. Countries that have enjoyed seeing the US chastened should ask themselves whether they really want chaos and a wave of refugees. There is grave fear of a return to the unrelenting civil war of the 1990s, with multiple players using the country as a proxy for other contests. The international community should do all it can to hold them back.

But even as American politicians talk about Afghanistan, they are talking past the country. The fall of Saigon – two years after US troops withdrew from South Vietnam – is invoked by the likes of Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell as an image of a humbled America, rather than a betrayal of promises made. Even when remarks are purportedly directed to Afghans – as with Mr Biden’s ill-judged exhortation to “fight for themselves, fight for their nation”, which sounded at best like hollow encouragement and at worst a rebuke – they are really intended for the domestic audience. For the Biden administration, this is a credibility issue. There are long-term security implications for the US, as for Europe, if Afghanistan once more becomes a refuge for terrorism. But those who treat this as another parable of American status should remember that the Afghan people face not humiliation, but disaster.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ten years ago at Wembley, FC Barcelona won football’s Champions League with a performance that established an absolute hegemony in the world’s most popular sport. As Sir Alex Ferguson conceded, the Catalan team had given his Manchester United side “a hiding”. But Barcelona’s hold on the global imagination has been about more than trophies and victories.

Arguably the most famous football club in the world, Barcelona is owned not by an oligarch but by its members, and run by a democratically elected president. For years, the team’s shirts bore the Unicef logo, rather than the name of a commercial sponsor. On the pitch in the early 2010s, the football reached a level of choral beauty never witnessed before, orchestrated by a trio of diminutive homegrown geniuses: Xavi, Andres Iniesta and, first among equals, Lionel Messi. Cups, ethics, rootedness and aesthetics: Barcelona had it all. “More than a club”, as the well-known slogan has it.

This week, as the European football season gets under way, the golden age ended in tears. A distraught Messi has been forced to leave the club he joined at the age of 13 to join Paris Saint-Germain. Ballooning debt – only partly a result of revenue lost during the pandemic – meant that Barcelona could no longer afford to pay even half the wages of the world’s best player and stay within the Spanish football league’s spending rules. The grief of Messi’s departure follows a disastrous spring when the club’s reputation was irreparably tarnished by the cash-driven decision to sign up to the aborted European Super League cartel.

The fall from grace of an institution that has provided such inspiration over the years is sad to witness. The unhappy, spendthrift reign of former club president, Josep Maria Bartomeu, who resigned last year, did much of the damage. But, in a tragic twist of fate, Messi’s extraordinary, peerless talent also turned into a problem. Barcelona simply became too dependent upon their Argentinian superstar. In his timely new book, Barça, the writer Simon Kuper records that Messi’s contractual earnings reportedly came to more than €555m (£472m) between 2017 and 2021. This scarcely credible level of reward drove up the salaries of teammates and new arrivals, making them difficult to then offload. After Iniesta and Xavi retired, an overpaid team aged and declined. The sumptuous passing rhythms refined and perfected in the early 2010s were gradually ditched in favour of giving the ball to Messi. His influence became more powerful than that of a series of coaches who came and went. When Covid tipped finances over the edge, directors leapt at the idea of joining the wildly unpopular European Super League to escape the mess that had been created.

Barcelona’s style of play, at its mesmerising best, was the sporting equivalent of a sparkling conversation. Passes were exchanged in the manner of prompts or invitations, receiving fluent and inventive responses. The debate often ended with the ball in the opposition’s net. But having established a culture of collective excellence, a single individual became so pre-eminent that a great institution lost its way. For both club and player, let’s hope the new season is a happier one.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What term do you want to search? Search with google
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A correspondent asks whether there is any demand for Latin among secondary students (Letters, 8 August). Indeed there is. Over the past 10 years, the charity I co-founded, Classics for All, has supported the reintroduction of Latin, Greek and classical civilisation to 1,000 state primary and secondary schools.

At primary school, pupils have loved learning Latin, coming to it with no preconceptions about elitism or difficulty. They move on to secondary school expecting Latin to continue. The first cohort of students is now studying classics at university. Demand built, and it is being met. Far from being a dead language, Latin today is a living subject that broadens cultural understanding and educational horizons, and, perhaps most importantly, is truly enjoyed by thousands of pupils across the UK.

Sarah Jackson

Founding chair, Classics for All

I disagree with the letter saying Latin is a dead language and shouldn’t be taught in state schools. With increasing numbers of pupils who have trouble with English as a first language – and this applies to pupils everywhere – Latin teaches, above all, grammar: the construction of sentences, subordinate clauses, and punctuation as a result of the latter. It is, in general, a grounding force in an increasingly inarticulate world.

Why not have Latin (and maybe for those who want to go further, its attendant classical literary texts and poetry) to teach a better articulacy subtly, without those terrible grammar rules and analysis of clauses that pupils in the 1960s, for example, were subjected to?

Patricia McCarthy

Mayfield, East Sussex

At my school in the 1960s, I was able to take domestic science and Latin to GCE level. Latin was a prerequisite for university entry at that time, but I have never regretted taking it. It develops logic and is a fascinating tool for unpicking the meaning of words in English, and a key to learning other European languages.

Domestic science also stood me in excellent stead, providing a basic understanding of food science and a lifetime’s enthusiasm for cooking. Both subjects should be included in all school timetables as being valuable, relevant life skills. Surely that is what education is for? By the way, two years of German wasn’t entirely wasted either; I still retain a smattering when lucky enough to be able to travel.

Vivien Scorer

Southwell, Nottinghamshire

I am a retired teacher of Latin (and Greek and ancient history) in more than one comprehensive school. Your correspondent does not realise what a bedrock Latin is for understanding and appreciating modern Romance languages (Italian, Spanish, French, etc) and how necessary it is for some professions – archeology for one, not to mention its use with Greek in science. I have several old pupils who have done very well in life using their knowledge of a language which covered much of the world.

Mary Vicary

Church Stretton, Shropshire

I had the good fortune to be taught Latin in the 1950s by a dedicated teacher at my local comprehensive in Douglas, Isle of Man. This changed my life. I went on to study classics at Newnham College, Cambridge, then read law and had a career. The popularity of Mary Beard’s TV programmes is only one instance of how these languages never die.

Sylvia Freedman

London
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Prof Alan Finlayson is right to question Labour’s approach to values when it is treated as a hollow exercise in developing “clearer, sharper, more uplifting messaging” (Labour’s preoccupation with ‘values’ is a basic political error, 6 August).

Simply communicating Labour party values is unlikely to win an electoral majority, particularly if it appears as an opportunistic alignment with the perceived values of the electorate. That would indeed amount to abandoning political leadership in the hope of gaining short-term party popularity.

However, the notion that political success is grounded in meeting demands while ignoring values is to miss the point. Values and policies to meet demands are not only inseparable but sequential. Effective political alliances or coalitions are not culturally monolithic, nor do they necessarily share a common political philosophy. But they do possess a consensus on core values, which in turn underpins and shapes their policy responses to the demands of the electorate.

The triumph of Vote Leave was based on a powerful, political consensus that the source of the UK’s social and economic problems was membership of the EU. Indeed, the Vote Leave campaign was able to frame the narrative in which that consensus was articulated. The challenge for the Labour party is how to forge alternative, convincing policies that meet the demands of an electorate, large sections of which no longer share their core values.

Dr Norman Brady

Norwich

Alan Finlayson is spot on in his critique of Labour’s obsession with “values”, which are meaningless to the electorate if they are not operationalised into consistent policies. This doesn’t mean the vast smorgasbord of goodies offered by Jeremy Corbyn ahead of the 2019 election. It does mean, for example, converting a belief in equality of access, opportunity and outcomes to match the best standards in northern Europe through effective wealth taxation, including a windfall tax on the super-rich, a land value tax and progressive property and asset taxation.

There are many other examples of populist, centre-left demands that would have traction with the electorate, especially if Labour had the vision to seek an electoral alliance with the Greens and the Lib Dems to reverse the Brexit catastrophe, seek proportional representation to end Tory electoral dictatorships and promote an urgent green industrial revolution. The socially conservative, over-60s, ex-Labour “red wall” voters have been lost and no amount of “listening” will bring them back. Labour’s future lies with the neglected under-40s.

Philip Wood

Kidlington, Oxfordshire
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The increase in medical school places might be causing understandable challenges for universities, but training more doctors is nothing but a positive development for the future of the NHS and our health (Grade inflation forces ministers to pay for extra medical school places, 5 August).

We simply do not have enough doctors, which means poorer quality care, excessive workloads and higher levels of burnout. If we fail to ensure a sustainable supply of doctors, the NHS will struggle to meet future demand and patients will suffer.

This is a major problem in mental health, where the pandemic has increased demand and a lack of psychiatrists has been threatening the government’s ambitious long-term plans for improving and expanding services.

We need bold action, not quick fixes for one-off problems. The government must increase the number of medical school places to 15,000, allocating new places focusing on shortage specialties, such as psychiatry. The future of the NHS depends on it.

Dr Adrian James

President, Royal College of Psychiatrists, London
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@How can pay cuts for people working from home be justified when money is being saved on desks, staff facilities and office space (Civil servants in London could see pay cut if they resist return to office, 9 August)? Surely working from home is saving the huge cost of running large offices. Or are we missing the point here – that pressure is being applied by property owners, developers and politicians who will all lose out if we vacate big towns and cities?

David Bruton

Colchester, Essex

After guides to the Euros, Olympics and the Premier League, can we look forward to a supplement for readers who are mainly interested in things other than sport? Perhaps a guide to classical music festivals and events?

Elizabeth Swinbank

York

I doubt that those of us who suffer severe tinnitus would find bellringing ticking all the boxes for health and wellbeing (Letters, 11 August). Some years ago my then GP called the condition “the bells of hell”.

Jean Jackson

Seer Green, Buckinghamshire

My late father was the headteacher of a junior school and always spoke to each child on their first day at school (Letters, 12 August). “What is your name?” he would ask. One shy child was very hesitant in answering so he further prompted with: “What does your father call you?” “You little bugger” was the immediate and somewhat startling response.

Richard Ward

Cobham, Surrey

“Rishi Sunak and Boris Johnson leaving Downing Street” (photo caption, Journal, 12 August). If only.

David Cooper

Nafferton, east Yorkshire
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I was very moved by Steve Mallen’s story on founding the Zero Suicide Alliance (‘I don’t intend to let my son down twice’: the bereaved father trying to end suicide, 11 August), the more so because our daughter is only alive today due to the right person happening to be in the right place and able to say the right thing at the right time. During her treatment we experienced the very best and the very worse the NHS has to offer. Putting aside the long waiting times, the inconsistencies in care, the administrative errors and the breathtakingly brutal shift from adolescent to adult services, the thing that stands out is the very limited evidence that all the expensive drugs and hospital stays actually help young people.

A fundamental rethink is needed in how we respond to distress among young people. Just as Mallen describes, sparing the time while walking in a wood to talk to a woman who was upset. Quite often what is needed is not drugs and being locked away, but time and the right words.

Name and address supplied
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Balmoral: “Located in Royal Deeside,” we learn from the royal family website, this gigantic granite folly is “one of two personal and private residences owned by The Royal Family, unlike the Royal Palaces, that belong to the Crown”. So, other than exceptionally cold, according to Cherie Blair – and described by one royal biographer as “gruesome, ugly and dull” – perfect for any member of that family in need of complete privacy.

As for a royal who might require a personal and private residence in which to avoid, for instance, being served with papers alleging the royal sexual abuse of a trafficked US minor, it’s hard to imagine anywhere better.

What is Prince Andrew up to inside Balmoral? Thanks to The Crown and various memorable accounts and photographs – one shows David Cameron almost succeeding in his bid to re-roof the place at a competitive rate – we can easily picture him huddled by a two-bar fire, struggling with a jigsaw puzzle or killing one of the symbolic wounded stags with which this vast estate abounds. At one time, you might even, in the picturesquely swirling mists, bump into an as-yet unprosecuted child sex predator; the late Jeffrey Epstein, Prince Andrew’s friend, was reportedly a guest there in 1999. Perhaps he felt at home with the dead animal heads and antlers, his own Manhattan home being, as Julie K Brown writes in Perversion of Justice, her impressive account of exposing Epstein’s crimes, “dark and ominous”. The interior featured individually framed glass eyeballs, with one room he called “the leather room” and another the “dungeon”.

It remains obscure, however, why the prince enjoyed staying with this charmless and sinister – even if you never spotted a succession of young girls – financial adviser who, when not being massaged, liked to share his dream of seeding a master race with his DNA. Although Epstein’s mysteriously acquired wealth was convenient when, in 2010 (after he had been jailed for soliciting sex with minors), Fergie needed a loan.

As for Balmoral today, even with attractions including his ex-wife and thousands of doomed grouse, Andrew surely can’t hide there for ever or not without addressing the civil lawsuit launched last week by Virginia Roberts Giuffre. The most recognisable alleged victim of Epstein’s sexual assaults and trafficking, she says she was sexually abused by the prince in 2001. After escaping a miserable home, foster and institutional care and imprisonment by a trafficker, Giuffre appears to have been the sort of isolated “character”, as Prince Charles calls struggling teenagers, that some of the best known royal charities were set up to support. Epstein liked to pose as a benefactor, varying threats and intimidation with promises to pay for college or to set up his victims with modelling careers.

Prince Charles makes it known that for Andrew, whose endurance of “slings and arrows” elicits his sympathy, there is now no return to public life. Since royal family life is routinely public, that could mean anything. Andrew is welcome, his name uncleared, at the semi-public retreat to Balmoral and presumably afterwards in his subsidised mansion on a crown estate. You wonder what he’d have to do to forfeit these signifiers of royal approval. Trade in horsemeat? Because a family brand so invested in children’s charities and whose image relies deeply on this connection is unlikely to escape contamination, as more details emerge, from Andrew’s closeness to a prolific paedophile and to that paedophile’s associate, Ghislaine Maxwell. Her trial, on charges of procuring girls for Epstein, is due this autumn.

Are they aware inside Balmoral of what Epstein, their former party guest, did to girls? Or just, as it increasingly appears, indifferent? In the United States, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology finally apologised, with resignations, for its shameful association with Epstein, and MIT had not, at least, formerly advertised itself as the saviour of the young and dispossessed: his prey.

From at least the time of Prince Philip, British royals have identified themselves as, especially, protectors of children and young people: an apolitical, attractive, largely amenable demographic that might grow up to feel loyal. If Diana is often portrayed, as with the new statue and the Diana award, as having a special vocation, the Duke of Edinburgh awards preceded her, followed by Charles’s Prince’s Trust, Prince Harry’s Sentebale, the Cambridges’ Place2be, Kate’s early childhood foundation and, according to her mythology, Sarah Ferguson’s work as a “philanthropist for children”. The Queen is patron of the Scouts and Princess Anne of Save the Children, which fights child trafficking. Charles last year appointed Katy Perry a British Asian Trust ambassador against the same crime. Were it not for the Giuffre lawsuit, there might last week have been more coverage of William’s support for another child-focused royal scheme, Future Forward, to “unlock the potential of young people”.

His uncle has previously dismissed, despite the photograph of him holding her side, Giuffre’s account of being trafficked to him when she was 17 – actually on the old side for Epstein. His preference, Brown reports, was for “waif-like prepubescent girls from troubled backgrounds who needed money and had little or no sexual experience”. Giuffre looked old enough to get into, for instance, Tramp, where the prince, in his catastrophic interview with Emily Maitlis, denied accompanying her.

Absurd as they were, Andrew’s assorted excuses and pizza alibi offered the royal family and its supporters an exculpatory narrative, to the point of allowing Harry to replace him – “recollections may vary” – as the official blood fabulist, bent on spoiling the Queen’s forthcoming jubilee. Andrew, in contrast, was restored to us this year, eulogising his father: “We’ve lost almost the grandfather of the nation.” Which makes him – what – the nation’s creepy uncle? Or worse?

The longer Andrew is silent on the Giuffre lawsuit, the more his immediate family may want to review, if only for consistency’s sake, its traditional concern for marginalised young people. Maybe old ones would be less trouble.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Garden Museum in London is running an architectural competition for the design of a pavilion for St Mary’s Gardens, a leafy enclave next to its premises in a converted church in Lambeth, south London. I am a member of the interview panel. The winner has yet to be chosen, but I can reveal that it won’t be a submission from one Minecraft builder that shows a blue-tinged skyscraper that occupies the entire footprint of the garden.

It comes with a justification based on the menace of “very bad” grey squirrels to Britain’s ecology: “How do we stop grey squirrel[s]?” it asks. “Squirrels eat nuts. Nuts grow on trees… if we remove the trees we stop the grey squirrels,” the submission explains. So “to remove trees we build a big tower. It will also sell for a lot of money because it’s so big.” It ends with a sop to whoever might be troubled by the loss of green space: “It can also have a garden on the roof.” It’s meant to be a joke and, as I say, it won’t win. But it deserves some kind of a prize: as a parody of the bogus arguments whereby towers are allowed to trample over British cities, it’s genius.

Question of balance

London’s Central Hill estate, designed by Rosemary Stjernstedt. Photograph: Sam Mellish/In Pictures via Getty Images

At the other, southern end of the borough of Lambeth stands (at least for now) Central Hill, a council estate whose stepped terraces were skilfully and thoughtfully arranged over steep slopes that face back towards the centre of the capital, in a location close to where the Crystal Palace once stood. The design arranged blocks of homes so as to preserve mature trees and create quiet, informal enclaves. It was completed in 1975, three years before Alexandra Road and Branch Hill, council estates in the borough of Camden that also use stepped terraces to create a variety of spaces.

The latter two are listed buildings but Historic England has just refused, for the second time, to recommend listing for Central Hill, for reasons that don’t seem to make a lot of sense. The design was “not particularly innovative”, it said in its first refusal, even though it predates the Camden examples. The “level of threat”, it says now, “cannot be determined”, even though the borough of Lambeth has clearly stated its intention to demolish the estate.

One difference between the projects was that Central Hill was – unusually for the time – designed by a woman, Rosemary Stjernstedt. The other two were designed by men. Campaigners for Central Hill’s listing say that approximately 0.015% of listed buildings were designed by women, so Historic England has just passed up an opportunity, however modest, to redress the balance. One architectural construction its decision does preserve, it seems, is the glass ceiling.

Tucker takes aim

Fox News anchor Tucker Carlson has praised Hungary’s ‘pretty buildings’. Photograph: Richard Drew/AP

The Fox News host Tucker Carlson, on a recent trip to Hungary to extol the regime of Viktor Orbán, took time to praise the country’s “pretty buildings”. In America, he said, there is “ugly architecture, brutalist architecture, glass and steel architecture, Mies van der Rohe architecture”, which sets out to “dehumanise us”. Dehumanisation, he said, is the “act of convincing people that they don’t matter”. Perhaps he should have a word with his hero, Donald Trump, who built quite a few structures in his career as a property developer that, objectively, are built of steel and glass and, subjectively, might be considered ugly. On second thoughts, maybe not: I’d hate to think what Trump’s idea of “pretty” would be.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Office for National Statistics Covid infection survey estimates that, either through vaccination or infection, an extraordinary 94% of adults now have antibodies to Sars-CoV-2.

So why are cases increasing and why does vaccine star Prof Sir Andrew Pollard say herd immunity for Covid-19 is “mythical”?

The reproduction number “R” is the average number of people infected by someone infected with Sars-CoV-2. If everyone in the population were susceptible, as in the start of an epidemic, this is labelled R0 (the basic reproduction number). For “vanilla” Sars-CoV-2, R0 was about three; with the Delta variant, it is about seven.

Suppose that among these seven people who would – on average – be infected, six were immune, the virus would only get passed on to one new person and the epidemic would stop growing. In this scenario, R would be effectively one. So, in theory, when 1 – 1/R0 of the population are immune, we reach herd immunity, which for Sars-CoV-2 is 6/7 = 86% of the population.

So what’s the problem? First, the neat formula does not describe real life: immunity is not uniformly spread and people do not mix evenly. Second, including children, the proportion of the population with antibodies is likely to be less than 94%. Third, the formula requires sterilising immunity: stopping infection in potential hosts. For this kind of virus, vaccinations reduce but do not eliminate the risk of infection, subsequent transmission and severe disease.

Sars-CoV-2 differs from measles, which has a very high R0 of about 16, but for which full vaccination or survived infections probably bestow lifelong immunity. Of course, measles can still spread when those lacking immunity are close, such as when young people who had not been vaccinated following the MMR scare in the early 00s grew up and started gathering at music festivals.

Sars-CoV-2 is becoming endemic, meaning continued recurrent outbreaks, especially in communities with low levels of immunity. We shall all remain at some risk, which is a difficult message for those with extreme anxiety about Covid-19. But while herd immunity may be an unattainable goal, every step towards it helps.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What term do you want to search? Search with google
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sign up for the Week in Patriarchy, a newsletter on feminism and sexism sent every Saturday

Imagine no possessions? Easy if you’re Elon!

Elon Musk has an enormous rocket and a tiny house. Last year the multibillionaire (who is the second-richest person in the world) announced that he was going to sell off most of his physical possessions, including multiple mansions, and “will own no house”. He appears to have made good on much of that pledge and is now living in a $50,000, 375-square-foot, prefab home in Texas that he rents from his company SpaceX.

To say that Musk has “fans” is an understatement. He has devotees. The 50-year-old has an army of admirers, most of whom are young and male, who seem to believe that he is the second coming. Predictably, Musk’s new living arrangements have sparked an orgy of admiration from the MuskBros, who see it as another example of how their dear leader is selflessly – and modestly – saving the world. “Reminder: Elon Musk is the richest person globally with a net worth of $193B, and he lives in a $50k foldable home that he rents …” one guy gushed in a tweet that went viral. “Stop buying stuff you don’t need to impress people you don’t like.”

Now that last bit is very good advice, I’ll grant you that. But let’s not pretend Musk is living a simple and sustainable lifestyle, shall we? His new digs aren’t so much an actual home as a $50,000 office; I’m fairly confident he’s not entertaining his six children there, anyway. It’s easy to eschew possessions when you can afford to get your hands on whatever you want, whenever you want it. And while Musk may not technically own a home, his company effectively owns the village of Boca Chica where his house is located. SpaceX has been accused of ushering out the village’s residents, many of whom are retirees, and pressuring them to sell their homes. Public beaches are reportedly frequently closed with little warning when SpaceX is running tests. Musk has also taken the liberty of unofficially renaming Boca Chica “Starbase”. “For better or worse, Boca Chica belongs to Elon now,” TexasMonthly sighed.

I’ll give credit where it’s due, Musk’s carbon footprint is low by billionaire standards (which isn’t saying much). Bill Gates, for example, who is trying to turn himself into a thought-leader on the climate crisis, is responsible for far more emissions. Still, it’s more than a little nauseating to watch a billionaire – whose wealth rocketed during a global pandemic – being venerated for living modestly. It’s also bizarre to watch him boasting about not owning property during a housing crisis. Thanks to decades of trickle-up economics, nearly half of American workers don’t earn enough to afford a one-bedroom rental, let alone buy a house. Musk wants us to think he is using his immense, and unconscionable, wealth to save the world. But billionaires like him are a result of the same greed that is helping to accelerate the climate crisis. If Musk really wanted to help the planet perhaps he should think less about his living arrangements and more about his tax arrangements.

Why Nasa’s female astronauts can’t fly as much as men

Not only are there are far fewer female astronauts than male ones, women are also not allowed to spend as much time in space. The Economist explains that’s because astronauts are exposed to huge amounts of radiation and women have been found to be at a higher risk of developing cancer than men when exposed to radiation. To limit health problems, Nasa has imposed gender-based career limits on radiation exposure that effective mean a woman can fly only 45-50% of the number of missions that a man can. To make things fairer Nasa wants to replace this system with a standard career limit.

What happened to America’s concern about Afghan women?

A humanitarian crisis is unfolding in Afghanistan and women and children will disproportionately suffer. “That’s not America’s problem,” Joe Biden has basically said. For 20 years the US has made a big song and dance about how it was largely in Afghanistan to liberate Afghan women and girls. This was always disingenuous, of course, but the US’s disastrously abrupt exit from the country underscores just how disingenuous it was. US involvement in Afghanistan has been a litany of disasters and was never going to end well. But Biden could certainly have tried to end it a little more thoughtfully, and less abruptly, than he did.

Female reporter being hunted by the Taliban tells her story

“Last week I was a news journalist,” writes an anonymous woman in the Guardian.

“Today I can’t write under my own name or say where I am from or where I am. My whole life has been obliterated in just a few days.”

Women can now wear trousers to the Henley Royal Regatta

Until this year the posh rowing event has mandated that women wear dresses and skirts “with a hemline below the knee”. After a petition by Oxford’s Women’s Boat Club, they’re graciously allowing women to expand their options.

Prince Andrew is not above the law

Like pretty much all of the powerful men connected to Jeffrey Epstein, Prince Andrew has faced some embarrassment but zero real consequences for cavorting with the convicted sex offender. Now, however, he is being sued in the US courts by Virginia Giuffre, who alleges the prince had sex with her when she was 17 while knowing she had been trafficked by Epstein, and it’s looking increasingly unlikely that he’ll be able to ignore the allegations.

Kathy Hochul will become the first female governor of New York

Hochul has said she will work to change the “toxic” work culture in office after Andrew Cuomo’s long overdue resignation. This isn’t the first time Hochul has stepped in to replace a man ousted because of scandal. A decade ago a sex scandal caused Representative Chris Lee to resign in disgrace and Hochul won an election to fill his vacancy. She was succeeded by another dodgy Chris: the Republican Chris Collins, who went to prison for securities fraud.

The week in pawtriarchy

Cats may have cultivated a reputation as aloof predators who secretly want to kill you, but they’re actually fluffy lovebugs who adore their humans. That’s according to a new study that has found cats see their humans as parents, maybe even more so than dogs. They’ve just a slightly odd way of showing it sometimes.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s hard to explain what it feels like when someone you thought you knew intimately starts to repeat conspiracy theories about the pandemic and vaccines. You don’t really grasp what’s happening immediately: it’s too vast and jarring a realisation to gulp down in one go. So you go through phases. First you clutch at straws. Perhaps it’s a bad joke, or they didn’t really mean it, or they’re just misinformed. Then you enter a stage of hot, disorienting rage and frustrated remonstration. Once that is spent, finally you cool off. But inside you is a leaden realisation that not only is this person you love putting their life at risk: perhaps you never really knew them at all.

People with the wildest theories about the pandemic can be found in countries even where most people don’t have access to the internet, cable TV or the shock jocks of commercial radio. A common impulse is to write off those espousing conspiracies, consigning them to the casualties claimed by WhatsApp groups, disinformation or silent mental health issues. These things may be true – but vaccine hesitancy is a symptom of broader failures. What all people wary of vaccines have in common, from Khartoum to Kansas, is their trust in the state has been eroded. Without understanding this, we will be fated to keep channelling our frustrations towards individuals without grasping why they have lost trust in the first place.

This mistrust can run so deep that people will trust almost any source of information other than the government. In my birthplace of Sudan, fewer than 1% of the population have been fully vaccinated and ventilators are even rarer than vaccines. The story is much the same in several other African countries, where vaccine availability is so poor that people will drop everything and head to a hospital based on nothing but a rumour that free shots are available that day. But for many other people, those rare lifesaving vaccines sound suspiciously like too much of a good thing.

When the first batch of donated vaccines was sent to Sudan earlier this year, two vulnerable members of my family rejected them because someone had started a rumour that an electrical power shortage in the country meant vaccines couldn’t be properly stored, and thus they would certainly have “gone off” and be harmful. I and others tried to convince them that, even if that were the case, the worst case scenario was the shots would be ineffective rather than actually harmful. Our efforts were futile. Still, I clutched at those straws, hoping that once the first shots were administered and no harm was reported, my relatives would come round. But their excuses were ready. The new batch was a “reject”, I was told, donated by western countries that sent the vaccines to Africa for some good PR rather than throwing them away.

This sounds like completely irrational behaviour, but in fact it is the opposite. In countries such as Sudan, nothing good, and certainly nothing free, comes from the state. The government is an extractive body that exists not to serve citizens, but to rifle through their pockets and charge them for going about their daily business. Corruption is endemic – from bribing one’s way through traffic violations, to being forced to use private hospitals because government cronies have hoarded medical technology. The state is something that you thrive in spite of. The government’s communication reflects this uneasy relationship. Officials speak to the public either to scold them or spread propaganda, and dissent is banned; in Egypt, doctors who contradicted the government’s account of the pandemic were arrested, while oxygen tanks ran out in intensive care units in Cairo.

How do you try to convince someone that the provision of free and effective Covid vaccines is the exception to the rules they have lived under their whole life? That vaccines are a sudden outbreak of generosity and competence? Suspicion is easily sown, because political systems don’t need to be fully authoritarian to sustain exploitative and dishonest regimes that breed mistrust. You might think there is a dodgy hidden profit motive behind Covid vaccines if you live in the US, for example, where there is extreme political resistance to publicly funded healthcare, an outrageously profitable healthcare and pharmaceutical industry that spends $306m (£221m) on lobbying a year, and exorbitant, unregulated pricing of everything from flu shots to holding your baby after birth. You might, if you lived in the UK, doubt the government’s assurances that the vaccine had been rigorously tested, after seeing senior officials appear to make up pandemic policies as they went along, dragging the nation with them through U-turns and lockdowns whose rules they did not follow themselves.

State failure breeds paranoia. And when trust in government breaks down, people turn to personal vigilance. This climate of hesitancy and wariness is heightened by poorly regulated media that trade in falsehoods. In the UK, for example, a misleading report about ethnic minority people being excluded from vaccine trials was resolved only with a short correction in a footnote.

Vaccine rejection doesn’t happen in a vacuum. It’s easier to dismiss hesitancy and conspiracies as unhinged behaviour; it makes us feel less unnerved by displays of unreason from those who we think are, or should be, rational people. Sure, among vaccine-hesitant people are those who are simply stubborn, misanthropic or selfish. But, just as the pandemic exploited the weaknesses of our economic and public health systems, vaccine hesitancy has exposed the weaknesses of states’ bond with their citizens. There are no easy answers for how to deal with those who repeat conspiracy theories and falsehoods, but scrutinising the systems that lost their trust is perhaps a good place to start.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Boris Johnson is a bit of a loner, socially and politically. He doesn’t have a clear group of friends. Neither does he hail from a particular political faction. The latter probably contributes in no small part to his electoral success: it’s hard to pigeonhole him, much to the frustration of his opponents. The former is useful, too, as he doesn’t end up just appointing his mates to jobs. He doesn’t really have mates, for one thing. He’s notoriously difficult to get truly close to.

But there are obvious disadvantages to not having your own tribe. One is that you don’t automatically have people who will come out to fight for you when you find yourself in the trenches. The other is that you find it hard to notice when there is a political problem brewing in your party because you haven’t really bonded with one part of it, let alone its noisy, often stubborn, entirety.

Johnson is going to feel both of these disadvantages particularly keenly this autumn. He is heading for a stand-off with many of his backbenchers on green issues as the UK prepares to host the Cop26 UN climate summit in Glasgow. It’s not clear whether he has realised quite how widespread the worry is within his own party about the direction he is heading in on climate change policies. It’s not even clear whether he understands what the nub of the problem is.

Because he is not a tribal politician, he is not fully aware of the delineation of the groups in his party on climate. The noisiest is the “net zero scrutiny group” (NZSG), set up by Steve Baker and led by South Thanet MP Craig Mackinlay. It is easy for casual observers – including the prime minister – to assume that this is the only source of scepticism about the measures needed to reach net zero. It isn’t.

What they aren’t, according to Mackinlay, is a bunch of climate change deniers dressing up their irritation with this agenda as serious scrutiny of the policies. “What I want this group to be is a clearing house, a balanced academic facility where we get all sides of the argument. We only seem to get one argument from the climate change committee and when the serious decisions come we want to be fully armed.” Their main worries are the cost of many of the proposed measures on the lower paid, as well as the real greenness of what’s on offer. Members often cite electric vehicles as an example. “We are being skewered down the route of just battery vehicles,” explains Mackinlay. “But there are a lot of hidden costs to the planet here, not least because of the rare metals involved, which are usually produced in the Democratic Republic of Congo involving unspeakable human misery. I’m not convinced that the mining companies have got the ability to produce the volumes of these things that we need.”

One MP says: 'We have got to be careful that we are not targeting language to address seats in south-west London'

Another member explains that, while the NZSG (not the catchiest of names, it has to be said) is signed up to the principle of climate change being a serious problem caused by humans and in need of a solution from humans, they feel political leaders are making the mistake of assuming that any solution is a good solution. “They’ve told us the ‘why’ of all this; fine, I’m signed up to net zero,” he says. “But every time someone questions whether the way of getting there is the right one, they just pivot back to the reason we need to do it, which isn’t the same thing.”

Johnson will hear a lot from the NZSG in the coming weeks. But he would be mistaken to think that they are the only constituency within the party that he needs to speak to. MPs in red wall seats are also very anxious. This bunch of MPs is represented by the Northern Research Group, which worries not just about the cost of electric vehicles, green boilers and other measures for their constituents’ homes, but also about the language ministers are using.

A fundamental mistake that the government is making is to assume that talking about “green jobs” is the way to appeal to voters in working-class, formerly Labour seats. That’s not right, according to a number of red wallers. One says: “We have been trying to relay to them for a while that they need to stop saying ‘green jobs’. Our people think it’s some kind of civil service, public sector thing. We need to make it hi-tech, high-skilled, levelling up.” Another adds: “We are all pretty supportive of this stuff but if I talk to my constituents about ‘green jobs’, they think of a council employee who goes around wasting taxpayers’ cash. But if I talk about next generation manufacturing, then people get it. We have got to be careful that we are not targeting language to address seats in south-west London. ‘Green’ does not go down well up here because it sounds naff and something that’s being imposed.”

There is also deep frustration with what NRG members see as “greenwashing” or off-shoring Britain’s carbon emissions to other countries. The fight over plans for a new coalmine in West Cumbria is one example and it exploded into a heated debate in the main WhatsApp group for Conservative MPs recently when local MP Mark Jenkinson started to question energy minister, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, about whether ministers really understood what blocking this mine would mean. Jenkinson’s position, and that of many Tories in manufacturing seats, is that the coal produced by this mine is coking coal, used to make steel, not generate dirty electricity. Britain will use coking coal whatever happens: it’s just a question of whether it imports it from Australia, thereby making another country foot the carbon emissions bill, or is more honest and produces it here at a lower cost to the planet.

Even the most fervently green group of Tories, represented by the Conservative Environment Network (CEN), isn’t fully comfortable with the direction in which Johnson and his ministers such as Alok Sharma are heading. One MP who is listed by the CEN as a “champion” of green policies privately worries that the government isn’t bothering to explain to voters why the big measures to reach net zero are necessary. “Cut me and I bleed green,” he says. “But I do have some sympathy with this; I don’t think the government is necessarily making rational choices. We are nowhere on nuclear, for instance. We haven’t rolled the pitch on so many of the changes we are going to be imposing on people and their lives. It’s green jobs all over again. People need to understand how and why the green agenda is beneficial to them and why the pain is worth it long term.”

Another “champion” is irritated that the prime minister’s wife, Carrie, an environmentalist by profession, seems to have more influence over green comms than elected MPs. But he adds: “How do you tell your boss that you think his wife is wrong and has too much power? You can’t. And that’s why so many people are making noises off about Carrie.” Other loyal MPs say that regardless of whoever is leading the comms on this matter, they are being pushed to breaking point by what they see as the “tin-eared” approach of the prime minister.

Johnson’s lack of understanding of how deep the worry runs in his party has been made much worse by the distance imposed by Covid. That he had to spend the final week of term in self-isolation meant that he missed a number of important opportunities to bond with his MPs. He was supposed to attend the 1922 Committee of Conservative backbenchers, but ended up having to speak to them over Zoom, a format he has never managed to make work for him.

Similarly, he missed end-of-term receptions in parliament, where he could have got much more of a feeling for where his MPs were emotionally. Now, as the summer starts to draw to an end, he faces being hit by a barrage of frustration when he comes back to Westminster in September. The changes he needs to make don’t even involve him dropping his green agenda. They just involve him listening to the different tribes in his party and understanding that they aren’t automatically signed up to his policies yet. Even a loner is capable of picking that up.

Isabel Hardman is assistant editor of the Spectator
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There is still a month on the clock until state schools go back in New York, but for plenty of kids in other states in the US – Alabama, Kentucky and Tennessee among them – the autumn term started last week. Many school districts in those states have put mask mandates in place, as has New York: in September, when 1 million-plus children in the city go back to school, they will all be required to wear masks. Meanwhile, remote-schooling options in the city have been cancelled for all but immunocompromised children, and the head of the country’s second-biggest teaching union is pushing for mandatory vaccination for teachers. Changes in infection rates notwithstanding, the start of the new school year looks as if it might be as normal as we can hope it to be.

The strange thing about this anticipation is that it falls at a time when many of us are, once again, curtailing our movements because of Covid. For the first time in months, there are two new Covid cases in my apartment building; infection rates in the city and across the US as a whole are up. After what seemed like a spell of premature optimism at the start of summer, everyone has returned to full-on mask-wearing in stores, and often in the street. And whereas prior to vaccination it was easy to tell oneself that children were less at risk than adults, now it’s one’s unvaccinated kids who seem most starkly unprotected. The risks are still very low – according to the American Academy of Paediatrics, only between 0.1% and 1.9% of all Covid cases in children in the US result in hospitalisation. Still, it changes things knowing that, as a vaccinated adult, if you decide to travel or go to an indoor party it’s your kids who may suffer the consequences.

If we’re lucky, these calculations exist only at the level of thought experiment. But after 18 months of the pandemic, even that feels emotionally wearing. You spend your life as a parent reassuring yourself it probably won’t happen; not a responsible attitude in these times. For public safety reasons alone, the only sensible aphorism is “better not take any chances” – although at the beginning of summer, “you have to live your life” enjoyed a brief moment in the sun. (It seems that, for a while, “it is what it is” has been retired from use, not least because no one can agree what “it” is, and if they do, the next minute it changes.)

This background noise, the impermanence of every rule and the constant feeling of low-level threat – in addition to a suspicion one might be overreacting – have contributed to the sense that, although in relation to last summer we are in far better shape, these are comparatively more exhausting days. Long Covid describes the after-effects of infection but might stand, too, for the psychological wear and tear of triggering with every decision a domino run of thought that always ends in the same destination. It probably won’t happen, I’m sure we’ll be fine, but if I do this thing – fly to Chicago; let this person ride with us in the elevator; go on an indoor play date and let the kids take off their masks – will I end up killing my neighbours?

Many of us are out of adrenaline at this point. The line of least resistance is to make no plans, so as to savour the small pleasure of not having to cancel them. Looking ahead to the start of term, meanwhile, is an exercise in longing for the reassurance of a regular timetable and a reminder – an odd case of increasing one’s kids’ exposure to calm one’s nerves about their probability of catching it – that schools have very low transmission rates and kids don’t often get sick.

A question remains as to when any of us might loosen the defensive crouch we’ve been assuming, in one form or another, since March 2020. The threshold from burned-out, pandemic-addled husk of a person, dragging ourselves commando-style from day to day, to something approaching regular levels of energy is hard to discern, but I have a feeling the end of summer may help. I don’t make new year’s resolutions, but the sense of the new school year as a life-changing boundary is one I’ve never quite been able to lose. Roll on September.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It was like the football version of the race between Richard Branson and Jeff Bezos to be the first dick in space. The race, that is, to pull off the most stratospheric transfer deal. On Thursday, Chelsea announced the signing of Belgian forward Romelu Lukaku for an eye-popping £97.5m. Lukaku used to play for Chelsea but seven years ago they sold him. Now, they have bought him back at more than three times the cost. The club has a history of letting go some of the best players in the world, from Kevin de Bruyne to Mohamed Salah. You can afford such carelessness if your club is owned by a Russian oligarch, Roman Abramovich.

As the Premier League returned this weekend, one might have expected the Lukaku move to have been the transfer story of the summer. In any other year, it might have been. This year, though, it has already been trumped – not once, but twice, and maybe again for a third time. First, Manchester City paid £100m, a new British record, for Aston Villa midfielder Jack Grealish. They might smash their record again before the end of the month if they manage to wrest Harry Kane away from Tottenham, who are demanding a staggering £160m for the England captain.

But even this has been trumped by the move of arguably the greatest player, Lionel Messi, from Barcelona to Paris Saint-Germain (PSG). The Argentinian forward had been with Barcelona since he was 13 but his relationship with the club unravelled in recent years. Nevertheless, Messi had agreed to another deal – one with a 50% pay cut – only to discover that Barcelona’s finances have been so mismanaged that even that was not possible. The Catalan club lost €487m (£414m) last season and has a total debt of €1.173bn.

So PSG nipped in, adding Messi to a forward line that already boasts the two most expensive players in the world, Neymar and Kylian Mbappé, bought for £198m and £163m respectively. Manchester City is owned by Sheikh Mansour, a member of the Abu Dhabi royal family, PSG by the state of Qatar, through a sovereign investment fund. When it comes to football finance, even Russian oligarchs cannot compete with the riches of the Gulf states.

In all this, it is easy to forget that it’s barely four months since the European Super League (ESL) was triumphantly announced and then humiliatingly withdrawn after outrage from fans, all within 48 hours. The ESL was an attempt by Europe’s richest clubs to make themselves even richer by setting up a league from which they could not be relegated, a scheme designed not for fans but for owners to ensure a steady and uninterrupted flow of money.

PSG’s signing of Messi shows why clubs such as Barcelona were desperate for the ESL. The latter might be one of Europe’s super-clubs but it is not backed by the sovereign wealth of Qatar. Pretending that it was, and spending money it did not have, is one reason why Barcelona ended up losing its greatest player.

What is true of Barcelona is also true, though not so dramatically, of most other top league clubs across Europe. The pandemic and the empty stadiums over the past year have deprived clubs of huge income streams, exacerbating the divide between the merely fabulously rich and those for whom money is no object because their owners regard football clubs in the same way that Branson and Bezos view space travel. The ESL was execrable, a money-spinning exercise detached from any organic sense of history or rivalry. But the system it sought to replace is barely any better.

Why should all this matter? After all, it’s only sport and when we talk about “inequalities” we are talking of disproportions among clubs and players and owners who are already shockingly wealthy. Every month, Messi will bank more than twice what the average British worker will earn in a lifetime.

It matters because sport matters. Football, as the Liverpool manager, Jürgen Klopp, put it, may be “the most important of the least important things” but, as we have seen over the past year, from the Euros to the Olympics, sport, even without live spectators, can bring joy and hope and redemption. It is not merely bread and circuses but something woven into the lives of millions.

What gives football its heart and drama is that every game, every fan, is part of a wider story, an imagined community

What gives football its heart, its soul and its drama is that every game, every fan, is part of a wider story, part of a collective memory and of an imagined community. Many lower league clubs, from Barnsley to Swindon, are often important social institutions in their towns, providing a feeling of civic pride and a kind of mutual hope. As wider political and social projects and identities have disintegrated in recent years, so the sense of solidarity provided by institutions such as football clubs has become more important. And, as the past year has shown, sport can be a platform through which social debates, from racism to national identity, get played out. The fact that Manchester United’s Marcus Rashford has had greater impact on government policy than Keir Starmer might tell us something about today’s Labour party, but it also speaks of the place of football, and footballers, in national life.

The real issue facing football is not just the chasm between the super-clubs and the rest of the football world. It is also that, as the game has become more commercial, so the football itself – the skill, the beauty, the passion – has become subservient to the product and the brand. For PSG’s owners, what is significant about Messi is not his mesmerising talent but the prestige he will bring, the shirts he will sell and the television deals he will enable.

There is, however, a dilemma in all this, too. For all that we hate the greed of the owners, the transformation of the game into a commodity like cars or computers, and the exploitation of clubs as objects of prestige and geopolitics, few fans would want a return to football as it was in the 1980s. Money has helped create a more cosmopolitan game, improved standards and allowed for the building of new stadiums. Watching players such as Salah and De Bruyne, coached by managers such as Klopp and Pep Guardiola, who have helped transform the game at all levels, has been a boon.

As with much else in our consumer culture, the market has opened up new possibilities in football – and corrupted it at the same time.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The hours after a fatal attack on members of the public are harrowing. Confusion reigns, rumours swirl and anxious people try to contact loved ones to make sure they are safe. Last Thursday evening, as reports of gunfire and possible fatalities on a housing estate in Plymouth began to circulate, the question of whether it was a terrorist incident was at the forefront of everyone’s minds. When Devon and Cornwall police announced it was not terrorism-related, I wondered how they could be so sure – and their judgment has been called into question by everything that has emerged since.

We now know that 22-year-old Jake Davison was a misogynist who shot dead his mother, who had recently been treated for cancer, before taking the lives of four others. There are parallels between Plymouth and the Sandy Hook massacre in Connecticut in 2012, when Adam Lanza shot his mother five times before going to a primary school where he killed 20 children and six adults, all women. Not for the first time, the significance of extreme misogyny in the genesis of a fatal attack on members of the public seems to have been missed.

It is hard to see how Davison’s actions fail to meet the government’s definition of terrorism, which includes “the use of threat or action… to intimidate the public”. Examples include serious violence against one or more people, endangering someone’s life or creating a serious risk to the health and safety of the public: tick, tick and tick. But here is the get-out clause. The definition stipulates that terrorism must be “for the purpose of advancing a political, religious, racial or ideological cause” and it is often argued that even the most extreme misogyny does not meet that test.

It seems that its deadly interaction with other forms of extremism is poorly understood, something that struck me forcibly after the Manchester Arena bombing in 2017. Five years earlier, Salman Abedi was already showing signs of being radicalised, but the significance of his assault on a young Muslim woman at college was not recognised. Abedi punched her in the head for wearing a short skirt, almost knocking her out in front of witnesses. It was an act of staggering brutality, displaying a toxic combination of misogyny and allegiance to Islamist ideology, along with a low threshold for violence. Yet Abedi was not charged. Greater Manchester police dealt with the incident through restorative justice and Abedi owned up to anger management issues, avoiding a referral to the Prevent counter-terrorism programme. In what seems to be an example of history repeating itself, it has been revealed that Devon and Cornwall police recently restored Davison’s firearms licence, which he lost in December, after he agreed to take part in an anger management course.

Yet Davison made no secret of his seething resentment of women, posting hate-filled diatribes on YouTube. He compared himself to “incels” – involuntary celibates – angry young men who blame women for their inability to get sex and revealed an obsession with guns. In a video uploaded three weeks before the shootings, he came close to justifying sexual violence. “Why do you think sexual assaults and all these things keep rising?” he demanded in a 10-minute rant, claiming that “women don’t need men no more”. One of the questions Devon and Cornwall police need to answer is if they were aware of the content of Davison’s social media posts when they returned his licence.

In North America, incels have been linked with white supremacy, as well as being held responsible for the murders of around 50 people. In Canada, their ideology has been designated a form of violent extremism following an attack on a Toronto massage parlour last year in which a woman was stabbed to death by a 17-year-old man. It was the second such attack in the city in two years, after a self-described incel drove a van into pedestrians in 2018, killing 10 people.

In the UK, however, misogyny is not even widely recognised as the driving force behind violence against women. Time and again, we hear about men who supposedly “just snapped” and killed their female partners in what the police describe as “domestic” and “isolated” incidents. Not so isolated, given that 1,425 women were killed by men in the UK between 2009 and 2018, but we are expected to believe that such homicides could not be predicted or stopped. In fact, it is rare for a woman to be murdered by a current or former partner without a previous history of domestic abuse.

Hatred of women is normalised, dismissed as an obsession of feminists, even when its horrific consequences are staring us in the face. In June last year, two sisters, Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman, were murdered in a north London park by a teenager. Danyal Hussein, now 19, had been referred to Prevent after using school computers to access rightwing websites, but was discharged after a few months with no further concerns. What seems to have been missed is his virulent misogyny, which led him to make a “pact” with a “demon” to kill six women in six months.

Five years ago, I began to notice how many men who committed fatal terrorist attacks had a history of misogyny and domestic abuse – practising at home, in other words. No one would listen so I wrote a book about it, listing around 50 perpetrators who had previously terrorised current and ex-partners. It was published in 2019 and inspired groundbreaking research by counter-terrorism policing, showing that almost 40% of referrals to the Prevent programme had a history of domestic abuse, as perpetrators, witnesses or victims. Project Starlight has produced a number of recommendations, arguing that counter-terrorism officers need to look for evidence of violence against women when they are assessing the risk posed by suspects.

That is a welcome development, but we need to go further. We are all in shock after hearing about the horrific events in Plymouth, while the grief of the victims’ families is awful to contemplate. But Davison’s murderous rampage demonstrates that our understanding of what constitutes terrorism is too restrictive. Extreme misogyny needs to be recognised as an ideology in its own right – and one that carries an unacceptable risk of radicalising bitter young men.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The problem with dishonesty is that you have to remember your most recent falsehoods to at least try to keep your story straight. In their pantomime “war against woke”, the UK’s statue defenders are incapable of remembering what they said just 12 months ago.

Last summer, when the statue of Edward Colston was toppled, those who howled in protest claimed that they were not seeking to defend the reputation of a slave trader – a man complicit in the deaths of 19,000 Africans – but were merely opposed to the destructive way in which the statue had been removed. Toppling statues, or even removing them from public display peacefully, they lectured, entailed “erasing history”.

The answer, they and the government argued, was to leave statues and monuments in place but add contextual details that made visible aspects of the past about which statues had previously been mute. This strategy – “retain and explain” – could be best achieved by attaching plaques to the pedestals on which monuments stand.

Fast forward to 2021 and the same people seem to have forgotten that this was ever their position.

With no statue toppled since Colston’s pavement dive, the statue-philes have been forced to make the most of slim pickings. Hence the hysterical reaction to an audit of statues and monuments conducted by Newcastle city council. The council’s report found that Newcastle has no monuments with direct links to slavery and with no Colston or Cecil Rhodes to worry about, it makes only modest suggestions. These include making changes to a city centre monument to 370 men from north-east regiments who died in the Anglo-Boer war of 1899-1902.

Topped with a statue of Nike, the winged Greek goddess of victory, the Boer war monument has plaques at its base that list the names of men from the region who died in South Africa 120 years ago. In a statement, the council explained that its aim is to “widen public interpretation of the South African war memorial” by installing “two information panels, one to interpret the statute and the other to shed light on its local connections in the city”.

To those whose abilities of recall stretch all the way back to 2020, the council’s proposals sound very much like “retain and explain” and there is not much here to get excited about. No statues are to be removed, never mind toppled. No one is taking the knee or trying to explain how structural racism works. Marcus Rashford is not involved and the Duchess of Sussex has not chosen to fly to Newcastle and wastefully hurl avocados at the monument.

Yet in culture war Britain, even the non-story of Newcastle’s statue audit is enough to pull the hair-trigger of the anger-industrial complex. Just a few years ago, before politicians and newspapers had mastered the art of using half-forgotten colonial conflicts to whip up anger and division, a report by a heritage committee, set up by the local council of a northern city, would have struggled to win space on the pages of even the local papers. Yet with wearying predictability, the council’s proposal to provide additional historical information became national news and was caricatured as “cancelling history”.

Meanwhile, the manifest and indisputable fact that the Anglo-Boer war was, as the council called it, a “colonialist enterprise” was deliberately presented as a libel rather than a statement of fact. With similarly tedious inevitability, the report was mischaracterised as “virtue signalling” and “erasing our history”, an especially trite phrase – even in this strong field – given that all wars other than civil wars, by their nature, generate histories that are never solely “ours”.

Many people at the time regarded the conflict as a grubby war of aggression

One military historian who must have missed the “retain and explain” memo concluded that the council’s proposals had been arrived at because the monument “no longer suits the current cultural zeitgeist”. It is this threadbare, non-argument that best reveals the deep dishonesty of the pro-statue lobby.

Their repeated claim in defence of statues to mass murderers and memorials to colonial wars is that, guided by the “standards of the time”, our ancestors universally regarded empire as uncontroversial, naturally excused the violence that underwrote it and always celebrated its builders and defenders as heroes. None of that is true, particularly when it comes to the Anglo-Boer war.

Many people at the time regarded the conflict as a grubby war of aggression, motivated by British ambitions to seize the gold and diamond reserves of southern Africa. Others worried, with good reason, that the war was fuelling anti-British sentiment across the world. Indeed, volunteers from numerous nations travelled to the war zone and joined the Boers’ ranks against the British.

The scorched earth policy adopted by the British in the final phase of the conflict, which entailed the imprisoning of Boer civilians in concentration camps, as they were named and described at the time, led to the deaths of around 30,000 Boer women and children. When made public, the horrors of the camps strengthened a significant anti-war movement in Britain and appalled even ardent supporters of the empire. The deaths in other British camps of around 20,000 black Africans were scarcely commented upon, by either side, in this “white man’s war”.

The statue obsessives claim to be defending the soldiers whom the Newcastle monument remembers, yet they cannot explain how pretending that the conflict in which they fell was glorious honours their memory.

But then this is not really about the young soldiers of 1900. It is about the ageing culture warriors of 2021, people so opposed to honestly examining our imperial past that they misrepresent even the most modest acts of reassessment. Like Dorian Gray, they are so fearful of uncomfortable truths that they seek to lock away history’s mirror.

The irony here is that the history that Newcastle city council aims to empower the people of my home town to better understand contains exactly the sorts of harsh realities and ugly complexities that, if properly discussed, could help awaken us from our colonial dreamtimes.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In France over the past few weeks, the topic of vaccine passports has induced an avalanche of outrage. Opposition to the measure has united both the hard left and right, with more than 200,000 people taking to the streets to express their contempt. In the kaleidoscope of disparate groups involved, the only unifying banner is the assertion that Emmanuel Macron’s policy is an infringement of the French tenet of liberté.

Nor is France unique in facing such resistance. In the United States, mask and vaccine mandates have generated passionate opprobrium and legal action.

Those resolutely opposed to anything styled as a vaccination passport tend to frame the issue as a solely personal choice. That can seem superficially reasonable but it highlights a crucial misunderstanding – a presumption that vaccination is solely an individual boon. On the contrary; immunisation is, at heart, a public health measure, implemented to reduce incidence and burden of disease at a population level. That it has huge individual benefit is undeniable but viewing vaccination through this reductive, individualistic lens fundamentally distorts the reality that it is about much more than protecting oneself.

Immunisation collectively reduces reservoirs for disease, providing a firewall that protects vulnerable members of society. While a Covid infection might not do a young, healthy person lasting harm, their passing on that infection could inflict substantial, even fatal, damage to vulnerable people.

This is a consideration frequently missed in the arguments about proof of vaccination in public spaces. Those decrying it as an infringement of their liberties fail to realise that others have a reasonable expectation that they should not be needlessly exposed to a potentially deadly virus if it can be avoided.

The libertarian argument fails on another level too – unvaccinated populations still pose a threat even to the vaccinated. Apart from the fact that vaccines do not have perfect efficacy, viruses mutate with reproduction. The unimmunised, in effect, constitute a mass of human petri dishes, where mutations endowed with capacity to evade the protection afforded by vaccination swiftly arise. The reduced effectiveness of vaccination against the Delta variant is a telling reminder of this reality.

Individual rights are not absolute and must be balanced with the freedoms of others

How we proceed then is a challenging question. We can simultaneously acknowledge that individual rights exist, but also acknowledge that rights are not absolute and must be balanced with the freedoms of others. Very few of us would object to the imposition of speed limits on a shared public road or to restrictions on smoking in public places, given the recognition that these activities can harm others.

The concept of communal vaccination rests on the same principle. It is worth noting that these debates are certainly not new. In England and Wales, the Vaccination Act of 1853 mandated universal vaccination against smallpox, with fines levied on those who opted not to comply. Such was the virulence of smallpox that vaccine mandates for schools were introduced in several US states as early as 1827.

It’s also worth noting that, while these measures were extraordinarily effective at reducing infection, they too were lambasted by opponents as medical despotism. Such charges have modern echoes in the slew of recent legal challenges against vaccine mandates. In one US case last week, Judge Frank H Easterbrook upheld Indiana University’s right to mandate vaccination for returning students. Ruling that a university has the right to decide the measures necessary to keep other students safe in congregate settings, Easterbrook noted: “Vaccination protects not only the vaccinated persons but also those who come in contact with them and at a university close contact is inevitable.”

Notably, this judgment relied on a 1905 supreme court decision, Jacobson v Massachusetts, which determined that states may require members of the public to be vaccinated against smallpox or risk being fined, a case motivated by the same “liberty” canard.

President Emmanuel Macron has told the French people that with freedom comes responsibility. Photograph: Hannah McKay/Reuters

Context is critical too. Even before the advent of Covid, anti-vaccine propaganda online had led to a deadly renaissance of diseases that were once virtually eradicated worldwide. Vaccine hesitancy is a spectrum and anti-vaccine activists had proved adept at weaponising social media to terrify parents. In 2019, endemic resurgence of measles forced the World Health Organization to declare vaccine hesitancy a top 10 threat to public health.

Anti-vaccine activists, galvanised by the pandemic, have made the invocation of liberty a central theme of their messaging. One especially ugly, historically illiterate stunt is their appropriation of the yellow star used to stigmatise Jews under Nazi Germany, claiming that they’re being similarly segregated from society for their beliefs. Quite aside from being staggeringly tone deaf, this is a deplorable false equivalence.

Vaccine certification seems a reasonable requirement for communal activities and one with historical pedigree, especially when the only barrier is misguided ideological opposition. But perhaps the most pertinent issue is whether vaccine passports can help banish the spectre of the pandemic.

Despite the sound and fury, the data from France is extremely promising. The government announcement that full vaccination would be required to enter public spaces caused a massive rise in vaccination uptake in the formerly vaccine sceptical nation. This is a vital observation, as it suggests much of the apathy was owing to complacency and laissez-faire contrarianism rather than some deep-seated opposition. While those protesting might be vocal, they are very much a minority. Macron’s move, for all the vitriol against it, was probably well judged.

Vaccines remain our best hope and there are still important conversations to be had on how we most effectively and fairly maximise uptake for everyone and what form mandates and incentives should take. However, one thing is sure – vaccination goes far beyond the individual and choices made have inescapable societal impact. Ultimately, those who would invoke the liberté of the French national motto as their mantra against vaccination betray themselves when they omit the equally vital fraternité.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After a week of GCSE and A-level results, we are in danger of missing the big point – our assessment system is not fit for purpose. It ruins the last four years of school on a narrow, stressful, unfair and badly designed exam merry-go-round. So, before we revert to flawed pre-Covid exams, now is the time for radical change.

The results of teacher assessments, we are told, is “grade inflation” but perhaps they actually reflect grade reality – the reality of what a child has learned in that subject over time, rather than merely what they can recall in that highly pressured moment in an exam hall.

Simon Lebus, head of Ofqual, the exams watchdog, is right when he says: “Exams are a bit like a snapshot, a photograph – you capture an instant, it’s a form of sampling – whereas teacher assessment allows teachers to observe student performance over a much longer period, in a rather more complex way, taking into account lots of different pieces of work and arriving at a holistic judgment. We can feel satisfied that it’s likely to give a much more accurate and substantial reflection of what their students are capable of achieving.”

This is particularly true for the most disadvantaged students. The received wisdom is that exams are fairer and more impartial. Leave aside that Ofqual admits that one in four grades is wrongly marked, the evidence from our schools suggests that students living in poverty are most adversely affected by having to perform in high-stakes moments in the exam hall. And many people are not aware that in a normal exam year a third of students, often branded “the forgotten third”, must fail their exams, however well they do, because of where grade boundaries are placed. In other countries, such as the US, if you meet the criteria, you pass.

Of course, without training and internal and external moderation to get rid of biases and inaccuracies, teacher-assessed grades can have problems, but this has been overcome for years in subjects such as drama, music and art and the extended project qualification (EPQ), which is much respected by universities.

I understand the impulse of some teachers, scarred by the huge amounts of extra work and pressure piled on them this year, to want to return to external exams. But that would be a huge missed opportunity. Many teachers have benefited from powerful professional development on curriculum and assessment in the past two years and we should harness these skills to shape a new system.

To succeed, we need to win the argument about “rigour’ in education. In the hands of former education secretary Michael Gove, rigour became the term for harder exams; harder exams were taken to mean more subject content. Yet this isn’t rigour. Rigour should mean that the assessment system is a true reflection of the varied strengths of every child – their knowledge, skills and dispositions. A rigorous assessment system would go beyond surface knowledge and exam technique and value the ability to think, to understand, to apply knowledge. It would identify the wider dispositions and strengths of every child. It would capture the development of each child throughout their schooling, not just on a few days, so that we get rid, once and for all, of the cliff-edge moment of the unveiling of 10 numbers or letters on GCSE day.

To do this, we need to change both what we assess and how we assess it (this needs to be varied – not just all the eggs in the exam basket). Ways to achieve this would include the following three:

First, students should be able to study interdisciplinary courses, not just single subject courses. So, a Steam (science, technology, engineering, arts and maths) GCSE, not just separate maths and sciences. Some independent and state schools are now devising their own courses on global perspectives, migration and climate change.

Second, we should recognise the strengths of every child in dispositions that are key to thriving in the modern world – creativity, collaboration, critical thinking and communication (or oracy). Employers spend a huge amount of time assessing these when they recruit, many believing they are now a better indicator of high performance than a degree.

Third, we could have many modes of assessment – not just exams and teacher assessment but other methods now widely used, for example, in universities. If you are studying medicine at a Russell Group university, you are assessed not just by exams but through observations, structured discussions, vivas, portfolios of evidence. And universities have experimented with open book exams and exams with extended periods of time, both of which have been successful. Assessments could be taken in secondary schools over several years, when the student is ready, rather than in one big group at the same time.

Across the world, there are interesting assessment practices we can learn from. Many of these practices have a similar purpose – to broaden what is valued in school beyond a narrow set of exams. (This paper is a great curation from Bill Lucas of some of the key ones: rethinkingassessment.com/our-findings/). The Mastery Transcript Consortium in America gives a more holistic dashboard of a student’s achievements. The Australian Council for Educational Research has worked successfully with schools on how to offer evidence of dispositions such as creativity and critical thinking.

This autumn, Rethinking Assessment (a coalition of schools, employers, universities, teachers and parents) will be conducting research projects in classrooms across the country in each of these three areas and we are seeking more schools to take part.

The aim is to capture the evidence and start to design a more “comprehensive learning record”, a digital transcript of the full strengths and achievements of every child. This passport could be tailored by the student to meet the needs of employers, universities and colleges and would mean that young people leave school with something that genuinely reflects what they can do and who they are.

This would be an assessment reform that would need to be implemented over time with proper training and support for teachers. It is one that we believe would command widespread support, be a lot fairer, would motivate young people and prepare them properly for the future.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What term do you want to search? Search with google
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Last August, Rishi Sunak was so confident that Covid was banished he said the furlough had to go. About 4 million workers would have either been forced to return to their jobs or found they had no job at all. “It’s wrong,” Mr Sunak told the BBC, “to keep people trapped in a situation and pretend there is always a job that they can go back to.” But it was Mr Sunak who was wrong. The pandemic was not over. A new, more transmissible Covid variant would soon appear. By October 2020 the furlough was back. Such an experience ought to chasten a politician. But that does not appear to be the chancellor’s style. He talked last week about the economy “bouncing back”. The furlough, he says, will disappear by the end of September. Is Mr Sunak once again tempting fate?

Britain has eased pandemic restrictions, but the country is not out of danger. A more virulent Covid strain could emerge. Mr Sunak, however, is betting that vaccine coverage and booster shots will allow Britons to live with the virus. The chancellor can also draw comfort from the Bank of England, which believes that mass layoffs have been averted and unemployment has peaked. The first week of August saw 1.7m active job ads, while 1.9 million people are on furlough. For some this will mean higher pay and better benefits. It may just be catchup. Half of British workers suffered a real-terms pay cut last year despite a sharp rise in average earnings.

Would a hasty withdrawal of government support that had helped firms retain staff be useful now they face higher debts and uncertain future sales? The answer is surely no. A better solution would be to rethink the way the labour market operates. The Trades Union Congress makes a sensible suggestion for a permanent short-time working scheme to be put in place as a post-pandemic legacy. Britain’s workers face a disruptive future featuring post-Brexit dislocation, net zero and a Covid hangover. Yet the UK is one of the few developed nations to have no permanent short-time working scheme to deal with periods of industrial disruption and weak demand.

Under such a scheme, companies that could show they were restructuring their business and wanted to keep staff could ask the state to pay 80% of salaries for a short period. Experiences of countries such as Germany and Japan suggest a UK scheme might cost about £5bn annually. This would be an investment in the British workforce.

If Britain has really got over the worst of the pandemic it should build what Harold Wilson called the “social infrastructure required for industrial change”. Nations rely on “labour reallocation” to transition from one economic state to another. Covid will change where and how we want to work, and where we are able to travel. Businesses have to attract and train new workers. Workforce shortages are very real. But people don’t choose unemployment, with its scarring susceptibility to malnutrition, illness and mental stress. Karl Marx’s reserve army of the unemployed is full of conscripts, not volunteers.

Gavin Kelly, the chair of the Resolution Foundation, points out that Wilson’s social infrastructure was built on new benefits, more training and university expansion. He says there was a 44% rise in labour reallocation between industrial sectors in the decade following 1968 compared with the one that went before. By this measure, contrary to conventional wisdom, these 10 years marked the most successful peacetime economic transition of the 20th century. The state helped workers find blossoming new jobs when obsolete ones withered away.

Today, more public sector investment, a job guarantee for the long-term unemployed and mini-furlough schemes could help kickstart and smooth the process of creative destruction. Britain has lower labour market dynamism, geographic mobility and workforce training than at the turn of the millennium. It would be a mistake, Mr Sunak, to abandon the lessons of the pandemic for the embrace of failed certainties.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Boris Johnson’s apparent willingness to sign off a new oilfield, Cambo, in the North Sea makes a mockery of his claim to global climate leadership. The first phase of Cambo would produce up to 170m barrels of crude. That is the equivalent, say Friends of the Earth, of the annual emissions of 18 coal-fired power plants. This sends dark clouds scuttling over the UK’s presidency of Cop26, held in Glasgow in November this year. For the UN climate summit to be a success, Mr Johnson’s team, headed by Alok Sharma, must cajole recalcitrant countries into line. It is doubtful that Mr Sharma can persuade other nations of the merit of forsaking fossil fuels when Britain will not lead by example.

Last week, the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change delivered its starkest warning yet about the planetary emergency. To have a 50% chance of keeping global heating below 1.5C requires the world to get net emissions of carbon dioxide down to zero before 2050. In a foreword to the IPCC report, António Guterres, the UN secretary general, wrote that countries should “end all new fossil fuel exploration and production”. The International Energy Agency, an intergovernmental group founded to protect access to hydrocarbons, has said much the same.

Cambo, controlled by private equity giant Blackstone via Siccar Point Energy, is the first of three large UK North Sea ventures. An even bigger deepwater oilfield, Rosebank, is waiting to be exploited by Norway’s state-owned energy company. In 2023, BP hopes to start drilling in its Clair South reservoir. The industry says the UK needs domestic supplies, yet most of the oil will be exported. Mr Johnson’s defence is as thin as the paper it is written on. His government has promised it will put an end to new oil exploration licences. But fields like Cambo, argue ministers, are just extensions of old licences. Mr Johnson’s green agenda risks slipping beneath an oil slick.

Deciding what action to take is difficult and the trade-offs tricky. Nicola Sturgeon, the SNP first minister, has been accused, with some merit, of hiding behind Mr Johnson over Cambo. The oil sector plays an outsized role in the Scottish economy. The loss of North Sea jobs could be answered with a more interventionist industrial strategy.

Governments do not want to impose costs today when the benefits arrive after they have left office. This misses the existential nature of the emergency. Lord Deben, who chairs the government’s climate change committee, warned in March that Mr Johnson’s North Sea plans fell short of net zero targets. The prime minister did nothing. A summer of record temperatures and apocalyptic fires and floods vindicates in a very tangible way what scientists for years have been saying. Inaction by Mr Johnson risks doing more harm than any good he may achieve in Glasgow.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The language of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s report on global warming last week was unusual for its uncompromising candour. As its authors made vividly clear, the world can no longer seek solace in the expectation that it can continue the unrestricted burning of gas, coal and oil without triggering devastation. Widespread flooding, severe droughts, rising sea levels, melting ice caps, coral reef destruction, heatwaves and forest fires will surely intensify unless we change our ways, the report’s authors emphasised.

The message is clear. Humanity must break its fossil fuel dependence in short order and every nation will have to play a part in bringing a speedy halt to that addiction, though the burden facing the United Kingdom is a particularly severe one. For a start, we have been burning fossil fuel, mainly coal, on a large scale for longer than any other nation. The Industrial Revolution was born in Britain, after all. Thus, we have a special duty to be in the vanguard of nations doing the most to counter the unpleasant impacts that greenhouse gases are already having on our world.

More specifically, the UK is set to chair the Cop26 UN climate summit in Glasgow in November. This, effectively, is the world’s last chance to agree measures that could limit global warming to a 1.5C rise above pre-industrial levels and so head off the worst consequences of our looming crisis. The UK therefore faces particularly intense pressure to ensure this summit is a success and needs to send out a clear message that it possesses the credentials to achieve that goal.

To do this, Britain must make it clear that it has plans to put its own house in order with a programme of measures that demonstrate it can curb its carbon emissions speedily and effectively. Many nations will be coming to Glasgow to look for inspiration and the UK’s credibility as summit host rests on it having a clear strategy that shows that in the near future Britain will not be putting more carbon into the atmosphere than it removes, so achieving the goal of net-zero emissions.

Johnson's administration remains guilty of continuing to support measures that are irreconcilable with net zero

Unfortunately, there are few signs that such a master plan is anywhere near readiness. Boris Johnson may have become a recent convert to green causes, having derided the science of climate change many times in the past. Nevertheless, his administration remains guilty of continuing to support measures that are irreconcilable with a strategy of achieving net zero in the near future. This list of incompatibilities includes the government’s recent scrapping of the green homes grant insulation scheme; freezing fuel duty while doing little to help electric car owners; authorising billions to be spent on new road schemes; delaying the phasing out of gas boilers in homes; and encouraging airport expansion. All are likely to lead to increases in carbon dioxide emissions rather than helping us to reduce them.

Certainly, Cop26 delegates from developing nations will see little inspiration in such an inventory. For good measure, the recent deep cuts that have been made to our overseas aid have badly harmed the UK’s reputation internationally. Our prospects of influencing the world at Cop26 at this moment look bleak, though there have been some encouraging moves, with Johnson revealing that he is set to announce a new £400m scheme to encourage homeowners to buy low-carbon alternatives to gas boilers. Nevertheless, the claim that Britain is nearing a coherent climate policy is unconvincing. It is estimated we need to invest about 1% of our GDP to build the infrastructure that will achieve net-zero emissions. At present, we are committing a tiny fraction of that. Britain clearly has a great deal to do before Cop26 but has a worryingly small window of opportunity to act. An injection of urgency into our climate preparations is now badly overdue.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The history of western interference after the second world war in countries throughout the world has been one of unmitigated failure for which we all bear a share of shame (UK and US send troops to aid evacuation from Afghanistan as Taliban advance, 13 August).

Western powers have invaded countries thousands of miles away in the name of “democracy” and achieved a vacuum of power that has swiftly been filled by the very forces they went to evict. Vietnam, Iraq, Afghanistan. We have left behind devastation and despair while never learning the lessons of each disaster. If people want a one-party state, why does the US and its poodles think it has a duty or right to impose a very flawed system of democracy on other nations? Hubris followed inevitably by nemesis.

Jane Ghosh

Bristol

Much has been written of late about how Afghanistan is being abandoned by its western allies, and parallels are inevitably being drawn with the US withdrawal from Vietnam. But perhaps those parallels should be pushed a little further. The government of South Vietnam was massively corrupt, with little popular support. Those were two of the reasons why it fell. Is it worth asking where the billions of dollars poured into Afghanistan have gone and why its government seems unable to defend itself? And what, now, is the alternative? Permanent colonisation of Afghanistan in a world where “colonisation” has rightly become a dirty word?

Prof Trevor Curnow

Lancaster

The disaster we are watching unfold in Afghanistan should put to rest the idea that there is such a thing as US “moral leadership”. President Biden has all but abandoned the country to a regime of medieval savagery and backwardness. A generation of Afghan women and girls is seeing its rights, freedom and dreams cruelly snuffed out. It is sickening to behold.

Daniel Peacock

Manchester

Among the many shameful aspects of the west’s abandonment of Afghanistan, we now learn that those young Afghans admitted to UK universities next month will be denied the places they had won on merit, apparently because embassy staff could not complete the paperwork in time. Can I suggest that every university with potential students from this sad country might band together and charter a plane to bring as many as are able to leave at once? I’m sure the Home Office will be able to deal with the “paperwork” once these young people are safely in the UK.

Sir Martin Harris

Former vice-chancellor, universities of Essex and Manchester

Ten years ago I worked for a British refugee charity on a government-funded scheme to encourage asylum seekers to voluntarily return to their home countries. Among others, we dealt with Afghans, and they returned under the belief that life would be relatively safe (although interestingly, it was never deemed safe enough for us, British workers to visit the country). Have we not let these people down? Have we not betrayed all the Afghan women who have resumed education and roles outside the home? And what about the journalists, the artists, those who engaged with a fragile democracy? Many of these people will be targets now. Involvement in civil society leaves a digital footprint that is hard to erase. I feel guilty myself, and on behalf of my country. The least we can do is give generously to the agencies on the ground who will soon be dealing with millions of refugees.

Caroline Willcocks

Bromyard, Herefordshire

I write to ask that the Guardian stops referring to Afghan women and female children being forced into “marriage” with Taliban men (Editorial, 13 August). It is not marriage. It is rape and slavery. In this case a polite word covers, even partially legitimises, the Taliban’s crimes.

Annie Thackeray

London
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Patrick Butler is right that the pandemic has made the crisis in children’s social care “even more acute” (Crisis in children’s services in England is shocking if not surprising, 11 August). However, it is difficult to see how the government’s review of children’s social care will achieve the radical changes needed, for two reasons.

First, it will require a commitment to more progressive taxation and increases in the minimum wage and universal credit to combat major inequalities, including those associated with the rising demand for children’s and youth services: childhood poverty, social deprivation, homelessness, poor health, ethnicity and disability.

Second, it will require the introduction of needs-led funding of local authority services; the end of exploitative privatised provision, including the use of poor-quality unregulated accommodation; and the reversal of draconian cuts in local services from 2010, which against rising demands have prevented children remaining with their families and communities, or receiving quality care to fulfil their potential into adulthood.

Prof Mike Stein

University of York

Your report on children’s social services paints an accurate picture of help and care for children collapsing and in crisis. The report focused on more demand during the pandemic, but there has been a longer trajectory of decay, disinvestment and disregard.

Since 2010, Conservative‑led governments have targeted austerity at poor communities and at public services. Privatisation has been promoted, and well over £200m each year is now gushing out of children’s services as profits for international venture capitalists. Poorer services at a higher cost.

The pandemic has not caused today’s difficulties. Instead, it is the virus of an ideology and intention promoting a privatised marketplace amid cuts that riddle children’s social services and leave children and families stranded and neglected. It is a virus that needs to be tackled with urgency.

Ray Jones

Emeritus professor of social work, Chepstow, Monmouthshire

In response to your interesting but disturbing article about the dire status of social care in England (‘FaceTime isn’t enough’: the struggle to protect England’s at-risk children, 11 August), I am aware of the equally disturbing situation in Scotland.

A friend of mine is a lead social worker in Scotland. In September 2020, six months into the pandemic, her team was down to a third of its regular staff level and some key workers were isolating. Schools were closed and she was working seven days a week with a huge caseload, trying to maintain the safety of at-risk children. Meanwhile, the country was clapping NHS workers, among whom were health visitors who refused to conduct home visits due to the pandemic. Social workers were left to pick up the pieces.

The social care system is grossly underfunded and social workers continue to be a poor and undervalued component in our care system. As your report states: “It is a ‘travesty as a civilisation’ not to put in the resources to be able to support society’s most vulnerable young people.”

Philip R Ratcliffe

Dunoon, Argyll and Bute
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Your article “Treasury blocking green policies key to UK net zero target” (13 August) suggests extreme myopia on the part of Rishi Sunak. This is surprising as he has shown with his coronavirus policies that it is possible to spend large amounts upfront to prevent large-scale future disaster. Climate change, if not addressed, will be a far larger global disaster. It needs a multi-pronged and global approach from central and local governments, the private and public sectors, and individuals. The state of the planet we leave to our children is, after all, a shared responsibility. Central governments must provide the lead, due to the scale and complexity of the challenge.

Spending now will generate new technologies that will open up global business and economic growth opportunities. It will also save huge sums that will otherwise be needed – if we delay – to deal with worse flooding, drought and fires, as well as the physical and mental health consequences.

On one side of the scales: act now, provide upfront investment, limit damage as much as possible. On the other side: act later, much higher cost to limit damage, far more permanent damage done, much higher financial and human costs. It’s a no-brainer.

Debbie Colson

London


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Melvyn Caplan should be congratulated for resigning as a councillor, having recognised that the buck stopped with him (Marble Arch Mound: deputy council leader resigns over £6m cost, 13 August). Perhaps Boris Johnson will take note and require cabinet members to act honourably in the future – but we probably shouldn’t hold our breath.

Les Bright

Exeter, Devon

I am concerned that the annual photograph of the Appleby horse fair in your print edition (Pictures of the week, 14 August) shows mounts on a dry gravel bed of the River Eden, rather than hock deep as is the tradition. Another sign of global warming?

Simon Aumônier

Steeple Aston, Oxfordshire

Your article (‘The soundtrack to my life was burping and farting’: how disgusting is your partner?, 14 August) has left me feeling worried. According to wind expert Julie Thompson, “we emit in the region of 15 farts a day on average”. Even without counting, I can tell you I do loads more than that. What am I doing wrong?

Fiona Collins

Carrog, Denbighshire

A father came to see me when teaching in a comprehensive some years ago (Letters, 13 August). “Why did you give our Johnnie detention?” he asked. I told him that Johnnie was heard swearing. “My son doesn’t fucking well swear” was the response.

David Blackledge

Formby, Merseyside

It’s time to expel Keir Starmer from the Labour party (Director Ken Loach says he has been expelled from Labour, theguardian.com, 14 August).

Derek Chown

Framsden, Suffolk
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I first made contact with Phillip King in the mid-1950s in the casting room at St Martin’s School of Art sculpture department: we both had our hands in bowls of plaster and were commenting on the sensual delights of the activity.

Subsequently, as students in Anthony Caro’s classes, we saw a lot of each other, eventually as family friends.

One of the most memorable events was a 1961 visit to Phillip’s flat in West Hampstead to see assembled around the room several of his new sculptures, the like of which I had never seen before; they were startling. If ever there was a challenge to a young rival sculptor starting out, that was it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Richard Beard’s book extract and accompanying interview made for interesting insights into the current Tory government and his own experience of boarding as a boy was clearly traumatic (“The childhood of a leader”, the New Review). However, newspapers focusing on the experiences of that generation of men who were made unhappy by their education helps perpetuate the myth that all boarding schools in 2021 continue to churn out repressed, inauthentic individuals with no interest in creating an equal world.

Whatever your views on private education as an idea, many modern boarding schools are deeply committed to educating children from all over the globe with strong values of service to others, teaching them that “with your privilege comes responsibility”. As a mum of three teenagers at a co-educational boarding school, I can also tell you that today’s boarders are home each weekend and FaceTiming for a catch-up every night; the days of not seeing your parents for weeks on end are long gone.

Finally, where are the voices of women? Boarding in the 1970s was not exclusively a male experience, yet I cannot remember reading in any newspaper about the female boarding experience, which I suspect was a more positive one.

Natasha Baker

Penn, Buckinghamshire



Richard Beard’s piece reminded me of the motto of Eton College – Floreat Etona (May Eton Flourish). The school’s primary concern is to preserve itself. Is it any wonder, with this message having been instilled in them at the age of 13, that our two most recent Etonian prime ministers have focused so much on their own financial interests and that of their friends – to the detriment of others?

Matthew Handy

Harrogate



Put PE centre stage

Rightly dissatisfied Labour councillors should support two proposals (“Tories ‘squandering Olympic legacy’ as school PE declines”, News). First, that physical education should be promoted from foundation to core status in the national curriculum so that no pupil misses out through the demands of examination preparation, the priority of other subjects or the temporary loss of facilities for other needs. Core subjects get more time and attention and receive more intensive monitoring and inspection. Funding for professional development is also greater, and time spent on core subjects in primary teacher training is far more than that for foundation subjects. Second, that the school day should be lengthened to provide more time for sport, music, drama, community service and the like.

Malcolm Tozer

Portscatho, Cornwall



In squirrels we trust

The password system I use (credit to Radio 4) makes every password different and yet easy to remember (“Need a strong password? Put three random words together”, News). Take a word, let’s say squirrel, add a number, 13 and a punctuation mark, !. Squirrel13!. That’s your formula word. Now insert the first three letters of the system/site for which you are creating a password (eg a Guardian account) after the first three letters of your formula and finish off with the rest: Squguairrel13! I defy any hacking system to guess that one.

Shira Rüb

Lower Ashton, Exeter



Walking back in time

Like Will Hutton, my wife and I went walking in the Yorkshire Dales and found evidence of an even earlier invasion than the Normans (“The view from Wensleydale: old paths, dry-stone walls and Norman subjugation”, Comment). Returning to our pub in Dentdale, the landlord asked where we had been and I described the long, wide, grassy path that overlooked the valley. “That’ll be the Occy,” he said. The occupation road.”

“The Normans?” I asked. “No. The Romans. It linked two of their forts.” Yorkshire folk have long memories.

Jon Lander

Devizes, Wiltshire



Unite to beat climate crisis

Your article about Alok Sharma declaring that Cop26 is our “last chance to save the planet” did nothing to reassure me that our future is in safe hands (“We’re on brink of catastrophe, warns Tory climate chief”, News). Even while global events are painting a clear and vivid picture of runaway climate collapse, Sharma and the majority of the public, including many working in the area of sustainability, still remain unsure about this increasingly obvious fact.

To provide worthy global leadership at this crucial point in history, the UK government should create a cross-party emergency government and demonstrate to the world that we in the UK can work together effectively for a common purpose. Furthermore, it should commission all media to get involved in an adult re-education exercise to help people understand that we all need to embrace rapid “degrowth” and a minimalist lifestyle. Such action would be an appropriate response to the code-red IPCC report that was published on Monday.

Barbara Williams

Long Hanborough, Oxfordshire



A matter of perspective

Lovely account of London’s Camley Street Natural Park (“Wild at heart”, Magazine) except for the phrase: “As prostitutes plied their trade.” That should be: “As men abused prostituted women.” It’s all a matter of perspective.

Jane Lawson

London SE7



Plight of Pakistani exiles

Your report “Dissident Pakistani exiles in UK ‘on hit list’ ” (News), highlighting the plight of Baloch nationalists living in Europe under the Pakistani intelligence agencies’ death threat, will be much appreciated, not only by Balochi but by freedom-loving people everywhere.

The Balochi are fighting for independence from Pakistani rule. Before 1947, Balochistan’s political status was similar to that of Sikkim, Bhutan and Nepal. It declared its independence from Britain in 1947, only to be occupied by Pakistan in April 1948 and has remained so ever since.

Under the Pakistani occupation, thousands of Baloch people have been massacred, hundreds of thousands made refugees and thousands more have disappeared or been tortured and jailed, often without trial. The assassinations of Karima Baloch in Canada and Sajid Hussain in Sweden are merely the tip of the iceberg.

It is a pity that, while the international community leaves no stone unturned to publicise human rights violations in Kashmir, Gaza and the West Bank, it chooses to remain silent when it comes to denouncing such violations in Balochistan.

Om Prakash Shabbi

Jalandhar, Punjab, India



Goodness? Gracious me

Reading Catherine Bennett’s piece (“Allegra Stratton leads by example in saving the world… she doesn’t fancy it just yet” (Comment) reminded me of the words of St Augustine in his Confessions: “Please God, make me good, but not just yet.”

David Hughes

Bath


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@