“I don’t go out, I don’t really go clubbing, I don’t drink, I don’t do none of that,” says Sohail Hussain, who is explaining how all encompassing his hobby is. “All my money goes on cars – for me it’s an investment.”

Hussain is one of three actors starring in Peaceophobia, a piece from collaborative theatre company Common Wealth and Fuel that interweaves stories about Islam, faith and modified car culture. Set in a car park in Bradford, the three drivers – Casper Ahmed, Mohammad Ali Yunis and Hussain – chat pistons and prayer over the constant hum of engine noise and tension.

Ali is mistaken for a drug dealer because of his car, Casper is harassed when working as a doorman, Sohail is told “he’s not like the other Asians” when he politely interacts with dog walkers.

The play originated from Speakers’ Corner, a political safe space in Bradford where a group of young Muslim women suggested doing something to de-stigmatise their brothers’ love of cars and Islam. The group originally held a car rally in Bradford’s city centre, where motor enthusiasts of all backgrounds met and talked about their shared pride. After that was a success, Common Wealth decided there was more to explore in the subculture.

It’s creative. When they see someone else’s car they appreciate it as art

Written by Zia Ahmed, the production is a typical of Common Wealth’s collaborative approach. The actors, all of whom have day jobs, contributed real-life stories that made it into the play, while six women from Speakers’ Corner also served as co-directors alongside Evie Manning.

Iram Rehman is one of them and says the project is about informing and unpicking some well-worn stereotypes about Bradford’s Asian population, who make up 20% of the city’s residents. “Because of the Bradford riots, there’s a lot of stigma around Muslim men,” she says. “The impression is that they are violent because of what happened, and they don’t really have a voice themselves. These are normal, Muslim men. They are passionate about certain things in life but they just want to live their lives.”

Ahmed, who is from south London, spent time with the three lead actors, listening to their stories and crafting a play that delivers a deeper look into the daily experiences of the three protagonists, from everyday racism and religious bigotry to harassment and street violence. “Casper talks a lot about his faith in the play. Faith is what brings him peace, but it’s also the thing that puts him under surveillance.”

Real-life stories … ‘There’s a lot of stigma around Muslim men’

Manning says the dedication and skills they devote to their cars is somehow lost in the mix of moral panic headlines and a general distrust of Asian men that has festered since 2001. “It’s creative, it really is like art to them,” says Manning. “And when they see someone else’s car they appreciate it as art because they know how much work goes into it.”

Ali, who founded Bradford Modified Club which holds meets for car enthusiasts, explains that since the Covid-19 lockdowns, driving while brown in Bradford has become increasingly difficult. He estimates he’s been stopped more than 10 times in the last two months and faced fines that amount to hundreds of pounds. “It’s taking the piss,” he says.

That anger and tension builds through the play as the cars themselves begin to “speak” with the actors and map out the political moments that shaped the men’s experiences: from the formation of the BNP in the early 80s, to the Manningham riots in 1995 and the start of the Prevent strategy after 9/11.

The result is a rare – and often funny – peek into the psyches of British Muslim men and a shocking reminder of what two decades of Islamophobic media coverage and government policy has delivered.

Common Wealth are based in both Bradford and Cardiff and have built a reputation for their challenging, site-specific work. Peaceophobia is similarly rooted in its locality. Bradford’s Telegraph and Argus newspaper is peppered with stories about car crime and associated antisocial behaviour, while the lyrics and videos of local bassline acts like Bad Boy Chiller Crew constantly reference car culture..

“This play could only come from Bradford,” says Manning, who will be touring it around the country from September.

Yet despite the hyperlocal nature of the piece, Manning says Peaceophobia is about the universal problem of being misunderstood. These men are essentially geeks, she says. Nerds with an addiction to buffing their cars, rather than antisocial petrolheads. “There’s none of that easy stereotype thing of, like, boys who drive cars are tough. It’s just not that at all.”

Changing that perception is one of the reasons Sohail joined the project. “I just want people to understand us,” he says. “A lot of people who see a car come past think either he’s a drug dealer or up to no good. So if people have the confidence to approach us and talk to us after seeing the play – that would be a win in my eyes.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Initially, this year’s Friends reunion didn’t exactly offer much in the way of entertainment. There was Justin Bieber dressed as a potato, and there was that meme about Matt LeBlanc looking like someone’s Irish uncle. Apart from that, the whole thing felt like an elaborate attempt to give James Corden even more air time.

But that was then. Because now that David Schwimmer and Jennifer Aniston are dating, the Friends reunion has become an important historical document and must be preserved for ever.

Now, it’s important to state here that Schwimmer and Aniston might not be dating. This whole kerfuffle seems to come from two pieces of information. The first was the segment from the Friends reunion – the only segment, really, that offered any new information – where they admitted they had secret crushes on each other while they were filming Friends. The second is that, after the reunion, Schwimmer apparently flew to Aniston’s home in LA so they could visit a vineyard together.

There are hundreds of reasons why Schwimmer might want to visit Aniston, many completely mundane. But the internet wants the two to date, so that’s it. They’re dating. They’re definitely dating, and it’s definitely amazing, and they call each other “my lobster” while they stroke each other’s hair in bed, and spend their days dancing around in fountains and wearing all of Chandler’s clothes and shouting “Pivot!”

Sure, a couple of years ago the internet hoped against hope that Aniston would get back with Brad Pitt, but that’s old news now. There’s something oddly defeated about a woman reuniting with an ex-husband. But a co-star? A co-star who her character had an on-off relationship with, on a sitcom that stopped being made 17 years ago? That’s much more exciting. Get it on already. Call each other Ross and Rachel while you’re doing it. Go on, hurry up, we’re all watching.

We’ve been invested in this for decades now ... Aniston and Schwimmer. Photograph: NBCUniversal/Getty Images

True, there may be something genuinely icky about deliberately confusing an actor with the role they play on television. We’re only interested in Schwimmer and Aniston getting together because we saw them act out a mimicry of infatuation on a show we liked. Had they played brother and sister on Friends, the internet might not have exploded with the same level of joy. But because we invested a decade of our stupid lives hoping Ross would end up with Rachel, it is suddenly of the utmost importance that Schwimmer follows the exact rote beats of this fictional relationship with Aniston. We demand it.

The optimist in me hopes this is all true. That two people in their 50s, who have both been beaten up by love in the past, have finally found lasting happiness with an old friend. It hopes that Schwimmer and Aniston will now have the most meaningful relationship of their lives, and find the lasting trust and companionship that has thus far eluded them.

But the cynic in me knows better than this. It knows that interest in the Friends cast is higher than usual post-reunion, and this may be nothing more than an attempt to stay in the headlines. It has seen the Instagram posts of Schwimmer self-consciously hawking T-shirts featuring Ross and Rachel embracing, and it has a horrible lurching feeling that this entire romance is nothing more than an opportunity to sell a range of sub-Redbubble tat.

Besides, everyone knows Rachel should have ended up with Bruce Willis.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tommy Jessop was 22 when he first saw a character with Down’s syndrome on screen. “It was … me!” he says with a grin, sitting in his family’s living room. In the BBC TV drama Coming Down the Mountain in 2007, Jessop played a disabled teenager despised by his older brother. It captured Jessop’s ability to fully realise his characters on screen. “Making viewers feel emotions is my passion in life,” says Jessop.

In person, the 36-year-old is animated company. There are many things Jessop thinks are either “brilliant” or “wicked”, including but not limited to: receiving an honorary doctorate in arts from the University of Winchester, his “top secret” new acting project, being a volunteer usher at the Theatre Royal, Callum Wilson and Allan Saint-Maximin from Newcastle United, Bradley Walsh’s The Chase, and presenting an award at the 2021 Bafta ceremony. His recent passion project is cooking, where he shares the results on Twitter with his nearly 30,000 followers. (“I’ve made flapjacks and cakes, shepherd’s pie and fish pie,” he says.)

Jessop has made a career out of overcoming obstacles. Growing up in Hampshire, he developed a taste for the limelight appearing in junior school plays. “I enjoyed being the centre of attention,” he says. His mother, Jane, believed it might just be a phase but Jessop kept getting cast. After he left school, Jane founded Blue Apple Theatre, a group dedicated to assisting actors with learning disabilities in taking their next steps on stage.



Her son, never ducking a challenge, took the lead in the Blue Apple Theatre’s touring production of Hamlet. “That was one of my personal highlights in my career,” he remembers. “I learned how to sword fight and to do the famous speech, to be or not to be.” No less than former Royal Shakespeare Company legend Mark Rylance told Jessop his performance was “phenomenal”.

Jessop was fortunate enough to be selected from hundreds of applicants for the Talent Fund for Disabled Actors – a bursary scheme organised by the BBC, Channel 4 and the Actors Centre – which helps nurture talent by running sessions for young people with top directors and industry figures. He started getting key TV roles in medical dramas such as Casualty and Holby City, building up his confidence and knowledge of the craft. Critically acclaimed dramatic roles followed in short films such as Innocence and Fighter.

Without question, however, Jessop’s biggest role so far was playing Terry Boyle in Line of Duty, Jed Mercurio’s hugely popular TV crime thriller. In seasons five and six, Jessop plays an unwitting victim, who, through “mate crime”, is first tricked into storing a dead body in his freezer, then subsequently framed for murder. At one dramatic moment, Boyle is interrogated, then nearly drowned in a freezing lake. “Being on set was literally like being in a James Bond film,” is Jessop’s memory of his on-screen near death experience, comparing the temperature to “living in Antarctica” and expressing his gratitude to his “brilliant” castmate Vicky McClure for giving him a hug to warm him up.

The results were viewed by 11 million people, including, to Jessop’s delight, the Queen. “I was literally speechless when I read that story,” he remembers. “It was really quite overwhelming.” The only drawback to appearing on a major BBC show was the ongoing health checks. “Well, you might let the Guinness World Records know: I took 21 Covid tests. It was very tough.” He clearly loved every other aspect of the experience – and was certainly not fazed by the description of his character as a “local oddball” by superintendent Ted Hastings. “This is showing the world what this ‘oddball’ is really capable of doing: in character I’ve even planned a murder!” says Jessop.

Asked what advice he would give other young actors with Down’s syndrome, Jessop believes you can be the agent of your own success. “Keep on dreaming and believing,” he says. “One day you really will reap the rewards of your hard work.” He believes passionately that disabled people need to be given chances to appear on screen, playing a wide variety of characters rather than merely timid victims or infantile objects of pity. “Look at the type of people I’ve played: a murderer, a fighter, a thief, a fisherman, a football fan …”

Jessop warms to this theme. “People have outdated views about disabled performers. We have jobs and hobbies, we fall in love and out of love. Please let us show you what we can do in life and in film. If we are on screen, people will know that we can live interesting lives and have skills and talents.”

Jessop believes that we can expect to see more multifaceted performances in the future. “The biggest challenge is to persuade producers and showrunners to believe in performers like me. People making short films seem to believe in us and trust us as performers to create amazing work – people making feature films need to learn from them. Just let us play characters with the same hopes, dreams and adventures everyone else has!”

He feels there is so much more progress to be made. “I’m breaking down barriers because there was no writing for actors like me, because they didn’t know we could play the roles.” He is profoundly grateful for the industry support he has received, but issues something of a challenge: “I can play any role you throw at me. Just give me a chance.”

Want to see more creator stories like your own? Be inspired, check out Adobe Diverse Voices
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Reading has always been everything to me, keeping me afloat when the sea of life gets choppy. Working in a bookshop added another dimension; not only was I was soothed in a near magical way by the physical presence of the books, but talking to strangers about them could always lift my mood. What joy, then, to explore all that in a bibliographic memoir. I imagined my dream customer, addressed them directly, and proffered anecdotes and themed booklists. Dear Reader was born.

My ulterior motive was that the novel I was writing was rather too full of characters who did little other than read. ‘“That’s no good,” I said to myself. “Fiction needs action!” I decided to restrain myself when it came to my novel, Everyone Is Still Alive.

But it didn’t work out that way. I tried, but I proved incapable of creating a cast who didn’t read at all. So, I surrendered to the inevitable. I would be the author of a novel in my own beloved sub-genre of books that are not only fiction, but about fiction; that are full of bookworms who strive to make sense of themselves and their world by reading and writing about it. Here, roughly in the order I encountered them, are 10 of my most cherished.

1. Anne of Green Gables by LM Montgomery

Orphan Anne Shirley felt as real to me as any of the flesh and blood little girls I knew, and I longed to be able to climb into the pages and join her story club. We have a lot in common. Anne is a ferocious bookworm who gets into trouble for reading Ben Hur in class because she just can’t stop until she knows how the chariot race will turn out. Such is the lure of reading, that she has to get her guardian, Matthew, to lock up tempting books in the jam closet until she has finished her homework.

Bill Nighy and Romola Garai in Tim Fywell’s 2003 film adaptation of I Capture the Castle Photograph: Allstar/BBC

2. I Capture the Castle by Dodie Smith

Cassandra Mortmain writes her diary while sitting in the kitchen sink, capturing her eccentric family. Her father, still famous for his experimental novel Jacob’s Ladder, is now stuck and does nothing but read as many detective novels as he can find. Cassandra’s beautiful sister, Rose, frets because she has no clothes and no opportunities. When they hear that rich Americans are about to move in next door, it reminds them of the scene in Pride and Prejudice where Mrs Bennet says that Netherfield Hall is let at last. Perhaps now something exciting will happen …

3. Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy

I’ve been reading and rereading this novel since my teens. My favourite scene these days is near the beginning when Anna is returning from meeting Vronsky for the first time and scarcely wants to admit the attraction. On the train home she reads an English novel and it is her impatience and frustration that signal to us that she is about to transgress: “It was unpleasant to read, that is to say, to follow the reflections of other people’s lives. She was too eager to live herself.”

4. The Light Years by Elizabeth Jane Howard

In the first of the Cazalet chronicles, Howard layers up satisfying details about what everyone is reading. Somerset Maugham, Margaret Irwin, Howard Spring and Angela Thirkell all get a mention and the characters are in and out of bookshops. When the brothers and their wives meet at the family home in the country, everyone chooses a book that reveals much about their character.

5. The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club by Dorothy Sayers

“Reading is an escape to me. Is it to you?” While investigating a death that occurs during the Armistice Day parade, Lord Peter Wimsey learns a lot about his suspect from her bookcase – Woolf, Mansfield, DH Lawrence – and rightly concludes that she is unhappy rather than guilty of a crime. Wimsey says that when he was in a nursing home with shell shock all he could do was play patience and read detective stories: “All the others had the War in them – or love … or some damn’ thing I didn’t want to think about.”

6. The English Patient by Michael Ondaatje

In a villa north of Florence in 1945, Hana chooses books from the huge library to read to her badly burned patient, who was rescued by the Bedouin when his plane crashed in the desert. He is damaged beyond recognition and has no memory. The only possession that survived the fire is his copy of The Histories by Herodotus, into which he has glued pages from other books and written observations in his small, gnarled handwriting. They live quietly and slowly, and then everything changes with the arrival of a friend of Hana’s father who has a theory about the identity of her patient.

7. My Brilliant Friend by Elena Ferrante

Elena, a writer in her 60s, learns of the disappearance of her old friend Lila and resolves to write down everything she remembers of their friendship growing up together in a poor and violent neighbourhood of Naples. The girls bought a copy of Little Women and read it together until it was tattered and sweat-stained and fell apart. When they were still children, Lila wrote a novel called The Blue Fairy but it is Elena who becomes a published writer. All through their lives, literature, education and the question of who has the right to tell a story weaves through their fraught and competitive friendship.

Ruth Ozeki. Photograph: Ross Land/Getty Images

8. A Tale for the Time Being by Ruth Ozeki

An author called Ruth who lives on Desolation Sound in British Columbia finds a lunchbox washed up on the shore. Inside are some old letters and a diary written by a 16-year-old girl called Nao Yasutani. As Ruth reads more of Nao’s story – she has moved back from the US to Tokyo and is struggling with her depressed father, her absent mother, and truly awful bullying – she tries to find out where Nao is, and whether she has survived the many challenges that threaten to overwhelm her.

9. Milkman by Anna Burns

Our 18-year-old narrator is walking along reading Ivanhoe the first time that the milkman tries to get her to go in his car. Come rain or shine, gunplay, bombs or riots, she always reads as she walks home through this unnamed 1970s city that brims with sectarian tension. Walking while reading is seen as deviant by her gossiping community, who go on to suspect that she is having an affair with the milkman. But she is scared and confused by his pursuit of her and would rather be left alone to read, always 19th-century literature because she doesn’t like the 20th. A sublime novel which is also funny.

10. The Confessions of Frannie Langton by Sara Collins

“Sometimes I picture all that reading and writing as something packed inside me. Dangerous as gunpowder. Where has it got me in the end?” Born on a plantation and brought to London by her master, Frannie knows that no one like her has ever written a book in the whole history of the world. Now, charged with the murder of her mistress, and inspired by Moll Flanders, she pens an account of everything that has happened for her lawyer. Simultaneously playful and deadly serious, this is both a highly engrossing gothic adventure and a meditation on race, ownership and the power of story.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For fans of the TV series, watching The Windsors: Endgame is akin to seeing Sex and the City: The Movie. High expectation is met by crashing disappointment. In the case of this comedy, it is puzzling that satire so sparkling on the small screen should be so lumbering in a longer-length live form.

It is momentarily thrilling to see the “royals” on stage, resplendent in ermine and waxed jackets, against the backdrop of Madeleine Girling’s palatial sets. But the jokes fall short of the dark imagination and quick intelligence of the Channel 4 series, which is a cross between Dead Ringers and The Crown, with deliciously surreal plotlines and pointed political comedy.

Sparkling satire? ... Kara Tointon as Kate and Ciarán Owens as Wills in The Windsors: Endgame. Photograph: Marc Brenner

This production, directed by Michael Fentiman, is written by the creators of the TV show, Bert Tyler-Moore and George Jeffrie; the latter died in September last year after completing the first draft. The cast is largely different to the series, though Harry Enfield still plays Prince Charles, Tom Durant-Pritchard is Harry and Matthew Cottle plays Edward. Emerging before the curtain opens, Edward tells us he is 12th in line to the throne – after Princess Eugenie but before Danny Dyer. It is all fine as a warmup act but the humour becomes more blunt-edged.

Harry and Meghan (Crystal Condie) are California yogis;. Kara Tointon, the strongest non-TV series performer, is Kate, who loves her Boden catalogue. We are urged to boo Camilla (Tracy-Ann Oberman), who really is a panto villain. There is topicality, with mentions of the Oprah interview with Harry and Meghan and of the former health secretary, but it is shoehorned in crudely. “Do you mind if I Matt Hancock your buttocks?” says Harry to Kate in an illicit clinch.

The central story is outlandish: the Queen has abdicated, Charles is king and power-mad Camilla encourages him to turn his monarchy into absolute rule. A secondary plotline sees Princesses Beatrice (Jenny Rainsford) and Eugenie (Eliza Butterworth) trying to prove their father, Prince Andrew (Tim Wallers), innocent of “nonce-gate”.

Topical ... Tom Durant-Pritchard as Harry and Crystal Condie as Meghan in The Windsors: Endgame. Photograph: Marc Brenner

One good joke pops up at the end when Charles is about to die and Wills tells him he loves him. Emotionally repressed even in death throes, Charles responds: “I send you my very best wishes.”

Prince Edward’s infamous orchestration of a version of It’s a Knockout is mentioned at one point. In its own way, this feels comparable to that royal disaster.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sharlene Whyte doesn’t just remember the racist murder of Stephen Lawrence in 1993. When the 18-year-old was fatally stabbed while waiting for a bus in south-east London, it was “one of the defining moments” of her teenage years.

“Now I have a son who’s 17,” says the actor, “and every time he goes out, I have fears for him in terms of safety on the streets and the attitude of some police. It would have amazed me to think, at the time Stephen Lawrence was killed, that, nearly 30 years later, the same issues would still exist. It’s better, but there are still big problems.”

The long legal and social consequences of the Lawrence case are the subject of Stephen, a three-part ITV drama screened later this month. Whyte portrays Stephen’s mother, Doreen, now Lady Lawrence for her decades of campaigning to bring her son’s killers to justice and for broader reforms in policing and racial equality. Hugh Quarshie plays Neville Lawrence, the victim’s father and Doreen’s ex-husband, just as he did in The Murder of Stephen Lawrence, an award-winning documentary-drama screened by ITV in 1999.

Raw grief … Doreen and Neville Lawrence in 1995. Photograph: Times Newspapers/Shutterstock

Executive producer of both projects, Mark Redhead, says that returning to the story in Stephen felt necessary because there is “unfinished business. I kept in touch with Doreen and Neville and became increasingly aware that this story isn’t over.”

Doreen was, in effect, leading the police investigation but wasn’t able to go in to do it

The initial film followed events from the murder to the collapse of a private prosecution brought by the Lawrences in 1996 against three suspects after the Crown Prosecution Service ruled there was insufficient evidence for a criminal trial. Stephen dramatises a reinvestigation of the case by DCI Clive Driscoll, a veteran detective in the Metropolitan police’s Criminal Investigation Division (CID). With forensic evidence found by processes unavailable at the time of the murder – and helped by Doreen Lawrence’s over-turning of the “double jeopardy” law, which prevented retrial of those previously acquitted – Driscoll brought two of the suspects to trial and conviction at the Old Bailey, while fighting considerable hostility towards his efforts from within the Met.

Steve Coogan, who plays Driscoll, says: “I don’t often play nice people so it was a change to play someone with integrity – simple, unannounced integrity, if you like.”

Now retired, the 70-year-old Driscoll tells me on the phone (“I’m a bit old-fashioned about Zoom”) from his south London home what he found when he-opened the files in 2006: “From the very beginning, I felt there was a dislike of the Lawrence family, which I’d never encountered before towards the mum and dad of a murder victim.” Was that racism? “There were great detectives in CID. But I think there were also people who didn’t give a toss if it was a black man who got murdered.”

The exact opposite of a maverick cop … Coogan as Driscoll. Photograph: Laurence Cendrowicz/ITV

Driscoll says that DCI Gene Hunt, the bigoted boozer played by Philip Glenister in Life on Mars and Ashes to Ashes was “a pretty realistic depiction of a CID officer of that period. There was a huge drinking culture and it was almost acceptable to go for a drink with the bad guys.”

Driscoll is unusual in police drama because his status as a “maverick” (the preferred characteristic of telly cops) comes not from breaking the rules but going back to them – supporting the victim’s family, sympathetically interviewing witnesses, collecting evidence, in a way that earlier investigations had not.

“The first thing we said to Steve Coogan,” says screenwriter Frank Cottrell Boyce, “is that Clive is the exact opposite of a maverick cop: he is going to do the job properly.”

Joe Cottrell Boyce, the dramatist’s son and co-writer, adds: “Clive believes in the original [Metropolitan police founder] Robert Peel principles of policing by community consent. And that was where he and Doreen found common ground.”

“When I took over young Stephen’s case,” Driscoll explains, “I gave the Lawrences and the witnesses we were trying to persuade to give evidence my phone number, and said, ‘you can call me any time. If I’m crying, it means I’m watching Fulham FC play, but I’ll talk to you.’ And that wasn’t how things were supposed to be done in the Met then.”

Affectingly, Driscoll always calls the victim “young Stephen”, the age at which death froze him. (If he had lived, Lawrence would now be 46, and perhaps the architect he wanted to be.)

Young Stephen … Lawrence would be 46. Photograph: Photo News Service/Shutterstock

Although much of the crew (including the head of every production department) were people of colour, the fact that Driscoll and the co-writers are white will inevitably bring charges of the drama having a “white saviour” narrative. But producer Madonna Baptiste says: “It’s a realistic portrayal in that, in the end, it took three people to crack this.”

Unusually – and against the classic rules of drama, which allow only one protagonist – Stephen has a trio of protagonists: Doreen, Neville and Driscoll. “The case would not have gone to court,” says Redhead, “without Neville and Doreen and we try to present Clive in a fairly unheroic way as being the servant of their case. In the end, we are a mixed-race nation and people should work together happily and collaboratively, which is what happens in this case. And, in fact, on this production, which is made by people of different backgrounds.”

Frank Cottrell Boyce expects that “a lot of viewers will come into this thinking Clive is going to help Doreen. But it soon becomes clear that – from her decades of campaigning and meetings – she understands far more about the culture and problems of the Met and she helps him to understand that.”

That dynamic is illustrated in a moment when the investigation meets one of its many obstacles and Doreen casually tells Clive that she “can phone the home secretary”.

“In the editing,” says Baptiste, “there was a natural rhythm – a Clive moment, a Doreen moment, a Neville moment.”

“Doreen was, in effect, leading an investigation but wasn’t able to go in to do it,” explains Frank Cottrell Boyce. “Clive was sort of her man on the inside. So the structure replicates her weird situation of trying to take on an institution without being allowed through the door.”

The actors were given the choice of whether to consult their real-life models. Whyte chose not to: “I felt I wanted to keep a respectful distance from Doreen, although I found reading her book very helpful.”

Because her profile comes from public appearances expressing raw grief and campaigning zeal, Lady Lawrence has a public image of pained determination. So this dramatisation may surprise some.

“It was very much the aim to show the warmth and humour she has,” says Whyte. “Understandably, what comes across in public is her determination and her cause, but clearly there has to be a different private side as well, and that’s what we’ve tried to catch. The relationship with Clive is fascinating because it is a friendship that grew from mutual respect and shared values that might, in other circumstances, have become a romance.”

Clive Driscoll is pleased by the script’s emphasis: “Doreen Lawrence is nothing like people think she is. She’s an amusing and friendly person in a way that, in the circumstances, wasn’t going to come across in public.”

Humour … Whyte as Doreen Lawrence. Photograph: Laurence Cendrowicz/ITV

During pre-production, Steve Coogan had a three-hour phone call with Driscoll, who remembers: “He didn’t really ask me about the story. He asked me why I was so keen to take young Stephen’s case, and why I thought it went differently when I took it over. I said I decided just to investigate it as a murder and ignore all the razzmatazz around the story. And we talked about how sometimes it can be better to be practical rather than highly educated. I have a Grade C in woodwork. But is someone with all these degrees necessarily a better detective?”

During that long conversation, Coogan recalls: “I asked Clive why he hadn’t become corrupt like so many coppers of his generation. And he said that his mum had brought him up a certain way and so taking back-handers or whatever would have been letting her down.”

“He’s far better looking than me,” adds Driscoll of Coogan. “He’s never going to be a body-double. But people tell me he’s got my accent off.”

Redhead sent the writers a list of what he calls “Clive-isms”, such as: “They call it common sense but it ain’t that common.” Driscoll laughs loudly at this: “I think my kids and my colleagues might call them something worse than Clive-isms. It’s me. It’s how I am. When I first joined the force, I really hated it and I realised I was trying to be some idea of what a police officer should be. I actually resigned and someone advised me to just be myself, and, after that, I loved it. Doreen Lawrence always says that she knew that if I’d made a cock-up I’d tell her.”

Stephen joins the small sub-set of dramas (including Waiting for Godot and Abigail’s Party) in which the title character does not appear. The dead teenager has a presence only in photographs on walls and in court-room evidence. Another memorial, explains Baptiste, is that, in the musical score by Segun Akinola, “there is a leitmotif that represents Stephen, so, when you see his clothes or he is mentioned, he is there subliminally.”

Although there were at least three other suspects, Driscoll was “compulsorily retired” after achieving two convictions in 2011 and the Met last year announced that the investigation is now closed.

“I know [the Lawrences] feel that there was no willingness or enthusiasm at the Met to carry on,” says Driscoll. “The bosses just wanted it to go away, but it won’t ever. I always said the best way to make it go away would be to solve it. Then it’s gone.”

The retired detective also points out that Stephen isn’t just about an old case: “As much as it breaks my heart to say it, young men being killed with knives on the streets of London isn’t uncommon.”

“It does feel like there’s been an improvement,” says Baptiste. “People notice racism more and want to change things. We just mustn’t think that’s enough. There’s a long way to go.”

Driscoll says he “speaks to Doreen Lawrence maybe twice a month, pop over for a cup of coffee. Mr Lawrence I call up in Jamaica now that I’ve worked out the time difference. He asked me why I always called him at three in the morning and I had to be honest and say that it was because I was under the impression it was three in the afternoon there.” He sees Stuart Lawrence, Stephen’s surviving brother, at football matches.

In TV dramas, retired cops have dreams and nightmares about old cases. Does he? “It was a massive privilege to investigate young Stephen’s case. I don’t know if it’s a nightmare but there were a couple of leads or opportunities [on the other killers]. And I wish I’d had the chance to satisfy myself if that evidence was good, bad, or indifferent. And my dream, I suppose, is that this drama will prick someone’s conscience to come forward with the information that will allow Lady Lawrence and Mr Lawrence and their families to have some closure. It may be a naive dream but that’s what I want because we should be grateful to them for helping to expose weaknesses in our system which hopefully we’ve been able to start to plug.”

Stephen is on ITV later this month.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@At the Temple Beth Torah in Holliston, Massachusetts, congregant Misha Defonseca bared her soul on Holocaust Remembrance Day in 1989, or perhaps 1990. As is the case with most aspects of the episode she’d set in motion on that January morning, the particulars are murky.

She spun an extraordinary yarn recounting her childhood years, from fleeing her home in Belgium after the Nazis apprehended her resistance-fighter parents, to a grueling odyssey on foot across occupied Europe, to an interlude living feral under the tutelage of a wild wolfpack. Her life story had all the tragedy and triumph of a film or a novel or, as fellow Beth Torah congregant and publisher Jane Daniel would soon persuade her, a memoir. Misha: a Mémoire of the Holocaust Years was a runaway success, complete with a co-sign from Oprah, a French film adaptation and a prospective adaptation deal with Disney.

But as suspicions over veracity arose and nudged her words from incredible to not-credible, everything would soon come undone in swift and embarrassing fashion, leading to years of legal battles and millions in fines.

Sam Hobkinson, director of the new Netflix documentary Misha and the Wolves, was instantly intrigued by Defonseca’s tale and the layers of meta-narrative surrounding it, like a gobstopper of deception. “Six years ago, I came across this whole affair in a small article in a British newspaper,” Hobkinson told the Guardian from his home in London. “It was about the ongoing court case in Massachusetts, into the tail end of this whole thing, and this struck me as fascinating, insofar as it was a look into how and why we believe things we are told to be true. It took the shape of a documentary about storytelling itself, in a way.

“And in the age of fake news, when truth is a slippery concept, this would be particularly fitting. I researched more and more into the background of this trial and couldn’t believe the story I’d happened upon.”

While dissecting that paradoxical phenomenon of believing the unbelievable, his film doubles as tense reportage tracing the trail of the genealogists and other self-appointed quasi-detectives as they sniff out the facts. He reveals critical facts at the same pace that they were uncovered at the time, leaning into the natural suspense that Misha could only invent. “I wanted to approach this like a thriller director, and for the audience to experience this story as its participants would have,” Hobkinson says. “People went into this blind and unknowing, the friends of Misha and the publishers, and they had a gut-wrenching revelation as the story unfolded. I wanted to tell it so that the audience could share in that.”

Though playing his cards close to the vest charged up the excitement of what he calls a “past-tense story,” Hobkinson also recognises that withholding information can be delicate business. He was wary of crossing the line that separates savvy narrative construction from cheap rigging of the game. The director explains that this ethical quandary “was in the forefront of our minds all along.”

“We had this idea of folding in untruths to the telling of the story,” he says. “We wanted the film-making to reflect that artifice, and we sought out devices that could assist in that. But in simple terms, for documentary film-making, the viewer needs to leave the cinema – or finish streaming the series, whatever you’re doing – armed with all the information there is to know. Along the way, to make the telling more interesting and representative of this story’s themes, I think it’s fair game to hold things back and misdirect the audience. As long as you’ve delivered everything you know on the subject once all is said and done.”

He does just that with the assistance of the self-appointed investigators who trawled file cabinets and library shelves for proof of Defonseca’s claims – or proof of their falsehood. Hobkinson saw the ethically shady Defonseca and her exploitative publisher as “flawed, complex characters,” leaving the protagonist role to one Evelyne Haendel, a fellow Belgian survivor and “hidden child” resentful of the idea that someone could turn the components of her own trauma into a lucrative fib. The flinty old woman was at first reluctant to participate in the production and relive events from years earlier, but once she did, she was “open and committed” in sharing both her recollections and her reflections on them. Now, the film acts as an unwitting tribute to her memory; she died of lung cancer a few months after recording her segments of the film, having shown Hobkinson what journalistic determination looks like.

Misha Defonseca Photograph: Netflix

“One of the things that interested me about [this process] was how it addresses the process of documentary-making,” he says. “You have the publisher, a woman who’s discovered what she thinks is an amazing true story that she wants to tell to the world. And to some extent, she’s so bent on telling this story for various reasons that she doesn’t do the homework she should’ve. I kept thinking, ‘There but for the grace of God go I.’ When it comes to finding new stories, the experience of this film has taught me to do my due diligence and then some.”

He realised that he was handling sensitive material from the outset: the intersection of Holocaust studies and skepticism is hazardous territory. The devastation of the Shoah has attracted an unusual number of hoaxers beyond Defonseca, from Jerzy Kosinski’s fabrications in The Painted Bird to Binjamin Wilkomirski’s debunked memoir Fragments to a similar exposure of Herman Rosenblat’s Angel at the Fence. More than simple literary misrepresentation, these incidents give ammunition to Holocaust deniers. “You don’t take on subject matter like this lightly,” Hobkinson says. “You have to be conscious of whether you might be fanning the flames of Holocaust denial. There were some financiers who were worried about participating for that reason – they felt it was queasy, highlighting the fact that some people fabricate Holocaust stories. Deniers would have us thinking that if we can claim one story to be untrue, how can we believe the rest? We can’t push this issue under the rug, best to tackle it head-on. I wanted to wrestle the narrative back from the Holocaust deniers.”

That imperative shapes the final scenes of the film, which point not toward the frisson of scandal, but to the question of who can be entrusted with stewardship of history. Defonseca’s lies and their fallout illustrate the vital importance of safeguarding the truth, and how easily the appearance of truth can be appropriated, manipulated and abused. For the dwindling number of Holocaust survivors, nothing could be more crucial than the maintenance and preservation of the record. This requires a trust that Hobkinson, along with his audience, learn can be all too easily abused.

“As we were going along, I thought a lot about why Holocaust narratives have attracted so many hoaxes,” Hobkinson says. “I hope this comes through in the film, that the story Misha told was pretty out there. But the context from which she tells it, her own experiences as a young Jewish girl during the Holocaust, make it very difficult to question. The thing that protected her, that made her hard to question, was the place of authority from which she was telling it. Potentially, that’s why more Holocaust hoax narratives have slipped through, because it’s a sort of sacred ground. Far be it from me to question someone sharing these horrible experiences they’ve gone through.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For feminists of the postwar Freudian era, it wasn’t so much disgust we were taking on. We were fighting ideas of lacking (penises, capabilities). We were being deprived of power, recognition and opportunity. We looked at the consequences of women’s roles as child bearers and emotional nurturers and how our profound dependency on mothers generated fear. We looked at the terrors, disappointments and desire to control that dependency.

Eimar McBride uses disgust in a visceral sense. The disgust coming at us. The shame and repulsion women feel towards our own bodies. Her framing adds another particularly useful layer to the discussion about dependency and the fear of it. Dirt, as her title reminds us, is “matter out of place”. A woman is an object who has dared to become a subject and is now out of place, wrong. And surely she is right. The backlash against women – from the vicious marketing of “beauty” to the use of rape as a weapon of war and the control of women’s bodies in certain US states that prioritise a foetus over a mother in need of medical treatment (I could go on) – tells us that disgust is a form of social control.

This is a control that is bred into girls from early on. They see their siblings, aunts and mothers taming and transforming the body as though there were something wrong with it. We drench women in shame. We still divide them into the sanctified and the sinner. Where once “sexual ignorance was a sign of a woman’s market value, now any admission of reticence or sexual naivete causes her stock to plummet”. However, McBride writes, women and girls are not only crossing the lines that have been drawn for us, but changing “the very lie of the line”, unleashing danger for those – Harvey Weinstein et al – who cannot, or will not, accept that change.

Her final point, in this satisfying polemic, is that women’s ability to manage conflicting demands could bring complexity and nuance to solving world problems and help us all navigate territories of contradiction. Yes, and well, sort of yes, for the fear that lurks behind the internal patriarch that lives inside us needs to be engaged with, too. Without that, we are destined to fix the pain and vulnerability of individual others rather than society as a whole.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@TV

Pose

8 August

The final series of Ryan Murphy’s drama, set against the backdrop of black and Latinx drag ball culture in 80s and 90s, arrives on UK screens this month. As mayor Rudy Giuliani clamps down on sex work and Aids looms large in New York, Pray Tell (Billy Porter) slips further into addiction, as pain and suffering are once again contrasted with the glitz and glamour of the ballroom world.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@All the Young Men: How One Woman Risked It All To Care For The Dying Ruth Coker Burks

The immensely uplifting story of a woman who helped Aids patients

In the spring of 1986, Coker Burks was in the medical centre in Little Rock, Arkansas, visiting a friend with cancer, when she noticed three nurses drawing straws to see which one would have to enter a patient’s room. Curious, she snuck down the corridor to take a look. Inside, she found an emaciated young man calling for his mother.



When Coker Burks challenged the nurses, one of them told her she was crazy to go in. “He’s got that gay disease,” she said. “They all die.” They refused to contact the patient’s mother, and so Coker Burks made the call from a payphone herself. “My son is already dead,” the woman told her. “My son died when he went gay.” Appalled, she went back to the room and sat with the young man, holding his hand until he died a few hours later. But when she told the nurses he was dead, they insisted that she was now responsible for the body. It took hours of phone calls before she found a funeral home willing to perform the cremation. As for the ashes, she buried them herself in a cookie jar at Files Cemetery in Hot Springs, where her family owned some land.



This was Coker Burks’s introduction to Aids, the disease that would come to shape her life. In 1986, Aids was a death sentence. There was still no reliable treatment, let alone a cure. The fear, ignorance and stigma were so great that hospitals regularly refused to treat patients. Informal networks of care were predominantly urban, centred in the gay capitals of New York City and San Francisco. In the south, people were coming home sick and terrified, hoping for refuge with their families, only to be rejected and die alone.



Coker Burks was 26 that year, a bottle-blonde Methodist and divorced single mother in a hyper-conservative town where divorce meant “social death”. She knew that helping people with Aids put her at risk of losing custody of her four-year-old daughter, never mind being shunned by other parents, co-workers or members of her church. But, as she explains, there was literally no one else. Within weeks of her first deathbed encounter, she was rung up by a nun who told her a patient had been dumped on the doors of the Catholic hospital and they were “not equipped” to treat him and anyway didn’t “want the reputation”. Once again, she sat by his bed, holding his hand until he died.



The calls kept coming, first from hospitals, and then from the men themselves. She educated herself about the virus by sneaking into the library at the local teaching hospital. She helped people get on disability benefit and found them places to live. In between her job at a sawmill, she cooked nutritious meals for her patients, begging for vegetables from neighbours and bone marrow from local deer-hunters. When the antiretroviral drug AZT was approved in 1987, she set up an ad hoc home pharmacy in her pantry, filled with stockpiled pills left behind when people died.



I admit I was sceptical of a narrative about an angelic straight woman saving helpless gay victims, but it’s hard not to be disarmed by Coker Burks (ably ventriloquised by her ghostwriter Kevin Carr O’Leary). Over the years Coker Burks buried more than 40 people at Files Cemetery in secret, and sat at the bedside of hundreds more. But as Aids care became increasingly professionalised in the 90s, she was left behind. It isn’t clear why this competent woman was repeatedly turned down for jobs, but maybe she functioned best as a renegade, doling out condoms at the cruising ground, a sex-positive Florence Nightingale.



There’s something immensely uplifting about her decision to involve herself in the travails of a community not her own, simply because she could see that there was a need. It’s a brighter story of human nature. There are other stories of the Aids crisis that foreground activism and community, but this is a paean to making friendships across boundaries, to being kind even when the cost is nearly unbearable.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“I’m getting older,” sings Billie Eilish, who’s 19, on Happier Than Ever’s opening track. “I’ve got more on my shoulders”, she adds, which is certainly true. Her debut album When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go? wasn’t just a huge global hit, but an album that significantly altered mainstream pop music. Two years on, streaming services are clotted with bedroom-bound, teenage singer-songwriters dolefully depicting their lives: anticipation for what the genuine article does next is understandably running very high.

When We All Fall Asleep … was an album that turned universal teenage traumas – romance, hedonism, friendship groups – into knowingly lurid horror-comic fantasies, in which tongues were stapled, friends buried, hearses slept in and marble walls spattered with blood. That playfulness is less evident on its successor. It flickers occasionally, as on Overheated’s exploration of stardom in the era of social media, complete with death threats (“You wanna kill me? You wanna hurt me?” she mumbles, before giggling: “Stop being flirty”) or on NDA, where the “pretty boy” she entices home is required to sign the titular legal agreement before he leaves. But the overall tone is noticeably more sombre.

Your Power and Getting Older both deal with sexual coercion – the former explicitly, the latter more obliquely – but the album’s primary topic is fame and its negative impact on the person at the eye of the storm: stalkers lurk, relationships are ruined, privacy is invaded, an inability to shut off the babble of public opinion about every aspect of your personal life plays havoc with your mental health. The subject even seeps into the album’s love songs: on the title track, Eilish wonders if the object of her affections has read her interviews and panics about them revealing all on the internet; My Future struggles to weigh up a romance against the progress of her career.

The music follows suit. If its sonic template is broadly similar to that of its predecessor – vocals that veer from mumbling and whispering to jazz-inflected singing but never lose a sense of intimacy; electronics evidently mixed to be listened to on headphones; the occasional shading of guitar or piano – its sound feels more subdued, less flashy. There are lots of clever production touches – the backing of Goldwing loops its a capella intro, a kind of lush, multi-tracked, easy listening reading of a verse from Hindu text the Rig Veda, in a way that recalls a broadband connection glitching – and a couple of moments where it decisively shifts away from Eilish’s previous work, with mixed results: the self-explanatory Billie Bossa Nova feels like a jokey pastiche, but Oxytocin’s techno pulse, bursts of atonal synth and vocal that more or less dispenses with melody is really gripping. But the closest it comes to the sonic firework display of Bury a Friend is the title track, which gradually builds from muffled, lo-fi acoustic ballad into an epic finale, multi-tracked vocals over drums and guitars drenched in a peculiar digital form of distortion that’s discomfiting and alienating rather than warm and familiar.

The cover of Happier Than Ever. Photograph: PR

Listening to a pop star complaining about being a pop star is usually enervating. It says something about Eilish’s skill as a songwriter that, in her hands, the topic feels genuinely affecting. It clearly doesn’t sound anything like Black Sabbath or Nirvana, but there are moments when, spiritually at least, Happier Than Ever feels like a 21st-century pop equivalent of the former’s Sabotage or the latter’s In Utero, two albums that also succeeded in a painting a compellingly bleak but empathetic picture of stardom. There’s something very realistic about the way the righteous anger of both spoken word piece Not My Responsibility and Overheated – “Is it news? News to who?” – doesn’t quite mask the hurt of being judged “for looking just like the rest of you”, or the way the lyrics of Getting Older thrash around, jumping from gratitude for her success to horror at the intensity of adulation and the weight of expectation Eilish has attracted. You listen to it and think: yeah, I’d probably feel like that if I were her.

It’s worth noting that the songs thus far released from Happier Than Ever have received a response muted enough for the singer to respond (“eat my dust,” she wrote on TikTok, “my tits are bigger than yours”). Perhaps that’s inevitable, given the music she’s made. It’s less obviously ear-grabbing and immediate than its predecessor, with lyrics that move away from directly reflecting the lives of her teenage fans: there’s not much point in pretending you’re still just like them when you’ve sold millions, sung a Bond theme and appeared on the cover of Vogue dressed in a custom-made Gucci corset.

But the fact that it’s a lower-key album than her debut shouldn’t distract from Happier Than Ever’s quality. The melodies and vocals are uniformly great; writing about the pressure of fame in a way that elicits a response other than a yawn is an extremely tough trick to pull off, and Happier Than Ever does it with aplomb. And listening to its grimmer lyrical moments, you wonder if an album that dials down her celebrity slightly would be such a bad thing if Billie Eilish is in it for the long haul, which Happier Than Ever strongly suggests she is.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@American Oz

8.45pm, PBS America

L Frank Baum, the author of the 1900 Wizard of Oz book that inspired the ensuing 1939 Hollywood classic, worked variously as a chicken breeder, actor, marketer of petroleum products, shopkeeper, newspaperman and travelling salesman in his pursuit of the American dream. This two-part documentary, continuing on Thursday evening, traces his remarkable life and legacy, beginning with his journey in 1888 to move his family from Syracuse, New York to Chicago. Ammar Kalia

Craig and Bruno’s Great British Road Trips

8pm, ITV

The six-part quickstep around Britain’s picturesque tourist spots reaches its penultimate episode. Here, Craig Revel Horwood and Bruno Tonioli are in the Lake District. And whether it’s wild swimming in Coniston Water or Cumbrian wrestling, the pair aren’t afraid of getting stuck in. Phil Harrison

Fake or Fortune?

9pm, BBC One

Fiona Bruce and Philip Mould continue their quest to unearth Britain’s potential lost art treasures, this week investigating a vibrant battle scene painting picked up at an auction in Ascot 30 years ago. Could it be the work of Victorian painter Edwin Landseer, which was thought to have been lost to a flood in 1928? AK

Kurupting the Industry: The People Just Do Nothing Story. Photograph: Jack Barnes/BBC/Roughcut Television

This Way Up

10pm, Channel 4

Aisling Bea’s flawless run continues against the backdrop of a looming lockdown. It’s Shona’s hen do, which allows Sharon Horgan’s character some embarrassment in the face of a stripper. Áine then goes into verbal overload when she meets one of Richard’s friends, but is vulnerable when he delivers his verdict on her. Hannah Verdier

Missions

10pm, BBC Four

Spacesuit alors! The hit French drama that seems to revel in stacking up dizzying sci-fi concepts continues with another double bill. The Mars expedition seeking to recover Jeanne has infiltrated her forest hideaway via underground portal but the jittery crew soon learn that they are not alone. Graeme Virtue

Kurupting the Industry: The People Just Do Nothing Story

10.35pm, BBC One

To mark the release of their first feature film this month, the cast and writers behind the hit BBC Three mockumentary People Just Do Nothing step away from their pirate radio personas and trace the story of their success, from YouTube to a five-season television deal. AK

Film choice

Brie Larson and Jacob Tremblay in Room. Photograph: Allstar/Film Nation

Room (Lenny Abrahamson, 2015) 11.40pm, Film4

This heart-rending drama, adapted by Emma Donoghue from her own novel, deposits us in a small, dark room, where a mother (the rightly Oscar-garlanded Brie Larson) and her young son have been held captive for many years. A rare chance for escape leads to big changes in their lives and puts a strain on their bond. Simon Wardell

Today’s sport

Cricket: Southern Brave v Welsh Fire 6pm, BBC Two. The Hundred match live from Ageas Bowl in Southampton.

Baseball: Houston Astros v Colorado Rockies 7pm, BT Sport 2. Inter-league match.

Uefa Super Cup: Chelsea v Villarreal 7.15pm, BT Sport 1. Final from Windsor Park, Belfast.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Television

After last year’s Christmas special, it’s time to return to the vast yet crumbling Button House and its inhabitants both alive and dead. At the end of series two, young married couple Alison (Charlotte Ritchie) and Mike Cooper (Kiell Smith-Bynoe) were slowly coming to terms with the presence of their ghostly squatters. Has the harmony continued?

Monday 9 August, 8.30pm, BBC One

The Marvel Cinematic Universe expands yet further with this animated series that explores what would happen if pivotal moments from the films occurred differently. The likes of Michael B Jordan, Natalie Portman and Paul Rudd reprise their previous roles.

Wednesday 11 August, 8.30pm, Disney+

Each episode of this weekly documentary series focuses on pivotal sporting moments and goes behind the resulting headlines. Caitlyn Jenner reflects on her journey to gold, US tennis player Mardy Fish opens up about his demons, and the Malice at the Palace NBA brawl is dissected.

Tuesday 10 August, Netflix

The star-laden, dialogue-heavy anthology series based on the New York Times column of the same name returns for a second season. No longer just set in New York, its eight standalone episodes explore love in its multiple forms, while the top-notch stars include the likes of Minnie Driver, Kit Harington and Miranda Richardson.

Friday 13 August, Amazon Prime Video

The third and final season of Ryan Murphy’s pioneering drama about New York’s drag ball scene arrives in the UK. The drama shifts to 1994, with new mayor Rudy Giuliani cracking down on sex work, while Blanca is inspired to reopen the House of Evangelista.

Sunday 8 August, 10pm, BBC Two

Deceit

Niamh Algar plays the undercover officer codenamed Lizzie James in this drama based on the real-life honeytrap operation initiated by police following the murder of Rachel Nickell in 1992. With the police focused on the wrong man, the operation puts Lizzie in danger.

Friday 13 August, 9pm, Channel 4

Podcasts

Ouija believe it ... Spooked. Photograph: wnycstudios.org

Host Glynn Washington returns for a sixth season of this hit supernatural podcast, gathering listeners round the campfire to hear tales of true-life ghost stories. Previous hair-raisers have included a haunted ceramic lamb that found a Walmart worker, a stranger guiding someone through the fog, and a vision of a young girl at the foot of a bed …

Weekly, Luminary

Trashfuture co-host Hussein Kesvani and comic Olga Koch front this new podcast series taking an irreverent look at the world of cutting-edge technology. They discuss developments such as the ethics of facial recognition software, bio-hacking (implanting technology into the body itself) and the effects of tech on the environment.

Weekly, BBC Sounds

Guardian Australia reporters bring the most important antipodean stories to your ears each weekday with this series. Recent highlights have included Brigid Delaney speaking to Marie Cameron, dubbed the Witch of Darwin by the media in the 1990s, and Australia’s approach to climate change.

Weekdays, the Guardian

Puerto Rican icon Ivy Queen delves into the dramatic history of reggaeton in this new series for Spotify, highlighting the musical innovation, near-fatal feuds and political interference that shaped what is now the world’s dominant pop sound. Megastars including J Balvin, Bad Bunny (pictured) and Karol G chat about their influences and artistry.

Weekly, Spotify

The hosts of hip-hop pod Breaking Atoms, Sumit Sharma and Chris Mitchell, front this spin-off celebrating the 25th anniversary of Jay-Z’s debut album, Reasonable Doubt. They explore his musical roots, as well as how he met business partners Damon Dash and Kareem Burke.

Weekly, widely available

Film

Stillwater

( 15) (Tom McCarthy) 1 39 mins

The wrath-of-the-American-dad movie gets a rinsing in this far-fetched but oddly enjoyable thriller . Matt Damon plays Bill Baker , an Oklahoma roughneck trying to get his daughter ( Abigail Breslin ) out of a Marseille jail for a murder she says she didn’t commit. A picaresque and, in the end, surprisingly self-reflexive vigilante drama ensues.

In cinemas

(18) (Janicza Bravo) 86 mins

What happens when a sometime topless dancer (Taylour Paige) is whisked away by a stranger (Riley Keough) on a trip to Florida with the promise of a big strip-club payday? Pimps, guns and gangsters, in an initially fun but soon wearing adventure that is everything we deserve from a script adapted from a Twitter thread.

In cinemas

(12A) (Augustine Frizzell) 109 mins

This creaky romance breaks out the old double time-frame narrative structure: in the present day, a journalist (Felicity Jones) uncovers secret love letters written in the 60s by the wife (Shailene Woodley) of a wealthy businessman.

In cinemas

(12A) (Maya Da-Rin) 98 mins

A hypnotic Brazilian drama that takes a cryptic, folkloric turn. Justino, a member of the indigenous Desana people, is a security guard at the Manaus docks whose performance starts to slide at the same time as stories emerge of a wild animal in the area.

In cinemas

(15) (Timur Bekmambetov) 106 mins

As lockdown winds down – for now – this pacey, effective, all-online thriller from Russia’s genre king Bekmambetov might be the last of the Zoom movies. Based on a true story, it stars Valerie Kane as a British journalist who uses fake Facebook and Skype accounts to get the attention of Islamic State recruiters.

In cinemas
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I Am Victoria (Channel 4) | All 4

Cruel Summer (Amazon Prime Video) | amazon.co.uk

The Boy Who Can’t Stop Dancing (Channel 4) | All 4

Jerk BBC One | iPlayer

There’s no mellow easing into I Am Victoria. From the moment Suranne Jones appears as the title character, it’s clear that she’s struggling in deep psychological waters: eyes darting at unseen threats; teeth bared in an animalistic rictus; neurotically polishing cutlery in her pale, pristine show home; slapping her face as part of a skincare regime that seems akin to self-harm via the medium of moisturiser.

The twin sense of unease and dysfunction persists as Victoria pesters her husband – Top Boy’s Ashley Walters, all understated wariness – to wake their children (on a weekend), curtly issues work instructions over the phone, frantically makes the bed (“Just put the fucking cushions back!”) and humiliates her sister when she asks for money (a scene crackling with mutual microaggressions). By the time Victoria is preparing to entertain guests like she’s running a war room with canapes (“I want it nice!”), you think you’ve got her sussed: she’s one of those exhausting perfectionists who’s all about the facade, the exterior; it doesn’t matter if the inside is an unholy mess. But then Victoria’s psyche starts to explode and shatter on a whole new level: when was the last time you saw someone bite down on a soya milk carton to stop themselves screaming?

Victoria opens a new trio of standalone episodes of Dominic Savage’s celebrated I Am … anthology, which is committed to illuminating the excesses and subtleties of feminine inner worlds. The 2019 first series featured Vicky McClure, Gemma Chan and Samantha Morton, who was Bafta-nominated for her portrayal of a fraught single mother. This time there are powerful performances to come from Letitia Wright (undone by love) and Lesley Manville (in crisis). First, though, there is this audaciously messy detonation of a performance from Jones. She starts at such a febrile pitch, you wonder if she’s left herself anywhere to go, but she manages to scorch a way through. As the hour unfolds, the issue becomes not about whether Victoria needs help (that much is instantly obvious), but if she can stop hating herself long enough to get it.

If you’re in the market for a bubblegum-popping teen thriller, then Amazon Prime Video’s Cruel Summer could be for you. Named after songs by Bananarama or Taylor Swift (your pick), co-executive-produced by Jessica Biel, already a massive hit for the US cable channel Freeform, this 10-parter is set in small-town Texas, with a story that flicks between 1993, 1994 and 1995.

Jeanette (Chiara Aurelia) is all braces and glasses (the go-to screen signifiers of high-school nerdiness), in awe of heavily semaphored popular girl Kate (Olivia Holt). A year later, Jeanette has co-opted Kate’s boyfriend and friends, while Kate is missing. Another year passes, and Jeanette is a pariah, accused by Kate, now returned, of knowing where she was kept by her teacher-kidnapper (Blake Lee) but failing to raise the alarm.

Harley Quinn Smith, Chiara Aurelia and Allius Barnes in Cruel Summer. Photograph: Bill Matlock/Freeform

Cruel Summer is far from perfect: the erratic time-hopping meant I mainly knew what year it was by Jeanette’s hair: bushy/diffident in 1993, sleek/glossy in 1994, short/angry in 1995 (jot this down, you’ll need it). Moreover, while Cruel Summer “does” the 90s (video rentals, chatrooms back when social media was just a baby), it doesn’t reach for the generational pulse as HBO’s more left-field Euphoria did.

Still, you could see Cruel Summer rivalling Netflix’s Riverdale for teen melodrama. Just as Jeanette successfully embodies geek ruthlessness, Kate doesn’t fall into the bear trap of mean girl cliche. Three episodes in, the plot was still twisting, with doubts creeping in not just about Jeanette’s narrative reliability, but Kate’s too. Most crucially, Cruel Summer understands the hot, shifting sands of teen psychology: “She’s not a sociopath, she’s a teenage girl.” As teen noir goes, this could prove addictive.

Poppy Goodheart’s Channel 4 documentary The Boy Who Can’t Stop Dancing was gently devastating. It followed Tom Oakley, a former contestant on BBC One’s The Greatest Dancer, as he applied to the prestigious Rambert School of Ballet and Contemporary Dance. Tom, 17, is a working-class Liverpudlian, but this was no Billy Elliot retread: Tom has cystic fibrosis, the genetic condition that affects the lungs and the digestive system and shortens life.

Tom Oakley in the ‘gently devastating’ The Boy Who Can’t Stop Dancing. Photograph: Tuesday's Child TV

What ensued was a dark ballet of creative yearning, medical jeopardy, family love and ceaseless, gnawing anxiety, all played out in lockdown, which derailed Tom’s training. It was painful to witness him grappling with the reality of his condition: “I go – woah! – I’m not going to live as long as this person sat next to me.” He views dance as “medication”, but also takes 75 to 100-plus pills a day: he showed some of them to the camera, ominously rattling around in his palm. For all the artistry on display, Tom’s personality was the true box-office draw here: a cat’s cradle of resolve, charm and vulnerability. I won’t reveal the outcome, but as he walked into Rambert for the audition, the phrase “on tenterhooks” never felt spikier.

Tim Renkow and Helen Monks in Jerk. Photograph: Adam Lawrence/BBC/ Roughcut TV

Last week saw the return of another, quite different disability-centred show: Jerk, the four-part, UK-based BBC black comedy in which Tim (US comedian Tim Renkow, who has cerebral palsy) relishes exploiting his disability.

Co-created with Shaun Pye (whose other disability comedy, There She Goes, stars David Tennant and Jessica Hynes)) and Stu Richards, the second series opened with the return of the previously deported Tim, clanking his walker through UK customs, jeering: “It’s so easy to get into this country.” After reuniting with his uncaring care worker, Ruth (Sharon Rooney), and uncool friend Idris (Rob Madin), Tim goes to college and starts identifying as able-bodied, to the scorn of Ruth: “If you really are able-bodied, you have no excuse for that smell.”

If anything, Jerk has sharpened up from the first series, conjuring wickedly unsentimental commentaries on disability and public hypocrisy worthy of Larry David: Tim frightening children; Tim being “exorcised” by an evangelical preacher. As Tim’s mum, Lorraine Bracco (yes, that Lorraine Bracco from Goodfellas and The Sopranos) once again steals scenes with throwaway caustic asides: “Don’t be getting anyone pregnant, OK, because they’ll come out like you.” Far from being “message-comedy”, Jerk smashes and subverts disability taboos just for the sheer hell of it.

What else I’m watching

Write Around the World With Richard E Grant

BBC Four | iPlayer

A travel series with an intriguing premise: fabled actor Richard E Grant (insert your favourite Withnail quote here) travels the world visiting places associated with authors including Elena Ferrante, Charles Dickens and Patricia Highsmith.

Mr Corman

Apple TV+ | tv.apple.com

Hollywood actor Joseph Gordon-Levitt embraces the small-screen streaming invasion as creator, writer, director and star of this low-key, normcore dramedy series about a teacher who once dreamed of becoming a musician. Also stars Debra Winger and Juno Temple.

Motorhoming With Merton & Webster

Channel 5 | My5

For those scarred by childhood “motoring” holidays (for some of us, the word “caravanette” chills the soul), husband-and-wife team Paul Merton and Suki Webster could help heal wounds with this amusing road-trip series examining the exploding UK staycation scene.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kate Clanchy is rewriting her critically acclaimed memoir after widespread criticism of her portrayal of her pupils, particularly children of colour and autistic children.

It follows reports that the publisher, Picador, had been in discussions to update future editions of the Orwell prize-winning book Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me, after days of online scrutiny over offensive passages, and was criticised for not going far enough in its initial statement.

Readers and fellow authors had been critical on Goodreads and Twitter of descriptions in the memoir, including the use of racial tropes such as “chocolate-coloured skin” and “almond-shaped eyes”, and references to one student as “African Jonathon” and another being “so small and square and Afghan with his big nose and premature moustache”.

Another passage was highlighted for the inclusion of ableist descriptions, in which Clanchy, a poet and teacher, refers to two autistic children as “unselfconsciously odd” and “jarring company”, and writes “probably, more than an hour a week” in their company “would irritate me, too, but for that hour I like them very much”.

The award-winning teenage author Dara McAnulty, who is autistic, shared the passages and tweeted: “Some people didn’t believe me when I shared some of my education experiences and how teachers felt about me … We can understand how you really feel about us.”

Initially, in a since-deleted tweet, Clanchy, 55, who is originally from Scotland, said she had been wrongfully accused of racism by reviewers on Goodreads. She later falsely claimed the quotes were “all made up”, then that the descriptions had been taken out of context.

Writers such as Philip Pullman and Amanda Craig came to Clanchy’s defence, while authors of colour, including Chimene Suleyman, Monisha Rajesh and Sunny Singh, criticised her response and the award-winning merit of the book, and went on to receive racist abuse from social media users.

Suleyman, a co-author of The Good Immigrant USA anthology, tweeted that she was particularly concerned by “the publishing team that didn’t spot it, the awards that celebrated it, and the white authors defending it and invalidating people of colour who are upset by it”.

Clanchy later apologised for “overreacting” to critical reader reviews and pledged to rewrite the book, calling the whole experience “humbling”. She wrote on Twitter: “I know I got many things wrong, and welcome the chance to write better, more lovingly.”

In a second statement addressing public anger at its initial lack of response and apology, Picador said: “We realise our response was too slow. We vigorously condemn the despicable online bullying of many of those who have spoken out. This has no place in our community.”

The publisher added that it apologised “profoundly for the hurt we have caused”.

Clanchy has taught in state schools for more than 30 years. In 2018, she published an anthology of pupils’ poetry and was awarded an MBE for services to literature. In 2020, a panel of independent Orwell prize judges described her memoir as “moving, funny and full of life”, offering “sparkling insights into modern British society”, and awarded the book the prize for political writing.

On Tuesday, the Orwell Foundation said that while it does not comment on the individual judging decisions of its jury, it acknowledged the “concerns and hurt” expressed about the work.

“The foundation understands the importance of language and encourages open and careful debate about all the work which comes through our prizes,” it said. “Everyone should be able to engage in these discussions, on any platform, without fear of abuse.”

Speaking to the BBC, Suleyman said “bridges have been broken in the publishing world” over the incident, adding there will be “some way to go to rebuild this trust with their writers and readers of colour”.

“Despite being accomplished writers and teachers on structural racism and colonialism,” she said, “Professor Sunny Singh, author Monisha Rajesh, and myself became invisible to authors who endorsed this book, speaking only with white authors, whilst simultaneously expressing denigrating racially charged views of us.”

Rajesh told the BBC she was unsure how the book could be updated given it was “riddled with racist and ableist tropes throughout”, including several phrases she said remained “rooted in eugenics and phrenology”.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Stevie Nicks has cancelled her solo concerts for 2021, citing her fear of catching Covid-19.

The Fleetwood Mac star said: “While I’m vaccinated, at my age I am still being extremely cautious and for that reason have decided to skip the five performances I had planned for 2021.”

She added: “These are challenging times with challenging decisions that have to be made. I want everyone to be safe and healthy and the rising Covid cases should be of concern to all of us.”

Nicks had been due to perform at festivals in California, Colorado, Texas and Louisiana.

The last of those events, New Orleans jazz and heritage festival, has been cancelled outright, with organisers citing the “current exponential growth of new Covid cases in New Orleans and the region and the ongoing public health emergency”. Louisiana has one of the lowest rates of vaccine uptake in the US, and experienced 16,000 new cases last weekend.

Country singer Jason Isbell has cancelled a concert in Houston, Texas, after the Cynthia Woods Mitchell Pavilion venue “was not willing to comply with the band’s updated health and safety standards”. On Monday, Isbell tweeted: “We’re now requiring proof of vaccination or a current negative test to attend all our shows, indoors or out. If the venue won’t allow that, we won’t play.”

Speaking on MSNBC, Isbell said of the live music industry: “The problem is they’re just getting so much pushback from some of the governors of certain states who want to kowtow to their political base, and try to make people think their freedom is being encroached upon.” Texas governor Greg Abbott has resisted the mandating of mask wearing and social distancing, despite a spike in Covid hospitalisations that has required him to allow the state’s department of health to recruit medical staff from outside Texas.

Isbell added: “I’m all for freedom but I think if you’re dead, you don’t have any freedoms at all. So it’s probably important to stay alive before you start questioning your liberty.”

Other artists cancelling US concerts this week due to the pandemic include Limp Bizkit, who cancelled their August tour. Speaking to Billboard, frontman Fred Durst said: “The system is still very flawed. Even if the performers, crews, staff, and promoters do their best to ensure safety on and behind the stage, that doesn’t ensure the safety of the audience as a whole. We are all in this together, and we all – individually and as a whole – have to make our best efforts to be as responsible and proactive as possible moving forward to combat and stop spreading Covid.”

Counting Crows have postponed shows due to a member of their touring party contracting Covid, and Lynyrd Skynyrd have cancelled their tour after guitarist Rickey Medlocke was diagnosed with the virus.

Earlier this week, Michael Bublé postponed his US tour until October, and dates in Argentina, Brazil and Chile will also be rescheduled.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@More than 80 years since he was first introduced to readers, and after decades of homoerotic subtext with his companion Batman, comics’ most trusty sidekick Robin has canonically come out as LGBTQ+.

In a cliffhanger ending to DC’s latest issue of Batman: Urban Legends, the current iteration of the Boy Wonder, Tim Drake, is shown accepting a date invitation from his friend Bernard, having just rescued him from a villain while in disguise as Robin.

“Ever have a lightbulb moment?” Drake muses in one panel. “Like something out in the ether has been taunting you, teasing you. Like you know you’re supposed to be on the same page as your brain but not everything made sense. People keep asking me what I want. But I couldn’t grasp it. Whatever it was. It always felt just out of reach. Until now. Until right now.”

Writer of the issue, Meghan Fitzmartin, told Polygon that she was not prepared to put a label on Drake’s sexuality, who has also been depicted dating the female superhero Spoiler, alias of character Stephanie Brown. “I wanted to pay tribute to the fact that sexuality is a journey,” Fitzmartin said. “To be clear, his feelings for Stephanie have been/are 100% real, as are his feelings for Bernard. However, Tim is still figuring himself out. I don’t think he has the language for it all … yet.”

She said she was thrilled to be given the go ahead by DC. “I fully sat on the floor of my apartment for a solid two minutes in happiness as it sunk in … I hope it is as meaningful for others as it has been for me.”

NPR critic Glen Weldon argued that it was no surprise, but a pleasant development. “Treatises have been written, and entire chapters of (very well-received!) books devoted to, the queer subtext in the Batman/Robin relationship. In Batman Forever (1995) and Batman & Robin (1997), the late film-maker Joel Schumacher did everything he could to transform that queer subtext into a butchy, leather-queeny text,” Weldon wrote. “But today … well. Incredibly enough, to those of us who’ve been waiting for years, Robin just came right out and said it himself, in the pages of Batman: Urban Legends #6.”

Drake is just the latest in a run of superheroes to be written as LGBTQ+, including Batwoman, Harley Quinn, Poison Ivy, married couple Midnighter and Apollo, and, most recently at Marvel, Captain America.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Walter Yetnikoff, the record label executive who championed the career of Michael Jackson and others, has died aged 87 due to bladder cancer.

As president of CBS Records, Yetnikoff oversaw hits such as Bruce Springsteen’s Born in the USA, Pink Floyd’s The Wall, Barbra Streisand’s Guilty – her biggest-selling album – and “Weird Al” Yankovic’s phenomenally successful comedy records.

But it was his stewardship of Michael Jackson that generated the biggest success, after he – initially reluctantly – oversaw the signing of the Jackson 5 from Motown Records in 1975. Yetnikoff allowed Michael to start recording his own music, leading to a string of hit solo albums including the biggest-selling album of all time, Thriller.

Yetnikoff lobbied for the single Billie Jean to be played on MTV, threatening to pull the rest of his roster from the channel if they didn’t accede. The Jackson estate has paid tribute to his efforts after his death, writing: “It is difficult today to imagine the level of cultural apartheid at the music channels in 1983 … Yetnikoff was ferocious on Michael’s behalf and didn’t hesitate to play corporate chicken with the powerful music channel. In short order, Billie Jean was added to MTV in heavy rotation, opening the flood gates for Michael’s extraordinary success and also for a whole generation of black artists. Walter forced that to happen, and with that decision, the wall came tumbling down.”

At the 1984 Grammy awards, Jackson hailed Yetnikoff as “the best president of any record company”.

With producer Phil Ramone and Billy Joel, December 1977. Photograph: Bobby Bank/WireImage

Born in Brooklyn in 1933, Yetnikoff studied law at university and joined CBS as a lawyer in 1962, having served in the US army in the mid-1950s. He rose through the ranks, becoming president of the label’s international arm in 1971 and president and chief executive of the whole company in 1975.

Known as a relationship manager more than a seeker of new talent, he developed stars including Cyndi Lauper and Gloria Estefan, and signed Paul McCartney, who he paired with Jackson and Stevie Wonder for hit duets. Other key albums during his tenure included Meat Loaf’s Bat Out of Hell, and a string of hits with Billy Joel.

He assisted in the $2bn sale of CBS to Sony in 1988, but left in 1990 amid a dispute with executive Tommy Mottola, and struggles with depression and addiction. Having emerged unscathed from a payola scandal at CBS in the mid-1980s, Yetnikoff later wrote in his 2004 memoir: “I might have been middle-aged, but I adopted the youthful battle cry of more sex, drugs and rock’n’roll. I wanted more of everything, and I wanted it with a vengeance.” He entered rehab in 1989.

Later ventures, including his own label Velvel, did not match his CBS success, and an attempt to produce a Miles Davis biopic starring Wesley Snipes failed.

Yetnikoff was married three times, and had two sons with his first wife, June May Horowitz, called Michael and Daniel. They survive him along with his wife, Lynda.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The smells of damp wood, sea air, tobacco and maybe just a soupçon of human sweat will waft through a gallery for an exhibition telling the hidden stories of what was once the world’s busiest port.

Details have been announced for a show that draws on the enormous, largely unknown archive of the Port of London authority (PLA).

Staged at the Museum of London Docklands, it will tell 200 years of stories that will range from seafaring phrases that have filtered into everyday English language use to the historical dependence of London’s docks on the sugar trade and slavery.

The curator, Claire Dobbin, also wants visitors to experience the smells workers would have inhaled day in, day out – as she herself has been doing.

Damp wood and sweat … deal porters being trained at Surrey Docks. Photograph: PLA Collection

“My office smells very much like the docks because I’ve got all the samples here,” she said. “I’ve learned that you become accustomed to the smell of a room in about seven seconds. You adjust quite quickly. I don’t notice it until I go out and come back in and think, ‘oh, it smells like a warehouse in here.’”

The scents section at the show will evoke the docks themselves – wood, sea air, sweat – as well as a tea warehouse and the home of a dock worker: “The smell of a coat drying by the fire, the smell of tobacco,” said Dobbin. “Younger people don’t remember when so much of London smelled of tobacco.”

The show is a partnership with the PLA, which has a remarkable archive on shelves about 1km long. It includes photos, objects, reels of film and oral testimonies. There are also about 50,000 plans and engineering drawings and 5,000 paintings and prints.

“Sizewise it is quite vast,” said Dobbin. “The problem has been where to start and then … at some point you need to stop. I think we have done more than scratch the surface and we have found lots of exciting stories to tell.”

A group of Lascar seamen – sailors from southern or south-east Asia – at East India Dock, 1908. Photograph: PLA Collection

Objects going on display include sandals seized in the 1870s, which have hollowed out soles to smuggle opium, and a 1950s diver’s helmet and air pump used by someone clearing riverbeds.

One section will describe how seafaring and dockland words and phrases have filtered in to common usage. Examples include sling your hook, tie up loose ends, fathom something out, like the cut of someone’s jib and crack on – the crack being the cracking sound from when a sail is released for a boat to go faster.

One of the objects on display, a diver’s helmet. Photograph: PLA Collection

The museum has for a number of years addressed the history of the transatlantic slave trade. Last year it removed the statue of Robert Milligan, a prominent British slave trader, which had “stood uncomfortably” outside the museum for a long time.

In the port of London show it will exhibit a document commemorating the unveiling of the statue to serve “as a reminder of the full truth behind the economic prosperity that made the building of West India Docks possible”.

London remains the UK’s busiest port and the exhibition will tell its story from the end of the 18th century to the creation of the London Gateway “mega port” at Thurrock in the Thames Estuary.

The jar’s label reads “Dehydrated meat. Landed at New Fresh Wharf approx March 1944.” Photograph: Museum of London

Dobbin said it had been a thrill to go through the archive. “It has been a lot of fun and a real privilege to have access to such a meticulous and eclectic collection.”

One aim of the exhibition was to give “a behind-the-scenes view of things which, actually, many people don’t know much about.”

It will also include examples of the countless samples which were taken of goods coming in to London. One is a pot of dehydrated meat from the 1940s: “We haven’t opened it,” said Dobbin.

Another is a pot of ambergris, which was highly prized and used in perfumes. Dobbin explained: “It is essentially whale poop.”

Port City is at the Museum of London Docklands, 22 October-8 May.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The head of one of the UK’s leading drama schools is leaving her job at the same time as an investigation into complaints about aspects of her “conduct and management style”.

Sarah Frankcom is departing as director of Lamda (the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art) after less than two years in the job.

In a statement its board of trustees said they had been in discussion with Frankcom since early June about her departure and its timing. It added: “In recent weeks, complaints on some aspects of conduct and management style have been made against Sarah by a small number of former and current employees. Following this, the board has instigated a full and fair internal inquiry into the allegations.

“No conclusions can or should be reached about those claims until the inquiry process is complete. The wellbeing of all our staff is paramount and the allegations are being taken seriously. Lamda respects the confidentiality of everyone involved during the inquiry process.

“Sarah has told the board that she takes any allegations of this nature extremely seriously, welcomes the investigation and respects the confidentiality of the process.”

Before joining Lamda, Frankcom spent 21 years at the Manchester Royal Exchange, arriving as literary manager in 1998. She was made joint artistic director in 2008 and sole artistic director in 2014.

She regularly collaborated with Maxine Peake, directing her in productions including Hamlet, Miss Julie, Happy Days, The Skriker and A Streetcar Named Desire. She also established the Bruntwood prize for playwrighting, the biggest of its kind in the UK.

Frankcom started out as a drama teacher in the east end of London before working with new writers and in drama schools.

Before taking up the LAMDA job she told the Guardian she would pursue “radical solutions” to recruit the next generation of actors from around the UK”. She warned that the “talent pipeline” is in a “pretty fragile” state and that “drama schools are still really, really monocultural places”.

One of her first moves as director of Lamda was to cut the cost of first round audition fees to get in to the school, stating: “It is all about creating greater opportunity. For too long we have talked about removing barriers to students from challenging and low-income backgrounds.”

In the statement, Lamda’s trustees said they wanted to “put on record their appreciation and recognition of Sarah’s hard work during an unprecedented time for Lamda as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic”.

The trustees said Frankcom had helped change and reorganise the school “addressing diversity at Lamda as a training organisation” and “successfully moved the exams business online”.

Lamda is the oldest drama school in the UK whose alumni includes Chiwetel Ejiofor, Rory Kinnear, David Oyelowo, Katherine Parkinson, Toby Stephens, David Suchet, Harriet Walter, Ruth Wilson and Benedict Cumberbatch. Cumberbatch was appointed president of the academy in January 2018.

Lamda said a search for a new director was under way and neither the school or Frankcom would be commenting further on the matter.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In an era that stifled women, Lilian Bland blazed with a life force that defied all convention, including gravity.

She worked as a press photographer, smoked, wore trousers and dungarees, rode a bicycle, taught jiu-jitsu and opened a car dealership, apparently impervious to the fact that she lived in the Edwardian era.

In August 1910, Bland etched a niche in history – she is believed to be the first woman to design, build and fly her own aeroplane, a feat accomplished over Shane’s Castle estate in county Antrim, Northern Ireland. She called the plane Mayfly, explaining: “It may fly, it may not.”

Her career was glorious and scandalous and groundbreaking – and then, little by little, forgotten.

While other female pioneers such as Amelia Earhart were celebrated, Bland lapsed into obscurity. When she died in 1971, aged 92, a keen gardener, painter and gambler, she was remembered, if at all, as a footnote.

The Mayfly, the aircraft designed, built and flown by Lilian Bland. Photograph: National Museums NI

That is now changing. An exhibition, an auction and posts on social media are shining a light on her life and nudging Lilian Bland towards the feminist pantheon.

Bland is featured in a new National Museums NI exhibition at the Ulster Transport Museum in Cultra, Belfast, on Northern Ireland innovators who made a global impact.

“It’s only in recent years that her story has come to life,” said Clare Ablett, the curator. “She did not conform to Edwardian-era rules and would not let restriction on her femininity hold her back in any way. She never let anything hold her back. Lilian is very inspiring and not just for young girls and women, for anyone.”

Feedback on the exhibition has been positive, with the latest group of visitors to the museum on Tuesday marvelling at Bland’s story, said Ablett. “She was quite an amazing woman.”

Coincidentally, four paintings that Bland made in her home in Cornwall were auctioned last month.

The seller did not do it for the money, said Mimi Connell-Lay, of the Penzance-based David Lay Auctions. “They were sitting in a cupboard not doing anything and she thought this was an opportunity to put Lilian’s story out in the world again. She just wanted people to know about her because she’s very unknown, which is tragic.”

The paintings are amateur – it was a hobby for Bland – and ordinarily might not even reach auction, but after buyers learned about Bland the lots sold for £350-£550. “She’s now my new favourite heroine,” said Connell-Lay, who researched Bland’s background. “People were bidding because of her history.”

Bland was born in 1878 in Kent, part of the Anglo-Irish gentry. Edwardian society ladies led empty lives full of empty talk, she once said. A harsh judgment perhaps, but Bland led a wild, precious – and perilous – life.

She went hunting and shooting and rode horses like a man, spurning side-saddle and writing a guide to falling off safely. She worked as a photojournalist. After her mother died she left England and with her father joined relatives in Carnmoney, County Antrim.

Her interest piqued by Louis Blériot’s aviation exploits in France, she took notes at an airshow – the men assumed she was a secretary – and went home and designed and built a glider. She bought an engine in England, which she brought back to Northern Ireland by train, and built the Mayfly.

After reportedly using her aunt’s ear trumpet to put fuel in the engine, she made her inaugural flight – less than a mile – on 31 August 1910. The sight of a bull in the field below is said to have encouraged her to stay airborne.

After advertising her skills as a plane-builder and selling Ford cars she married a cousin, Charles Bland, and emigrated to the Canadian wilderness in 1912.

The marriage foundered after their only child, Patricia, died of tetanus aged 16. Bland returned to England and lived in Cornwall until her death. Her nickname, “the flying feminist”, came later.

Recognition began to grow in 2010 during the centenary of her first flight. A historical society in Antrim unveiled a plaque, and authorities renamed Glengormley Park after her, installing a metal sculpture of Mayfly. A website dedicated to Bland was created in 2014.

Guy Warner, an aviation historian who wrote a biography in 2010, welcomed the renewed recognition for Bland. “She was forgotten because she was in Ireland, an obscure part of the world in 1910, and because she was a woman. She was expected to marry well and run a household, not to do the tremendous things she did.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Christina Applegate, the actor known for her roles in films like Anchorman and Bad Moms, announced on Twitter overnight that she had been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis.

“A few months ago I was diagnosed with MS. It’s been a strange journey,” wrote the 49-year-old in her tweet. “It’s been a tough road. But as we all know, the road keeps going. Unless some asshole blocks it.”

Hi friends. A few months ago I was diagnosed with MS. It’s been a strange journey. But I have been so supported by people that I know who also have this condition. It’s been a tough road. But as we all know, the road keeps going. Unless some asshole blocks it. — christina applegate (@1capplegate) August 10, 2021

Multiple sclerosis, an autoimmune disease, occurs when the immune system begins to attack the sheath that protects nerve fibers, making it difficult for the brain to communicate with the rest of the body. MS often makes it more challenging to walk and move, and for some leads to paralysis in the legs.

The exact cause of MS is unknown, and cases can range from mild to severe. The disease, which predominantly affects women, is rarely fatal, but lowers one’s life expectancy by five to 10 years, on average.

On Twitter Applegate asked for privacy “as I go through this thing.”

“As one of my friends that has MS said, ‘we wake up and take the indicated action’. And that’s what I do,” the actress wrote.

As one of my friends that has MS said “ we wake up and take the indicated action”. And that’s what I do. So now I ask for privacy. As I go through this thing. Thank you xo — christina applegate (@1capplegate) August 10, 2021

More than a decade ago, Applegate was diagnosed with breast cancer and underwent a bilateral mastectomy.

“I cry at least once a day about it because it’s hard to overlook it when you’re standing there in the mirror. When you look down, it’s the first thing you see... So you’re reminded constantly of this thing, this cancer thing that you had,” Applegate told the Oprah Winfrey Show in 2008.

Applegate won a Primetime Emmy award for outstanding guest actress in a comedy series for Friends in 2003. She was nominated in the same category for the same show in 2004.

She was nominated for outstanding lead actress in a comedy series for Samantha Who? in 2008 and 2009.

In 2019 and 2020, Applegate was nominated in the lead actress category again for Dead to Me, which was also nominated for outstanding comedy series. Applegate first gained fame as a child actor in the hit sitcom Married With Children.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A leading group of Spanish women film-makers condemned the San Sebastián film festival’s decision to award Johnny Depp its highest honour, saying it gave the international event a bad name.

Cristina Andreu, the president of Spain’s Association of Female Filmmakers and Audiovisual Media, said she was “very surprised” by the decision to award Depp the Donostia award at the festival’s 69th edition in September. The award is the event’s top prize and aims to honour lifetime achievement. “This speaks very badly of the festival and its leadership, and transmits a terrible message to the public: ‘It doesn’t matter if you are an abuser as long as you are a good actor’,” Andreu told the Associated Press.

Andreu added that the association, which has close links to the San Sebastian festival, was “studying next steps”.

In a statement on its website, the San Sebastián festival, based in the Basque resort town, praised Depp as “one of contemporary cinema’s most talented and versatile actors”. Previous recipients of the Donostia award include Viggo Mortensen, Penélope Cruz and Judi Dench.

The Karlovy Vary international film festival in the Czech Republic also announced plans to “honour” Depp at its upcoming event in August.

In their glowing website citations, neither festival makes mention of the scandal currently engulfing Depp’s career, following the actor’s loss in a libel case against the publisher of the Sun newspaper in which the high court concluded he had assaulted his former wife Amber Heard on multiple occasions. The actor’s most recent film, the Japan-set drama Minamata, has yet to be released in the US, resulting in a claim by its director Andrew Levitas that Hollywood studio MGM wanted to “bury” the film. Depp was also asked to step down from his role as Gellert Grindelwald in the third Fantastic Beasts film, and has been replaced by Mads Mikkelsen.

In an earlier show of defiance over film industry figures shunned in the US, San Sebastián chose to allow Woody Allen’s most recent film, Rifkin’s Festival, to be shot at the festival, and then selected it as the opening event of its 2020 edition. This followed Allen’s legal dispute with his former backers, Amazon, over claims Allen had “sabotaged” the marketability of earlier films with his comments about sex abuse accusations by his daughter Dylan Farrow and the #MeToo campaign. The dispute was settled out of court.

San Sebastián film festival has been contacted by the Guardian for comment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Dutch director Robin Lutz has put together a serviceable introduction to the work of legendary Dutch artist and illustrator MC Escher, whose name has become shorthand for a certain kind of brilliant illusion, infinite tessellation and visually perplexing design. He is probably most famous for an image he created, or at any rate popularised: the impossible staircase which ascends endlessly in a closed circle.

Escher’s work was well known in the postwar Netherlands, but it was only after a 1954 article in Time magazine that his reputation took off globally and he achieved colossal cult status in the US counterculture, with bootleg colourised versions of his prints appearing on posters and T-shirts. Escher was bemused to receive a letter from a certain Mr Mick Jagger asking if he would create an album cover – the answer was no, and Escher also rebuked Jagger for presuming to address him by his first name: Maurits.

Escher’s own words from his journals and letters are well spoken by Stephen Fry, though maybe making him seem more forthright and confident than he actually was, and the film very usefully shows how he was a passionate romantic at heart, and how his work was shaped by his initial, abandoned training as an architect, his European travels as a young man, his rapture at the dense architecture of small Italian towns, the intricately recurring tiled motifs of the Alhambra in Spain, and the music of JS Bach.

It is an interesting film, though it perhaps could have discussed if and how he was affected by living in the Nazi-occupied Netherlands (particularly as he had left Italy to avoid Mussolini’s fascism) and addressed more critically and more directly the question of whether Escher is an artist or not. Does he deserve to be considered a great artist? An ancestor of op art and Bridget Riley? Or is there, for all his dazzling technique, something sterile and self-enclosed in Escher’s images? Well, the film proceeds on the undiscussed assumption that he was a great artist. It’s impossible not to be a fan.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Michel Franco’s film-making has always had an edge of cold steel; here again is his icy stab and lacerating chill. New Order is an ordeal nightmare, imagining a violent uprising against Mexico’s super-rich. Connoisseurs of highbrow arthouse shock will note the fact that the film’s titles and credits, with the letter E in reverse, show the influence of France’s adulte terrible Gaspar Noé.

For decades, this has been the kind of provocative cinema that has faced opposition only in the easily ignored (and maybe secretly welcomed) outrage of conservative print media, but Franco has ironically faced his own uprising from online offence culture in Mexico when the trailer’s depiction of vengeful darker-skinned revolutionaries was condemned as racist. Franco wound up having to offer an apology after mishandling the response and claiming his film was suffering reverse racism targeted at what he inelegantly called the “whitexican”. It was an object lesson in how the “discourse” cannot absorb complexity or nuance.

The scene is a society wedding attended by the 1% elite in the grandest part of Mexico City, attended by corrupt politicians and business people, with their lazy, dissolute twentysomething children ordering about the darker-skinned servants. As in The Godfather, the wedding is to be an arena for a theatrical display of power – but not in the way intended by the father of the bride. Because a weird frisson of unease eddies about the party; there are chaotic protests in other parts of town. Guests have been jostled on their way to the house. Activists are splashing green paint everywhere: their signature touch. The mother of the bride is quietly freaked out when the tap water briefly runs green. Is this a poisoning of their water supply, or a supernatural visitation?

Bride-to-be Marianne (Naian González Norvind) is upset when a former servant comes to the door begging for money to pay for his wife’s operation: the menfolk are coldly irritated by this, but soft-hearted Marianne and her mother collect some cash and she actually leaves their compound with a servant Cristian (Fernando Cuautle) in the car, braving the disorder in the streets, intending to see to this matter personally. It means that she is spared the horror when her family home is overrun by armed protesters, but she is to face a nightmare of her own. The revolution has been taken over, or possibly run from the outset, by cynical, sadistic and corrupt military factions rounding up wealthy people, demanding ransoms and carrying out unspeakable sexual torture.

New Order is made with confrontational severity and technique; like, say, Michael Haneke’s Funny Games or Bertrand Bonello’s Nocturama, we are certainly not offered the essentially risk-free entertainment of a thriller. This is a brutality that we have no choice but to live through, minute-by-minute, moment-by-moment, with each turn of the screw worse than the last. There are no emollient moments, no sympathetic touches, no redemptive characters, and the movie arrives at an almost nauseous climax of injustice, cynicism and cruelty.

And what is to be made of it all? On the most basic level, it is a warning of what inequality can cause in the future and what it is effectively causing right now. Perhaps there is something nihilistic here, but New Order very effectively persuades you that a real-life revolution might well be every bit as ugly, horrifying and un-Hollywood as this shows – and that it is on the way.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Patrick is a middle-aged American writer who travels to Hollywood to watch his dreams come true: his latest book is being made into a movie and he has a job on set. When he arrives in LA, though, he discovers that his autobiographical novel has been adapted into a farcical horror and that he’s expected to act as errand boy for the movie’s suave producers, Brenda and Jay, and as driver to the lead actor, Cassidy Carter. Cassidy is notorious – Patrick has seen the viral video in which she’s caught shoplifting a single tampon. A paparazzo, unseen behind his camera, taunts her (“Baby, you’re so moody right now”) until she flips out, pulling a used tampon from her shorts, throwing it at the camera and shouting “Namaste”.

This is the hyperperceptive, painfully funny opening image of Alexandra Kleeman’s second novel, a speculative climate apocalypse fiction. From the outset, there’s a weird pathos to its disturbed and disturbing world, in which rich, successful Cassidy aspires to steal just one tampon rather than taking the box, and in which an enraged white woman’s “Namaste” is so wrong it’s perfect. Still, at least Cassidy has her tampon-slinging chutzpah. Patrick’s mind, by contrast, is saturated with borrowed dreams of contemporary America – advice from men’s exercise magazines, gory movies, advertising taglines, chat forums, property listings and news stories about polygynous cults. More than anything, Patrick’s perception of reality is obscured by his longing for self-advancement. Even his wife Alison suspects that their relationship is founded on the fact that Patrick’s “inner struggle filled much of his field of vision”: Alison can “hide in plain sight”.

If Patrick is obsessed with himself, Alison has become obsessed with the planetary emergency, to the point that she can no longer function. “I don’t see the park or the trees. I see all of it dying.” She and nine-year-old daughter Nora flee the couple’s suburban home for Earthbridge, a nature retreat in the Adirondack mountains: a place of handicrafts and homilies about climate grief. Alison doesn’t mention Patrick’s current situation to the other residents. She’s unwilling to risk a sermon on how Hollywood celebrates the human “at the expense of all else that lives and suffers”.

Something New Under the Sun is interested in this accusation, which could also be levelled at the tradition of the novel. Kleeman creates tensions between the intimate human stories that are the mainstay of literary fiction and the non-human worlds in which these stories happen. She is a playful rather than a lecturing writer, mining the different ways in which the personal is snarled up in the environmental, and vice versa. Alison frets about Patrick’s whereabouts and Nora’s bad dreams while straining to think about the decline of Israel’s Hula frog. Earthbridge pieties about ice sheets and river mussels get in the way of caring for loved ones. On the other side of America, daily life in LA appears even more absurd. The human-centred economy leaves most humans suffering, or at best stuck in traffic. When Patrick and Cassidy glimpse vacant-looking people being loaded into green vans, they become convinced that their movie is a front for some sinister operation. Brenda and Jay have connections with WAT-R, a synthetic blue liquid that has replaced tap water across California. Its commercial monopoly works with quiet efficiency so that lower-income households are left without water and in debt. “When people are dying of thirst, they’ll drink gasoline,” observes Jay. “And it’s their right to do that.”

Kleeman’s first novel, You Too Can Have a Body Like Mine, was distinctive in its attention to minute detail. Oranges were described in segments; human skin seen pore by pore, as though the prose looked more closely than the human eye. Something New Under the Sun develops this intense focus in brief passages that digress into largely unseen worlds: sewage pipes, the heart of a wildfire, a prehistoric seascape. When a fictional setting is given a great deal of attention, it’s become a cliche to describe it as a character in the story. That cliche requires an assumption that forests or weather fronts don’t habitually make anything happen. In Kleeman’s novel, as in real life, this assumption looks wishful: scenery and infrastructure threaten to murder the protagonists. Patrick, naturally, is not at all cool with the idea that anything outside his own head has independent agency. He watches insects flit through the beams of his headlights. “The reality of that world unsettles his own.”

Something New Under the Sun is sun-drenched, sharply observed and swift-moving; the sentences are beautiful. What makes it strange and new is the way the narrative disrupts itself. With concentrated attention on each flame in a wildfire, prehistoric marine life forms, or the plastic taste of soft furnishings in a carpet beetle’s mouth, it takes notice of much that is outside the brief of the story of Patrick and Cassidy, Alison and Nora. The book encompasses extra reality, but the experience of reading it is oddly surreal – it exposes unsettling truths about this “world as a whole, trembling with life and violence”, hiding in plain sight.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Delights of an Undirected Mind is a group show promisingly centring around dreams, trance states and hallucinations. It takes its name from a film by Swedish artist duo Nathalie Djurberg and Hans Berg, which is playing on loop on a small television screen just as you come through the gallery doors.

Djurberg creates brightly coloured clay puppets, with bulging eyes and spindly limbs, which perform in surreal animations set to a soundtrack composed by Berg. The narrative plays out mainly in a child’s bedroom, where a little girl is being put to bed by an elephant in a dressing gown, but it’s when a tiger starts suckling at a cow’s teats that things get really out of hand. In comes a giraffe, a gleaming black octopus, a unicorn, a pair of cucumbers spooning, a mouse caressing a piece of cheese with legs and a crocodile wielding a leather whip. There’s a lot of caressing and writhing around on the bed, and then a can of condensed milk spills its sticky contents all over the sheets. It’s a humorous and hedonistic scene that vividly illuminates the darker undertones of children’s fairytales, but also makes reference to modern-day greed and the hypersexualisation of culture.

‘Wonderfully eccentric’ … Prouvost’s tapestry This Means Tableau. Photograph: George Darrell/Courtesy Lisson Gallery

While I would have liked to have watched the film projected on to a wall in a darkened room, rather than standing exposed at the window, listening to the unsteady rhythm of low guttural murmurings through headphones as colourful creatures gyrate around the screen is strangely hypnotic. It’s like an acid trip without the paranoia. That said, when I catch sight of my reflection as it flits across the mirror at the top of Laure Prouvost’s Metal Yoga Man sculpture, I nearly jump out of my skin.

‘I nearly jumped out of my skin’ … Laure Prouvost’s Metal Yoga Man – Upward Facing Dog, centre, with Emma Talbot’s silk paintings. Photograph: George Darrell/Courtesy Lisson Gallery

Prouvost’s giant, wall-hanging tapestry in which a goat explodes in the centre as a kind of deity surrounded by a cosmos of floating objects and words is wonderfully eccentric and rich in detail. The work explores a more abstract way of learning language in which the artist creates her own system of labelling: the goat “means you” while “flamingo = angry” and “wrench = father”. Meanwhile, displayed on the wall to the right, two of Emma Talbot’s silk paintings of figures falling through lush, floral landscapes possess a compelling luminosity.

Nevertheless, I can’t help feeling that all of the work would benefit from a more imaginative use of space: the stark whiteness of the single, undivided room feels simultaneously claustrophobic and too expansive. This is most obvious in relation to Susan Hiller’s work. A rare painting from her Home Truths series, in which children’s bedroom wallpaper is overlaid with paint and graffiti-like markings, hangs opposite the film and although the works are thematically linked, they invite very different perceptual experiences. In contrast to Djurberg and Berg’s brazen hedonism, Hiller’s painting seems static, subdued, and somewhat old-fashioned.

As such, the exhibition isn’t quite as adventurous or transportive as it could be, but still, it provides a much-welcomed reprieve from more solemn everyday realities.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Post-pandemic theatre in the UK seems to be bringing us a slew of upbeat musical revivals, classics and feelgood fare. Shakespeare’s most merry of romps, abounding with music, love triangles and pleasing silliness, sits squarely among it. Whether these shows mark a collective retreat into comfort viewing and escapism is a moot point. What is clear is that Sean Holmes’s production excels at the job of lifting us up and making us laugh.

Every comic character is clearly drawn and expertly played. A swaggering and sometimes staggering Sir Toby Belch (Nadine Higgin) comes on with a crate of beer. Andrew Aguecheek (George Fouracres) is a fantastic idiot in pastel colours and a cravat. Victoria Elliott’s wise clown, Feste, is whip-smart and nimble, albeit with a too soft singing voice that doesn’t carry above the orchestra. Sophie Russell plays Malvolio as an understated puritan until bursting into his awful comic incarnation in a yellow body-sock. All are genuinely funny with excellent comic timing, and bring out the full effects of a text that is stuffed full of double meanings and dexterous language.

The dramatic characters duly stick to seriousness, on the whole. Bryan Dick’s Orsino is an intense unrequited lover. Michelle Terry excels as Viola, straight-faced, tormented, only occasionally raising a conspiratorial eyebrow at the audience. Ciarán O’Brien’s Sebastian is the most comic – a kind of Alec Guinness spoof with his cane, his RP and his emphatic actorliness – and is enormously entertaining to watch. Shona Babayemi is poised and stately as Olivia, and knows how to bring physical comedy into the part the more besotted the character becomes.

Tormented … Michelle Terry as Viola. Photograph: Marc Brenner

The production is a faithful one, yet full of imaginative tweaks in its comedy of deception and gender-disguise. Feste, who initially comes on in sparkly dress and stilettos, transforms into an androgynous figure before us, while the play’s same-sex attraction is channelled well in scenes between Orsino and Viola, dressed as the male Cesario.

Viola and Sebastian’s Elizabethan dress clashes with the rest of the cast’s contemporary costumes and marks them out as interlopers in Illyria. Several characters look like modern-day cowboys: Orsino in fringed jacket and shirt; Toby Belch in the long coat and Fedora of an outlaw. Jean Chan’s set resembles a down-at-heel holiday town (jukebox, carousel tiger, tacky welcome sign) but with surreal touches (a dead stag, alluding to the play’s theme of the romantic hunt). These dissonances all work well and build on a sense of doubleness.

It is a production with many tonal variations, from love sickness and romance to drunken revelry and the bitter aftertaste left by Malvolio’s cruel gulling, but all its parts are carefully entwined and contain an impeccable artistry.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There is so much hope in Eva’s initial encounters with Pat. Tentative smiles and introductions, hand-holding in the back of the Uber on the way to her place. They save their first kiss for the moment they land in bed, and have deep conversations after.

But just a few weeks later, Eva is pregnant and Pat is dead, never having known that she is carrying his child.

It’s the little bursts of good in what could be described as a modern-millennial tragedy that makes Allee Richards’ debut novel, Small Joys of Real Life, the poignant work that it is.

Shortlisted for the Richell prize for emerging writers and the Victorian premier’s award for an unpublished manuscript, the novel charts the monthly happenings in Eva’s life (and by extension, that of her friends, Annie and Sarah) over the course of her pregnancy. In between, there are heartfelt conversations she will never have with the father of her baby: intimate revelations of how buoyed she felt in the aftermath of their one-night-stand; a dwelling on what could have been; an indulgence in the fantasy that she could have stopped him from taking his own life.

There’s an implicit, perhaps unconscious, resentment for the novel’s boomer couples.

It’s another narrative predicated on the sense of millennial hopelessness and angst made famous by the likes of Sally Rooney (Normal People), Anna Hope (Expectation), Dolly Alderton (Ghosts) and Frances Macken (You Have to Make Your Own Fun Around Here), but with a quintessential Melburnian feel. Like the women in the aforementioned stories, Eva and her friends don’t have huge problems, they’re just grappling with the same sort of pensiveness that seems embedded in the psyche of anyone born after 1983.

If Richards knows why this is the case, she doesn’t let on. We spend a lot of time dissecting things in Eva’s head, observing the well-constructed characters around her whose stories are told intimately, but don’t distract from the main plot.

She writes matter-of-factly – never preaching – about bringing kids into a world battling climate change; about the gentrification of Melbourne’s once culturally-diverse suburbs. There’s an implicit, perhaps unconscious, resentment for the novel’s boomer couples; the effortless way in which they know one another’s needs, their ownership of seaside holiday homes, complete with thriving gardens bearing bountiful fruit, the fact that they seem to be able to just get on with life while the generations after them constantly falter.

Though clever and subtle in its appraisal of modern life and dating, romantic relationships take a backseat to strong but flawed female friendships. Richards deftly navigates the intricacies of close-knit groups: the unspoken judgments; the push-pull we feel when our friends’ lives seem better, or simpler, than our own; the annoyance at opportunities landing in laps. Perhaps most commendable is her depiction of female desire; historically under-represented in general, but basically never represented in pregnant characters. Richards doesn’t shy away from Eva’s questionable choices in the pursuit of sex, nor does she sanitise or glamourise pregnancy (if anything, Eva seems to experience every single symptom you could possibly read about in a pregnancy book).

It’s a by-product of escapism from Eva’s very palpable loneliness perhaps, though Richards doesn’t render her a hopeless victim. Instead, her story is one of underlying optimism, most obvious when she counts the things she would like to experience with her baby, like walks in the pram or the making play-dough. Simple moments, Eva calls them, while also lamenting that the space adults make for sharing such joys – because they’re not as big as career prospects or romantic relationships – is limited.

“We never talk about them,” she says, of things like a pleasing turn of phrase in the book she’s reading, the home-grown eggplant left on her doorstep by a new neighbour, her baby’s kicks when she’s lonely.

Small Joys of Real Life is an easy, pleasurable read with surprising depth. There is doom in this life, more than we possibly realise, but there is also promise and hope; not just in new life that grows within us, but in our little moments of living, breathing joy even as we stare down the barrel of certain, unpredictable death.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Time has not lent much to this histrionically earnest issue picture starring Sammy Davis Jr from 1966, in which the life of a troubled African American jazz hepcat is quaintly imagined by the husband-and-wife screenwriting team of Lester and Tina Pine; the director is industry stalwart Leo Penn (father of Sean), who had been blacklisted in his former career as an actor after refusing to testify to the red-baiting Huac. Well, the film certainly challenges the all-white consensus, and a supporting cast including Cicely Tyson and no less a figure than Louis Armstrong gives it substance.

Davis plays Adam Johnson, a brilliant but mercurial jazz musician and singer, facing casual racism from the cops and stricken with depression and alcoholism after a car crash killed his wife and child and blinded one of his own musicians. His wild fits of anger on and off stage bring him close to meltdown; but then he meets and falls in love with the charismatic and beautiful civil liberties campaigner Claudia Ferguson (Tyson) whose grandfather is the much-respected jazzman Willie Ferguson (Armstrong). Adam’s life looks like it’s taking an upward path, and he is also mentoring a young white musician called Vincent, played by a very callow Frank Sinatra Jr, who – unlike Davis – does not convincingly master the art of miming to other people’s horn playing. But then Adam is forced to go on a tour of the south by his exploitative and arrogant recording company boss, played by Davis’s fellow Rat Packer Peter Lawford. This character’s name happens to be … erm … Manny. Some stereotypical thinking here?

There are some clunking moments, including a very squaresville singing appearance from Mel Tormé. And of course the bohemian club scene is picturesquely represented: loads of couples nodding along, entranced, and what is evidently supposed to be a sort of Roy Lichtenstein on the wall (that is: a poster saying “Pow!”). There is also one closeup shot of two young white women sitting close together, one of them having very short hair. This film has a certain value as a historical document.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Live on Blueberry Hill, Blimp Records. 1970, US This was recorded at the LA Forum on 4 September, 1970. It was the second ever LZ Bootleg and the one that was everywhere at the time – a great show, although during Bron-Yr-Aur Jimmy Page just gives up as the crowd are screaming and not listening. It sounds cavernous but that just adds to the charm of the show. They came back for several encores finishing with Fats Domino’s Blueberry Hill, hence the title. It was pressed on to coloured vinyl.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Carmelinda Gualim watches a nurse weigh her 16-month-old daughter Becky during a wellness check-up day. Before Hurricane Eta devastated their community, the children were healthier. “Today, it is rare for a child to have the correct weight and height,” said head nurse Cesar Chiquin. “Virtually all are at risk. Their families are not in a suitable place to harvest. They have lost sustainability.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When he was demobbed from the US army in the mid-60s, the photographer John Benton-Harris settled in London, working for the swinging, short-lived magazine London Life. Steeped in the New York street photography of Robert Frank and Garry Winogrand, he viewed the English with an amused outsider’s eye. He was fond of a quotation from Winston Churchill: “You must not underrate England. She is a curious country and few foreigners can understand her mind.”

That curiosity was rarely better on display than at the Chelsea flower show. When he visited in 1974, Benton-Harris was far more interested in the rare specimens on the picnic grounds at the Royal Hospital than those in the gardening competition. The display in this picture reveals perennial qualities of the English character, framed by awkwardness, somewhat clipped and stunted in emotional display.

It is, as always, a comedy of tiny nuances of class. While neither marriage appears to be in full, ecstatic bloom, the pair seated on the chairs guard a temporary advantage. The woman perched on the bank will forever be wondering about what best to do with her knees and whether the turban was a mistake. Her husband, meanwhile, appears to take quiet pride in the fact he would never be seen out with a checked sports coat and a fat cigar and would know to pour his wife’s cuppa before his own. The single man between them has seen it all before.

A new monograph of Benton-Harris’s photographs captures the changes of London society between the 1960s and the late 1980s, from free love to free markets. “Living among the English,” he suggested, “I sometimes feel that like my camera, I too am a time machine, being drawn to observe so many people pining to return to all their yesterdays.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Cast Out of Heaven by Hashem Shakeri (first place series winner) ‘The cost of housing is skyrocketing in Iran, fuelled by the current US sanctions and the subsequent drop in the value of the Iranian currency. This is forcing many from Tehran to leave the capital. The Mehr project was initiated in 2007 as the largest state-funded housing project in the history of Iran. However, sufficient measures were not taken to ensure healthy living conditions there. Here is the land of those cast out of their heaven – the metropolitan Tehran. And they all share is the bitterness of the fall,’ says Shakeri
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tokyo, Japan Simone Biles of the United States is seen in action on the balance beam at the Ariake Gymnastics Centre during the Tokyo 2020 Olympics. Biles closed off the women’s gymnastics events in Tokyo with one of the most heartening moments of the Games by winning bronze on the balance beam with a score of 14,000

Photograph: Mike Blake/Reuters
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Western Australian artist Timo Hogan has won the coveted National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander art award for his work, Lake Baker 2020.

Hogan’s spectacular painting pays homage to his father’s country and invites the onlooker to witness his knowledge and custodianship of this significant site.

‘I am very happy to have won this award. It makes me feel strong inside. Painting is important for Anangu to tell their stories. The Art Centre is a good place for people to come and be together and paint their country. I’m happy for this prize and that people see this work is important’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@‘Darwin’s really rallied behind us,’ Claire Summers, executive director of Darwin Aboriginal art fair, says of the thousand-plus audience who attended From Country to Couture. Now in its fifth year, the runway show celebrates interdisciplinary collaborations between art centres, fashion designers and other creative practitioners. This year’s show featured 12 fashion collections and, for the first time, accessories from artists of Numbulwar Numburindi Arts.

For some participants, From Country to Couture is a launching pad, while others view the event as a goal in itself. ‘It is incredibly inclusive,’ says Summers. ‘Not everyone is commercial, it’s mostly bespoke and one-off pieces, it’s more about the art.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In the 10 years since the start of the Syrian civil war, hundreds of thousands of people have been killed and millions forced to flee their homeland. Photographer Rich Wiles collaborated on a five-year project with Ruba and Rami al-Hindawi and their children, as they documented their new life in a small Yorkshire town. In Which Language Do We Dream?, curated by Anne McNeill, can be seen at Impressions Gallery until 13 November
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@George Mayer: Anima (Portrait, 1st place) ‘Jung believed that there was a female part of the psychic set up in the subconscious of every man. He gave it the name “Anima”. In the process of working on creative projects, I try to establish a connection with my anima, which is depicted here as a nude female figure. The red circle on the works is a reference to the planet Mars, which is often associated with war and aggression. In the photos the anima becomes positive: it is opposed to aggression, soothing it and helping to find inner harmony’

Photograph: George Mayer
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Interviewing Shayne Oliver is a conversational rollercoaster. We hurtle from cult 90s guitar bands to Arthur Jafa, from the problem with political correctness to the pressure on creatives, from Kanye West to Vin Diesel, with little warning of which thrill or spill is next. “I’m such a scatterbrain,” he says at the end of our call. “I’m sorry.”

But Oliver is far from a scatterbrain. He is best known as a fashion designer, the former vogue-dancer who founded the critically adored label Hood By Air, or HBA, in 2006. However, he is no longer limiting himself to clothes. Oliver is moving into music, having formed Anonymous Club – a “creative studio” focused on young talent that began as a series of parties. The studio’s debut release is Screensavers Vol 1, a compilation album based on Oliver’s demos, executive produced by Yves Tumor.

It’s a mix of dark noisecore, grungy sounds, bolshie hip-hop and dancefloor-ready tracks. It features acts such as Izzy, the model and musician from hardcore duo Dead Dogs; Sabrina Fuentes of Pretty Sick, the rock band she founded at the age of 13; and Tama Gucci, model, singer and mainstay of Miami’s queer underground. Oliver also stars – at least in a persona called Leech; for which he is painted white, with breasts, and wears only a wig and Nike Air Jordans.

“I would call it .. comedy,” he says, deadpan. Oliver is ambivalent about the sudden rush to recognise previously ignored creatives of colour, as representation became a hot button issue in culture over the past year. “Right now, the idea of Black popularity, I wouldn’t say it’s bad, but it’s a little vulgar, you know? I was like, ‘How can I do interviews without representing a Black face?’ That’s how it started.” Hence the white makeup? “Exactly. I feel like I want to save my Blackness for my creations.”

Transitioning is really specific. When you don’t have the resources, transitioning is really hard

One of Oliver’s missions with Anonymous Club is to show that you don’t have to be a superstar to be successful. “Alternative celebrity is being wasted in this generation because everyone wants to be highly popular,” he says, using Vin Diesel as an example. “He had been a queen of alternative classic cinema, like XXX, then went on to carve out a huge part of pop culture [in the Fast & Furious films] based on that.”

Oliver is also keen to create a platform for queer people outside what he sees as an increasingly academic culture. He feels uneasy about political correctness shutting out, as he sees it, those without an Ivy League education. “You can be in an evolutionary queer conversation because your friends are very well adapted to the conversations around queer rights. But what if you’re way more queer than anyone in your group? What if there is no one there yet to understand, ‘Where am I sleeping tonight?’”

This perspective comes from formative experiences. An only child born in Minnesota, he was brought up between the US and his mother’s native Trinidad. In 2000, when Oliver was 12, they settled in New York and he attended Harvey Milk High, a school for LGBT students, while getting an education in the ballroom scene – a world familiar to anyone who has seen the 1990 documentary Paris Is Burning, or the Ryan Murphy series Pose.

‘There’s an Uber outside’ … Oliver got Sabrina Fuentes out of bed. Photograph: Torso Solutions

It was here that he saw some tough realities. “I have been around so many trans women who went through the system, and had to go through shelters to get hormones, and it wasn’t glamorous,” he says. “I’m not saying every transition has to be brutal. I’m just saying that those women getting to that level was extreme. I don’t agree that you can facilitate and idealise the philosophy of queerness and then it’s all OK. It’s not OK.”

Oliver started walking in the Butch Queen Vogue Fem category at balls as a way to “imitate” the inspirational women around him. He considered transitioning himself. “But I just had different avenues I wanted to go down. And transitioning is really specific. When you don’t have the resources, transitioning is really hard. I had to choose how much I could dedicate to that and/or being successful.”

In 2006, at the age of 18, Oliver launched HBA with his friend Raul Lopez. By this point, he had graduated from Harvey Milk and dropped out of the highly rated Fashion Institute of Technology. He was immersed in New York nightlife from balls to electroclash nights in Williamsburg, and parties with the late artist Dash Snow in the Lower East Side. He paused the label in 2009, consumed by DJing at GHE20G0TH1K (pronounced “ghetto gothic”), the club founded by his friend Jazmin Soto, AKA Venus X. With a music palette that ran from Lil’ Kim to Marilyn Manson, and a distinctly inclusive door policy, it’s now so legendary that in 2019 Dazed & Confused named it a “club night that changed the world”.

Oliver says the “anything goes” atmosphere made GHE20G0TH1K special: “I remember when we were all in lingerie and DJing with all our privates exposed. The night was hot and everyone in New York was out, and we were playing the most insane music and everyone was getting naked and having fun. It was a freedom moment where everyone was fucking loose and losing their minds on a dancefloor in the middle of Brooklyn.”

Oliver relaunched HBA in 2012, and the label’s shows quickly created a buzz in fashion and beyond. There were soundtracks by Arca and DJ Total Freedom, with designer and DJ Virgil Abloh and Kanye West sitting in the front row. Male models wore dresses, the makeup gently mocked the contouring worn by the Kardashians, wigs were attached with chains, and a black-and-white speckled great dane joined everyone on the runway. Inclusive casting was consistent, with rapper A$ap Rocky walking alongside trans artist Boychild.

‘Fashion can be harsh’ … Hood By Air. Photograph: Victor Virgile/Gamma-Rapho/Getty Images

The clothes – with punchy graphic prints, oversized silhouettes and simple sans-serif branding – made the label successful. But Oliver sees shining a light on his community as the real achievement. “The [show] we did for AW14 was on the Chelsea Piers and we had all the girls come from the ballroom scene to vogue and rip it,” he says. “To this day, I can’t even watch it without getting emotional. That was a monumental moment to me.”

However, with so many creative elements involved, Oliver felt increasingly conflicted. “Fashion can be really harsh,” he says. “I remember seasons where [the fashion press] were like, ‘The music was really loud and horrible.’ And Alejandra [Ghersi, AKA Arca] and Total Freedom worked really hard on it and everyone in their world was raving about it and the work was so good.” In 2017, after a collection that included a collaboration with Pornhub and had photographer Wolfgang Tillmans on the catwalk, Oliver instigated another hiatus. For three years, he worked on projects with brands including Helmut Lang and Diesel. He announced HBA’s return in 2020, alongside the Anonymous Club.

Oliver’s time in the ballroom scene has bled into Anonymous Club, which has seen him taking on a maternal role. Sabrina Fuentes says Oliver got her out of a depressive, bed-bound state to work on tracks like the dark and wavy Ketamean. “I was like ‘I cannot come’ and he was like ‘That’s too bad, there’s an Uber outside.’ I got in and we went to the studio and made music.” Tama Gucci, meanwhile, says working with Oliver on tracks including reverb-heavy Lunch taught him a different perspective. “I’ve developed a new method of songwriting,” he says, “where we start with just a simple noise and write around how it makes us feel. I’ve realised it’s easier for me that way.”

Model behaviour: Anonymous Club star Tama Gucci Photograph: Torso Solutions

Gucci loves Oliver’s ear – “I’m always surprised at how many bizarre tunes he knows!” – but Fuentes says it’s a combination of full-tilt creativity and a caring nature that makes him exceptional: “He’s definitely one of the best artists and creative minds to come out of New York in the last 30 years. It’s rare that someone has that quality of warmth, bringing out the best in people, as well as being talented and driven.”

Working across art, music and fashion with a coterie of talent, Oliver has been painted as the new Andy Warhol, but nicer. He does see some similarities, but is nonplussed. “I have never said I wanted to create a factory,” he says, then catches himself. “I have only said that once – because I liked the fact it was silver.”

He is more inspired by Arthur Jafa, the film-maker and artist best known for 2016’s Love Is the Message, The Message Is Death. Using collaged clips ranging from Barack Obama to police shootings, Beyoncé to the LA riots, and Kanye West’s Ultralight Beam as the soundtrack, Jafa made what the New Yorker called a “crucial ode to Black America”.

It’s not just about the work, though. “I love a really weird Black man,” says Oliver. “I think being the Black weirdo is way harder than being another kind of weirdo. The work always gets wrapped into politics, which is always something people expect from Black people – that everything you do is political.” He pauses to take a rare breath. “I like it when you see these kind of men existing. That is really cool.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kiefer Sutherland, played Ace Merrill

This was the only audition where I did the reading and was hired right there in the room. I absolutely adored Spinal Tap, so to get that kind of affirmation from a director like Rob Reiner at that time in my life was really powerful.

Rob and I both agreed very strongly that there was no mushy side to this guy [villain Ace Merrill]. This is an asshole to the marrow of his bones; unfortunately, every town seems to have one. He was a bully and the only way to make the character work was if you hated him.

I worked with the main cast very little but when I’d get there early, they would be workshopping scenes and trying out each other’s lines. River [Phoenix] specifically had such an appetite to learn and be good – and, of course, he was. He was a year older than the rest of the boys and I think it made a pretty significant difference. When the others were doing age-appropriate things, River was asking questions like: “Would you mind running lines with me?” He saw me playing guitar and asked: “What song is that? Would you teach me?” His desire to get to the next level was so evident that you knew he was going to do something special. He was interested in storytelling from the perspective of learning and sharing as opposed to just entertaining.

‘This is an asshole to the marrow of his bones’ ... Kiefer Sutherland as Ace Merrill (right). Photograph: Columbia Pictures/Allstar

There was no animosity between the older and younger cast – I’ve never been that kind of actor. There’s a separation between how I am in my life and what we’re doing in between “action” and “cut” – thank God, because I’ve played some horrible characters, and Ace Merrill was one of them.

In many ways, the story that was being told in the movie was actually happening to me in my life

John Cusack was on the film for at least a week. I admired what he was doing and thought he was an actor I wanted to emulate. I got to spend time with him and we had some fun. We weren’t that far from Portland so we’d go to dances or try to meet girls. There’s absolutely nothing I don’t remember fondly about that film.

There was maybe a three-year period where I felt like the luckiest person on the planet. I got to do Stand By Me, The Lost Boys and Young Guns. I was cruising through and having a blast. There’s never felt like another time like that. In many ways, the story that was being told in the movie was actually happening to me in my life. Those are the summers and friends I will never forget.

Rob Reiner, director

Some friends were developing Stand By Me for the director Adrian Lyne but he left the project. They took it to me to read. I connected with the characters, loved the time period and everything about it. “Maybe I’ll take a shot at this,” I said.

For the next four days I drove around LA with a migraine because I couldn’t figure out what to do with it. It was this wonderfully observational piece that Stephen King had written about his experience going to look at a dead body with his friends. Once I hit on the idea of Gordie (Wil Wheaton) being the one that goes through this big emotional upheaval, then I hooked into it. In the book, Gordie was just an observer; once I decided to make him the main character, it all fell into place.

Wil had this sensitivity and intelligence. Jerry O’Connell (who played Vern) had never acted before apart from a commercial. The only one with real experience was Corey Feldman (Teddy). I’d never met a 12-year-old with that kind of rage inside of him, but in learning about his background and that his parents had split up and there wasn’t a lot of closeness there, I could see where it was coming from. River (Chris) was 13 and like a young James Dean. There was so much soul there. He had this great wisdom for a guy that age.

‘When it came out and was accepted it validated me’ ... Rob Reiner shooting Stand By Me. Photograph: PictureLux/The Hollywood Archive/Alamy

We shot in Brownsville, Oregon. It rains a lot there but we were lucky and got 60 straight days of sunshine. Even the day they were supposed to find the body was sunshine – we had to soak the whole set so it looked gloomy. I was looking for a town that had stopped in time and felt like it was in the 50s. We purposely tried to give it this hazy, gauzy and nostalgic look. Cinematographer Thomas Del Ruth did a magnificent job.

The vomit in the pie-eating scene was a mixture of large curd cottage cheese and blueberry pie filling and we were flinging it all over the place. That was fun, but the train sequence was difficult. For long shots we had stunt doubles and when I did shots with the actual boys, we used long lenses so the train looked like it was right on top of them even though it hadn’t even entered the trestle. They were supposed to be freaking out but didn’t feel the pressure. I started getting mad. It was hot and the crew had to push the camera down this long dolly track, so I said: “These guys are breaking their asses because you guys are fucking up!” The next time, they were frightened. Afterwards, they ran over, gave me a big hug and said “We did it Rob!” They were great.

Stand By Me means more to me than any of the other films I’ve made. It was the first time I did a film that reflected my own personal sensibility; it had a mixture of melancholy, humour and nostalgia. I was 12 in 1959 so the music was the music I listened to and the feelings I had in relation to my father, I injected into the film. When it came out and was accepted it validated me. It gave me a big boost to press forward.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As the hands of a clock turn, so, every few years, will there be a set of headlines condemning the Government Art Collection. So it is now: the Mirror has whipped up a small storm of protest over the fact that an artwork by Willie Doherty (price, £18,775) has gone on display in No 10, Downing Street. So has another by Cathy Wilkes (price, £70,200). Both works were acquired by the Government Art Collection. The Mirror has placed these works, by implication, in the category of the Johnsons’ “corrupt curtains” – the red-hot issue of soft furnishings for the family’s apartment at No 10 that somehow seems to threaten the prime minister more severely than, say, the brute fact of 125,000 deaths from Covid-19. “Nearly £100,000 spent on Downing St paintings as Boris Johnson prepares to slash benefits,” runs the headline.

Let’s straighten a few things out. First, any good government should be spending money on benefits and culture. Setting them in opposition is disingenuous and unfair. But to turn specifically to the Government Art Collection: the body is run by a director and a set of curators, independent of party-political allegiance. It cares for a collection of around 14,500 works of both historic and contemporary art. Acquisitions are regularly made, not according to the whim of a politician or their spouse, but with the help of an expert panel that includes the directors of Tate Britain and the National Portrait Gallery in London. A number of works were acquired to mark the centenary of Northern Ireland this year; both Wilkes and Doherty were born there (Wilkes is now based in Glasgow, Doherty in Donegal).

Cathy Wilkes, Untitled, 2020 Egg tempera on linen 24 × 28 × 2/5 in 61 × 71 × 1 cm Photograph: -

Most of the Government Art Collection’s funding comes from the public purse; some derives from philanthropic sources. Much of the work is held in storage – it has no permanent public display space – which may account for the perennial sense of slight mystery hanging over the collection. (No one, either, could accuse the collection of being especially effective at communicating its role and purpose.) It regularly lends to exhibitions: at the moment you can some of its works at the Towner, Eastbourne, the Hepworth, Wakefield, and the Whitechapel Gallery, London. One of its jobs is to place artworks in embassies overseas, as well as in government buildings in the UK. This includes Downing Street and government departments, including ministerial offices, whose incumbents can choose what they would like to see as they burrow through the contents of their red boxes. This traditionally provides an intriguing glance into individual politicians’ souls. Ken Clarke had paintings of Elizabeth I and Lord Burghley; Matt Hancock had a truly horrible Damien Hirst of the Queen. Former arts minister Ed Vaizey had a Michael Landy drawing called Compulsory Obsolescence, which at least showed some wit and foresight. It is traditional for artists to be horrified when they discover their work is actually liked by some despised government minister.

Artworks from the collection are displayed in official rooms where meetings are held and visitors are greeted. They are not hung in private apartments at No 10 or No 11. According to a No 10 spokesperson, the Johnsons and their household had nothing to do with choosing or placing these works. This is not difficult to believe. No 10 Downing Street is a big, rambling place, and there are artworks everywhere – lining stairs and corridors, and adorning the walls of the grand reception rooms. Frankly I doubt whether Boris Johnson has ever given the Doherty and the Wilkes a second thought. If indeed he’s even noticed them.

But he should. The untitled abstract painting by Cathy Wilkes is, like much of her work, quiet, inward, vulnerable-seeming. When she represented Great Britain at the Venice Biennale in 2019, she created a series of installations that resonated with a sense of mourning – a tomblike object dominated the first room, with tiny, delicate objects placed around it like offerings. For an exhibition at the Tramway, Glasgow, in 2014, she grouped figures uncertainly, perhaps even abjectly, beside odd little household objects; the effect was theatrical and somewhat ghostly, and though the artist ascribed no single meaning to the arrangements, at the time visitors were reminded of refugees, the displaced and terrorised, as they fled the Syrian war.

Willie Doherty, nominated for the Turner prize in 1994 and 2003, is similarly a major figure, working mostly in film and photography. His work in No 10 is a set of photographs of foliage and sharp shadows titled Ashen, Restless. As a kid, Doherty looked out of a bedroom window in his family home and saw Bloody Sunday happening before his eyes. Much of his work deals with historical memory and historical amnesia, the ineradicable nature of past wrongs, the imminence of violence. It is steeped in the horrors of what happened in Northern Ireland during his lifetime and before: the kneecappings and the disappearances of bodies into bogs, the burning cars. There was a time when some critics thought Doherty should move on from thinking about the Troubles. That would be a difficult position to hold now. In 2019, he made a work called Between, for which he photographed the roads between Derry and Donegal as they cross the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic. It would be an instructive work to show in Downing Street. So too, perhaps, a certain 2020 text work of his I keep thinking about. It’s titled Labyrinth of Lies.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the wall in my kitchen is a calendar made by Edinburgh theatre critic Thom Dibdin. This time last year, he and his photographer brother Peter took a set of pictures of Edinburgh festival venues that were shut because of the pandemic.

In February, we see Thom and his bike on the eerily empty Meadows. In July, he is the only one left standing in the Out of the Blue Drill Hall. This month, he’s on the Mound in front of the National Galleries with not a half-price ticket booth in sight.

In recent weeks, it’s been far from certain the 2021 festival wouldn’t go the same way. The Edinburgh international festival announced a slimmed-down line-up in April, but it wasn’t until the start of July that the fringe published its first batch of shows, a list it was adding to as recently as last week.

It now claims to have 440 in-person productions and a further 260 online – not the 3,800 we’ve grown used to, but not Dibdin’s desert either.

All the same, I had my doubts. It’s Wednesday evening, two days before the official start of the festival, and I’m sitting in George Square Gardens, which has been commandeered by Assembly just like the old days.

Painting final touches at the Pleasance in Edinburgh. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod/the Guardian

My concern is not the number of people; there are loads of them, a prime festival audience in waiting. We even have to queue to get a place on one of the sea of picnic benches before us.

What’s less certain is the art. In one corner, there’s an outdoor stage yet to be put into service and, at the other end, the Spiegeltent, a quaint cabaret big top. Much more visible, however, are the bars and food shacks that line the perimeter. This is not a festival, I think, but an enormous beer garden.

Usually, scaffolding is in short supply in August; this year it’s picnic tables.

But no sooner has the thought crossed my mind than I see Guy Masterson. The actor and director, a fringe veteran of 27 years, has just come off stage from his performance of Under Milk Wood. He is buzzing with delight at being back before an audience, not least because he’d been editing this “semi-skimmed” version on the fly.

He’d only sold two tickets in advance, he tells me, but 16 people had showed up. That’s impressive for the first night of a show only announced at the end of July. He is thrilled. I later hear there’d been more than 100 in for a children’s show that morning.

With audiences game and performers willing, maybe the old festival spirit is back. And by “old” I mean very old. Anyone going on stage in these uncertain circumstances can’t be expecting to get their big break, as Edinburgh mythology promises. The only reason to perform is for the love of it – just like the eight companies who rolled into town uninvited in 1947, the festival’s inaugural year.

Rehearsals for Double Drop at the outdoor MultiStory venue based at the NCP Castle Terrace Car Park. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod/the Guardian

“The people who are performing are doing it because they just really, really want to do their show,” says Verity Leigh, programme manager at Summerhall, where she’s built an open-sided 80-seat theatre to compliment her online programme. “Sure, if they get some nice reviews and a bit of attention from promoters, then that’s great, but the motivation is they want to be back doing it live. It feels like it’s back to first principles.”

On Thursday, the fringe’s “let’s do the show right here” spirit is given full vent at the launch of MultiStory, an outdoor venue set up by the Traverse, Gilded Balloon, Dance Base and Zoo. Comedian Fred MacAulay earns big laughs with jokes about performing in a car park – this one is run by NCP – but with Edinburgh Castle dramatically looming behind, the Traverse’s executive producer Linda Crooks is also right to say how photogenic it is.

Although audiences are willing, the city is relatively quiet. By the weekend, there is still not a leaflet nor an Elizabethan costume to be seen. I spot some modest posters in Nicolson Square, but the only person to approach me is a man from the Socialist Worker campaigning against imperialism. Take that, you free-market fringe!

What happens next remains unknown. Even pre-pandemic, the fringe was awash with venues that didn’t feel entirely sanitary and yet those same spaces were often where talent emerged.

Take the 50-seat Pleasance Attic. “That is a space Graham Norton and Michael McIntyre performed in,” says Anthony Alderson, the director of the Pleasance, which has reduced its warren of performing spaces to just two – the same number it had when it started in 1985. “We’ve got to work together to make sure these little rooms exist because that is where the heart and soul of this festival really lies.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A prolific career in TV means fame, right? Actually, the reality is often very different. Many great performances are delivered anonymously, either in a recording booth or under a mountain of prosthetics. That can lead to a strange sort of celebrity status: rubbing shoulders with screen legends on the red carpet one minute, shopping in Tesco without so much as a selfie request the next. So who are these unrecognisable TV icons? How do they bring their much-loved characters to life? And do they long for screaming fans?

Captain Saru from Star Trek and Doug Jones. Composite: CBS/ Bruce Smith

‘I’m not sure how much more rubber I want in my life’

Doug Jones: plays Captain Saru, a Kelpien, in Star Trek: Discovery

When you say yes to playing something that doesn’t look human, you’re saying yes to the entire process. I don’t get to shout: “Get this off me! It’s so hot and sticky.” I need the mindset of a performer, but also the endurance of an athlete, one who can take five or six hours of makeup application, then get through a long day of shooting.

Because of all the parts I’ve played, I often end up skipping the conventional casting process. People in creature effects just say: “It’s a tall skinny alien – we need Doug Jones.” I was playing the amphibian in the Oscar-winning film The Shape of Water when Star Trek: Discovery approached me. I was actually thinking “I’m not sure how much more rubber and glue I want in my life,” but there was no way I could turn it down. For Saru, I wear a four-piece prosthetic over my head that comes down past my collarbones, with gloves to change my hands. It’s all been moulded to my shape and pre-painted so getting it all glued on is only a two-hour process. I wear a Starfleet uniform like everybody else, but I do have special hoofed boots that add five inches to my height. That makes me about 6ft 8ins!

I just have to look in a mirror to know I’m not a romantic lead. For 35 years, my career has been about being either funny or scary. In my 20s, I was seeking fame. I would have loved to be on billboards and magazine covers, but I’ve grown to enjoy working under the radar. It’s nice to be able to go to a coffee shop with a friend and nobody knows who I am. But then I can go to a red carpet event where they announce who you are and you can act like a celebrity, before going back to anonymity.

Wendy from Bob the Builder and Kate Harbour. Composite: PA/Courtesy: Kate Harbour

‘We knocked Westlife off the top of the charts’

Kate Harbour: voices Wendy and Dizzy in Bob the Builder

Bob the Builder wasn’t just a show to us. We believed in the characters and their message of reduce, reuse, recycle. Bob was selling recycling years before it was cool! Wendy, his business partner and love interest, was one of the first strong female characters in kids’ TV. It’s nice to know you’ve played a vital part in getting that message to so many people.

We knew we had something exciting, but no one had any idea how massive it was going to be. We even got the 2000 Christmas No 1 with Can We Fix It? – knocking Westlife off the top of the charts. But the biggest pinch-yourself moment came when we recorded an album at Abbey Road. It was out of this world to be invited to such an iconic place for a show that, let’s face it, is about a builder banging nails in, a cement-mixer that talks, and a cat that goes “Miaow”.

I was at a gathering recently with a group of mums from the playground and they were talking about the vital work they do as teachers, nurses and social workers. I had a major wobble. I just thought: “What’s the point of me?” Weirdly, shortly after, I got this lovely fan letter that said: “Your little characters bring me so much joy.” And I thought: “That’s my purpose then? That can’t be half bad.”

Dipsy and John Simmit. Composite: Shutterstock

‘It was like being stuck inside a letterbox’

John Simmit: plays Dipsy in Teletubbies

I was a relatively experienced standup when I auditioned for Teletubbies. It was called Teleteddies back then and hadn’t even been commissioned. I was the only black person there and the oldest, too. So I stood out, which is a good thing. I was the first to be cast and I remember getting the train to the studio to try on this prototype suit innard that’s best described as one of those joke sumo-wrestler outfits. It weighed three stone, had limited air and no peripheral vision. It was like being stuck inside a letterbox. The whole thing felt surreal.

Rehearsals began at the end of 1995. That’s when I met the other three teletubbies: Pui Fan Lee, an actor; Dave Thompson, a standup; Nikky Smedley, a dancer. We were given our character names, but we were encouraged to “bring ourselves” to the roles. Pui Fan has Chinese heritage and spoke in Cantonese on the show. I brought reggae to the part with things like Dipsy saying “Papa come papa come to Po,” which is ripped straight from a classic reggae track called The Whip. And I’d slip in Jamaican dance moves, a bogle here and a tatty there.

If you look at Dipsy’s face it was actually darker – nothing on the show was accidental. We filmed for six years before finishing in 2002. Five years later, the production company invited us out to dinner and said: “Would you like to go to America?” I thought: “How many gigs will pay me to spend a week in New York?” It was an amazing experience. We got the keys to the city: we went on the morning shows in New York and took pictures in costume outside the Statue of Liberty.

The show made a huge impact. People still talk about it. If I was hit by a bus, I know Teletubbies would be in the first line of my obituary. But being attached to such a phenomenon is no bad thing.

Meerkat Aleksandr and Simon Greenall. Composite: Rex/Shutterstock/Getty Images

‘They wanted one meerkat to be a Russian Alan Sugar’

Simon Greenall: voices the meerkats in the Compare the Market adverts

I didn’t speak until I was about six. Not a word. But when I started to speak, I could do different voices and accents. My dad was a garageman and was very good at engine noises, so it’s an inherited skill. I didn’t actually start acting until my late 20s, though, and was in my 50s when I began voicing the meerkats.

In the beginning, they wanted Aleksandr to be threatening, a tough-guy businessman like a Russian Alan Sugar, telling people: “Don’t go to this site, go to that site.” But I thought: “Well, he’s an animal, he’s little and funny.” I took the pitch right up, but played it deadly serious and the effect is quite charming. That squeak he does at the end – I put that in for kids.

It’s a strange career, voice acting, but voices don’t know how lucky they are! It’s good fun, well paid and you can become very good at it very quickly. We’re like computers: you just feed in an idea like “a meerkat talking Russian” and we fire out a voice that fits.

My fanbase is made up of different age groups now. There’s the meerkats, of course, but there’s the Octonauts, too. I play Captain Barnacles, the brave polar bear leader of these little creatures who go underwater. That show is educational and environmental. It’s ultimately about kindness and citizenship.

Postman Pat and Lewis MacLeod. Composite: Cosgrove Hall Films/Alamy

‘There I was on the set of The Phantom Menace’

Lewis MacLeod: voices Postman Pat and, on Spitting Image, Prince Charles, Matt Hancock and more

As well as Postman Pat, I play two other characters: Alf the farmer and Ben Taylor, who runs the delivery office. I also sing the theme tune, which I’m chuffed about. I got to meet Prince Charles and he said: “So you’re Postman Pat? What does he sound like?” I replied: “Hello, Mrs Goggins!”

I’ve always been obsessed with audio and it’s got me on some huge projects. Voicing the vicious podracer Sebulba in The Phantom Menace was amazing. As a kid, I would build Star Wars sets out of Coke bottles and papier-mache. And there I was on set taking notes from George Lucas.

As I got into satirical comedy on shows like Spitting Image, I found myself having to master politicians, from Alex Salmond to Nigel Farage. David Cameron was very difficult and I just couldn’t get Trump – until I saw an interview where he noticeably softened his voice. My early impersonation was oddly reminiscent of Alec Baldwin in Glengarry Glen Ross.

Ashley Ailes, a contestant on The Weakest Link, and the show’s voice, Jon Briggs. Composite: NBCU Photo Bank/Getty Images/Katie Vandyck

‘We paved the way for other quiz shows’

Jon Briggs: best known for narrating The Weakest Link and voicing British Siri

When I was asked to be the voice of a BBC Two daytime quiz show, my initial reaction was: “Oh God, another nail in the coffin of my career.” I had no idea it would turn into this behemoth that paved the way for other quiz shows. The biggest one is probably Pointless. They’ve ridden on our coat-tails ever since.

We started in 2000. One of the reasons it was successful was that it was the only thing on during the Olympics that wasn’t sport. People who can’t stand sport were desperate for something else to watch. I did all 13 years. That’s 1,875 episodes. There were only two I didn’t do: a Eurovision special where they got Terry Wogan, and an Apprentice special which I’ve never understood to this day.

I have the performer gene. I like being on stage and I’m happy being the centre of attention, but I soon realised I was nowhere near good enough to be an actor. In the end, I went into radio because I absolutely loved it. My A-level grades were crap because I spent every waking moment when I wasn’t in school down at the local radio station. If you told me that I’d be making money from my voice 40 years later, I would have said you were barmy.

Kate and her dog Gin on Britain’s Got Talent and Peter Dickson, the show’s voiceover. Composite: Talkback Thames

‘Any career in entertainment is a rollercoaster’

Peter Dickson: voice of The X Factor and Britain’s Got Talent

I have never wanted fame, fortune and recognition. I still don’t. I’ve been close to many well-known stars and witnessed how fame can destroy people. I’ve never wanted that. A lot of people want to be famous without actually having any skills: fame is the end product they desire. I’ve never understood that. I have no regrets about working on The X Factor or Britain’s Got Talent: they’re entertainment shows and genuinely give people an opportunity to showcase their talent. It’s what goes on afterwards that can be the problem.

Any career in entertainment is a rollercoaster. Look at Bruce Forsyth, who I worked with for many years on The Price Is Right. There was a period after The Generation Game where he couldn’t get booked for anything. He was largely forgotten until being rediscovered by a new generation. I’ve done voice work on everything from lifts and bin lorries to cinema booking systems, which is probably why people recognise my voice all the time but never know where from! It’s been 43 years and I’ve loved every second.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Even if he wanted to, Alistair Green can’t redecorate his living room. The plain white walls that backdrop the comic’s sketches – and our Zoom call – are as much a trademark of his material as the range of deluded middle Englanders and disquieting eccentrics he portrays in front of them. His home is, for his legions of fans, a Mr Benn-style portal to an amped-up reality where Covid deniers believe that hand sanitiser causes the virus and anti-Meghan Markle sentiment is “nothing to do with race – she’s half and half”. He knows his audience would freak out “if I suddenly had purple walls”.

It would definitely be unsettling, given the amount of virtual time total strangers have spent in Green’s home in Deptford, London, during the pandemic. On Twitter and Instagram, he has gained a reputation for sharp satire and general oddities, with Ricky Gervais and Judd Apatow among the thousands to have retweeted his sketches. So-called front-facing camera comics have been having a moment since Covid hit, among them Michael Spicer, with his politically minded Room Next Door skits, and Munya Chawawa, who spoofs government restrictions at lightning speed. While Green has prodded Boris Johnson and co during the pandemic, his iPhone-filmed material is more focused on society at large and the people we all encounter there, often in single-take monologues.

“It starts from maybe something I’ve overheard,” he says. “It’s normally one line. I did one about a woman in a back garden. I thought about that weird English thing where you’re with your family, and someone does that baby voice where they go, ‘Where’s the sun gone?’” There’s a universality in the end product, which is a Frankenstein’s monster mix of Alan Bennett and Scottish comic Limmy complete with climate denial, illness and the looming spectre of death.

Ahead of the curve … Green and Diane Morgan as Teddy and Mookie in The Wankers.

Green was well ahead of the front-facing curve, having regularly posted his videos since 2018. Before then, he had garnered praise for his and Diane Morgan’s Wankers series on YouTube (a parody of the amorous Kooples clothing adverts) and a series of videos with his grandmother in which he narrated Fifty Shades of Grey to her, among other scabrous things. While he had been ploughing his standup furrow for the previous decade, and has popped up in some of the funniest shows on TV, including Stath Lets Flats, it’s clear that the internet is where Green belongs.

We speak about Julie, AKA Jules, one of his many memorable characters. On a trip to an Indian restaurant to pick up her takeaway, draped in a shawl, she is overbearing with the staff, assumes Solihull is in Asia, and offers advice on the menu to diners. “Aloo gobi – it’s cauliflower. I saw you looking confused.” Jules is horrendous, but also something of a tragic figure. “I don’t ever want to really be mean,” Green says of his creations. “She’s quite lonely. She wants people to know about her. And there’s a hint that the marriage isn’t great, ‘I’ll sit on the floor and eat with my hands, he’ll have a knife and fork.’ There’s a hint that they diverged at some point and she got into spirituality – crystals and stuff. I don’t think she’s a bad person. She’s just trying to do the right thing. She’d be very keen on pronouns but she’d still vote Conservative, and not make that connection.”

Not all his characters are treated with pathos, though. “Sometimes,” he says, “I’ve got no sympathy for them at all.” Take the sketch where a man poses questions about what a woman could have done differently to avoid sexual assault, ultimately concluding that she must be escorted by a man at all times. “There are no jokes,” he says. “You’re following his logic. And he ends up saying that women should be accompanied because he doesn’t want to acknowledge the problem.” It is, he says, “probably one of the darkest, if not the darkest” of his videos. “Really, what that character is saying is, ‘I’m sort of OK with sexual assault. I don’t want to make any changes. It’s not our fault.’”

Despite the attention he’s garnered online, Green also takes pleasure in showing his comedy in a cinema setting, something he is about to do again at London’s Blue Tick festival. The screenings are, he says, “really chaotic. I always do something weird to make it an occasion. I’ll dress up weirdly, like I think I’m a film director, and I’ll talk at the beginning for way too long.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Watch any superhero movie and you will see a credit along the lines of “based on the comic book created by”, usually with the name of a beloved and/or long-dead writer or artist. But deep, deep in the credits scroll, you will also see “special thanks” to a long roster of comic book talent, most of them still alive, whose work forms the skeleton and musculature of the movie you just watched. Scenes storyboarded directly from Batman comics by Frank Miller; character arcs out of Thor comics by Walt Simonson; entire franchises, such as the Avengers films or Disney+ spinoff The Falcon and the Winter Soldier, that couldn’t exist without the likes of Kurt Busiek or Ed Brubaker.

The “big two” comic companies – Marvel and DC - may pretend they’ve tapped into some timeless part of the human psyche with characters such as Superman and the Incredible Hulk, but the truth is that their most popular stories have been carefully stewarded through the decades by individual artists and writers. But how much of, say, the Marvel Cinematic Universe’s (MCU) $20bn-plus box office gross went to those who created the stories and characters in it? How are the unknown faces behind their biggest successes being treated?

Not well, according to Brubaker who, with Steve Epting, revived Captain America’s sidekick Bucky Barnes to create the Winter Soldier, portrayed by Sebastian Stan in Marvel’s films and shows. “For the most part, all Steve and I have got for creating the Winter Soldier and his storyline is a ‘thanks’ here or there, and over the years that’s become harder and harder to live with,” Brubaker recently wrote in a newsletter.

“I have a great life as a writer and much of it is because of Cap and the Winter Soldier bringing so many readers to my other work,” he added. “But I also can’t deny feeling a bit sick to my stomach sometimes when my inbox fills up with people wanting comments on the show.” (Marvel told the Guardian it had to “decline to comment out of respect for the privacy of [Brubaker and Epting’s] personal conversations [with the company].”)

Comic creators are “work-for-hire”, so the companies they work for owe them nothing beyond a flat fee and royalty payments. But Marvel and DC also incentivise popular creators to stay on with the promise of steady work and what they call “equity”: a tiny share of the profits, should a character they create or a storyline they write become fodder for films, shows or merch. For some creators, work they did decades ago is providing vital income now as films bring their comics to a bigger audience; they reason – and the companies seem to agree – it’s only fair to pay them more. DC has a boilerplate internal contract, which the Guardian has seen, which guarantees payments to creators when their characters are used. Marvel’s contracts are similar, according to two sources with knowledge of them, but harder to find; some Marvel creators did not know they existed.

A Marvel spokesman said there was no restrictions on when creators could approach the company about contracts, and said that they are having ongoing conversations with writers and artists pertaining to both recent and past work. A DC spokesman did not return multiple requests for comment. But the use of these contracts is at these companies’ discretion and the promised money can fall by the wayside.

Josh Brolin as Thanos in Avengers: Infinity War (2018). Creator Jim Starlin successfully negotiated a bigger payout from Marvel after arguing it had underpaid him for use of the villain. Photograph: Supplied by LMK

“The squeaky wheel gets the grease,” Jim Starlin, who created Thanos, recently told the Hollywood Reporter; Starlin negotiated a bigger payout after arguing that Marvel had underpaid him for its use of Thanos as the big bad of the MCU. Prolific Marvel writer Roy Thomas got his name added to the credits of Disney+ series Loki after his agent made a fuss. But these are creators that Marvel needs to keep happy; things can go very differently if nobody cares when you complain.

Bestselling author Ta-Nehisi Coates, who wrote a run of Marvel’s Black Panther and followed Brubaker and Epting’s Captain America run with his own a few years later, says that he believes Marvel has moral obligations to its artists and writers that go beyond contracts.

Just because it’s in a contract doesn’t make it right Ta-Nehisi Coates

“Long before I was writing Captain America, I read [Brubaker and Epting’s] Death of Captain America storyline, and Return of the Winter Soldier, and it was some of the most thrilling storytelling I’d ever read,” Coates says. “I’d rather read it than watch the movies – I love the movies too – but it doesn’t seem just for them to extract what Steve and Ed put into this and create a multi-billion dollar franchise.”

Coates says he feels fairly treated when it comes to his own work, but he is adamant that lesser known names deserve better treatment from the big studios, no matter what their contracts say: “Just because it’s in a contract doesn’t make it right. If I have some kind of leverage over you, I can get you to sign a contract to fuck you over. It’s just legalist.”

Over the decades, Marvel and DC have become parts of Fortune 500 companies: the Walt Disney Company owns Marvel, and DC is owned by a subsidiary of AT&T. Now, deciding what share of the success their comic creators deserve is a matter of complex wrangling between Marvel and DC, which want to maintain good relations with their talent, and the vast bureaucracies above them.

Among creators, there is a general sense that it has become harder to get paid at Marvel. One source told the Guardian that Marvel subtracted its own legal fees from a protracted negotiation over royalty payments. Others who have worked for DC and Marvel say both count on artists and writers preferring not to spend time chasing them for royalties.

Tom Hiddleston and Wunmi Mosaku in Disney+ series Loki. Photograph: Chuck Zlotnick

“Lawyer up, always, with comic book company contracts,” says Jimmy Palmiotti, longtime writer of DC characters such as Jonah Hex and Harley Quinn. “They are not in the business of feeding you the math.” Once a year, freelancers are allowed to audit the returns on their creations for DC and Marvel, but Palmiotti says it happens too rarely: “I can count on one hand the number of creators who’ve actually audited a major comics company.”

According to multiple sources, when a writer or artist’s work features prominently in a Marvel film, the company’s practice is to send the creator an invitation to the premiere and a cheque for $5,000 (£3,600). Three different sources confirmed this amount to the Guardian. There’s no obligation to attend the premiere, or to use the $5,000 for travel or accommodation; sources described it as a tacit acknowledgment that compensation was due.

Marvel declined to comment on this, citing privacy concerns. “We can’t speak to our individual agreements or contracts with talent,” said a spokesman.

Several sources who have worked with Marvel say that remuneration for contributing to a franchise that hits it big varies between the $5,000 payment, nothing, or – very rarely – a “special character contract”, which allows a select few creators to claim remuneration when their characters or stories are used. There are other potential ways to earn more – many former writers and artists are made executives and producers on Marvel’s myriad movies, cartoons and streaming series, for example – but those deals depend on factors other than legal obligation.

“I’ve been offered a [special character contract] that was really, really terrible, but it was that or nothing,” says one Marvel creator, who asked not to be named. “And then instead of honouring it, they send a thank you note and are like, ‘Here’s some money we don’t owe you!’ and it’s five grand. And you’re like, ‘The movie made a billion dollars.’”

One creator told the Guardian that he and other creators sometimes take pictures of action figures of their characters in shops, to demonstrate that their cheques are short

Both Marvel’s “special character contract”, or DC’s equivalent, a “creator equity” contract, are ways to keep creators happy enough that they don’t hold back all of their original creations for competitors. DC pioneered these contracts back in the 1970s and 1980s, responding in part to Marvel’s treatment of Captain America creator Jack Kirby. Jim Shooter, then Marvel’s editor-in-chief, refused to return original art to Kirby unless he signed a lengthy release form allowing the company to adapt his creations – including the Incredible Hulk, the Fantastic Four, Iron Man, Black Panther and the X-Men – without any compensation. DC saw an opportunity to score PR points, and offered Frank Miller, Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons what appeared to be much better contracts for works such as Ronin and Watchmen. (The company used a technicality to renege within a few years).

Brubaker has recalled once attending Comic-Con, where he watched Roz Kirby yell at Jim Shooter about his mistreatment of her husband in the middle of a panel on creators’ rights. (The panel, incidentally, included Moore and Miller, who were celebrating the apparent fairness of their own contracts at DC.) Decades later, Brubaker helped Marvel find success with his Captain America run with Steve Epting. According to sources, Brubaker and Epting showed up in tuxedos to the premiere party for Captain America: The Winter Soldier, a movie directly based on their comics, only to find that they weren’t on the list. Brubaker texted Sebastian Stan, the actor who played his and Epting’s character, Bucky Barnes, and he let them in.

Some creators told the Guardian that they did not know that Marvel even had the special character contract like DC. In fact, the Guardian has seen an application for the “Marvel Special Character Contract”, in which creators can formally ask Marvel whether one of their characters qualifies for extra payouts. In the application form, Marvel explicitly reserves the right to tell creators their characters aren’t original enough to get the bonus, warning that “the decisions are final” and not subject to appeal. DC uses the same measure; in 2015, the studio was criticised for cancelling payments to writer Gerry Conway for his character Power Girl, which the company retroactively decided was derivative of Supergirl and therefore ineligible for the contract, according to Conway. He no longer receives payments for her, he confirmed to the Guardian. DC did not respond to request for comment.

Superman creators Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster, who signed away their rights to royalties for $65 apiece in 1938. Photograph: Bettmann/Bettmann Archive

The Power Girl incident highlights how ethically fuzzy these contracts are, since they’re issued by DC and Marvel, drawn up unilaterally by the companies, and paid out when the companies account for their many films, TV shows, video games, trading cards, action figures and sundry other merch. One creator, who asked to remain anonymous, said he and other creators sometimes go to Target to take pictures of action figures of their characters for which payments are due, to demonstrate that their cheques are short.

DC and Marvel came into their own at a time of change in copyright law. The Copyright Act of 1976 gave artists the one-time right to cancel their contracts with IP holders, an option many exercised after witnessing the mistreatment of Superman creators Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster, who were left penniless. Artist Al Jaffee once claimed his pay cheques from EC Comics were issued with contracts on the back, so he couldn’t cash them without signing over the rights to his work. This was a common practice throughout the industry, including at Marvel, and one that was reevaluated in the wake of the act.

As comics publishers evolved into major media operations, their staff grew concerned about mistreatment of talent. There were famous fights over royalties, and thorny questions over what credit was due to thousands of co-creators working in a shared universe. In 2000, a consortium of publishers founded a charity to directly aid artists who’d fallen on the hardest times, called the Hero Initiative. (Marvel is a founding member, and AT&T lets employees donate directly from their paycheques.) By the 1980s, people who worked in comics at every level were fans, in the same way that even the ushers on Broadway can sing and dance if called upon. In 1986, DC editor Paul Levitz and DC president Jeanette Kahn were working on new schemes to more fairly compensate writers and artists. Moore, Gibbons, and Miller’s contracts were meant to usher in a new era of fairness. It was a long time coming: some were already looking askance at DC after its treatment of Siegel and Shuster came to light during the production of the 1978 film Superman.

Regina King in a scene from HBO’s award-winning 2019 series Watchmen, which was created without the involvement of Alan Moore. Photograph: Mark Hill/AP

But Moore and Gibbons’s Watchmen was a huge success, going through multiple reprints – unprecedented for a graphic novel – and DC never had to let its right to republish lapse, so it never did. The pair had a right to a share of merchandise profits; DC produced merch, classified it as “promotional items” and told Moore and Gibbons they weren’t owed anything. The vaunted in-house contracts that can make creators’ lives livable can always be subverted.

To the extent that there is any semblance of fairness in the industry now, it’s primarily Levitz’s doing, alongside Kahn and Karen Berger, who is now at Dark Horse Comics. Levitz left DC in 2009, but his influence is still felt across the industry.

“You want to create a situation where you never get to the old Russian joke where they pretend to pay us, and we pretend to work,” Levitz says. “You want people to win when the companies win. I’m proud of the fact that we improved the quality of how we treated creative people.” More than one creator recounts calling Levitz to ask for more money because of a scene in a lucrative Batman movie that lifted plot points or names from their work, then being shocked when they got it.

Many of his peers say that Levitz was a bulwark against meddling by executives at Warner Brothers. For years, he blocked the publication of Watchmen sequels, of which Moore and Gibbons disapproved – something DC did soon after Levitz left, to widespread condemnation. Without another Levitz, the “big two” are once again attracting the criticism that led to the creation of these elusive “special” contracts in the first place. Some creators have left the medium entirely, but others have founded their own studios, such as Image and Dark Horse, providing creators with alternative outlets. As Marvel and DC may find, more creators – Brubaker and Jupiter’s Legacy creator Mark Millar are already among them – will simply not work for them again.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bolivia’s cholitas luchadoras began wrestling in the early 2000s. The women, indigenous Aymara Indians who have traditionally been marginalised and oppressed, took to Mexican-style lucha libre wrestling for mental and physical health – and to stick two fingers up to a culture where wrestling was strictly a male preserve. For many it was also a means of escaping domestic violence. Their choreographed fights in the ring became a dramatisation of day-to-day struggles, all the while adorned in their traditional dress of layered skirts, petticoats and embroidered shawls. Their name, too, subverts and reclaims a term, cholita, that has often been used to demean. But there was also a social and recreational aspect to the wrestling matches that are staged as entertainment, and have grown over the years. Today it’s become a living for many of them, with their fights drawing huge crowds of local people and tourists.

For my personal projects I seek out ordinary people that lead extraordinary lives. I came across the cholitas luchadoras when I was researching another (unconnected) project in La Paz, the Cholitas Escaladoras Bolivianas, AKA the climbing cholitas. The wrestlers are in El Alto, a suburb of La Paz that sits high on a plateau 1,500m above the main city. The houses of the town seem to cascade down the steep cliffs into La Paz below and the mountains of the Andes are ever present. We spent our first few nights driving around looking for cool locations that would showcase the women – I knew I wanted to photograph them outside the ring and make the landscape part of the images. The float and bounce of their traditional dresses is an integral part of the visual impact of the wrestling, and I drew inspiration from the South American literary tradition of magic realism in how I portrayed the fighters mid-air, mid-flight, giving the images a dream-like quality.

In some matches the women also take on men – guys often twice their size – and hurl them over their shoulders

Ponkiss is a local soda of sorts. I know it almost looks like a set but it’s a street in El Alto. I had set up lighting to freeze the action, but I didn’t stage-manage the costumes – this is what they wear when in the ring and just another part of what makes them so unique, although I did place the various women in settings according to what colours would work better together. I love how the beautiful teal colours from the light in the window above are reflected in the colour of the dress. We also lit the background with the headlights from our production vehicle parked just out of frame – you can see that low light in the picture, raking from right to left, highlighting the wrestlers and lifting them out from the background. From a technical point of view it was a very tricky shot. I’m not going to tell you exactly how it was done, but I promise there were no wires, nothing like that. What you are seeing is them mid-flight. We kept experimenting to see which moves created the most dynamic shapes and allowed the dresses to flow and billow. We must have done 30 takes for each image but the women never batted an eye despite the physical toll. They’re incredible.

The wrestling matches might be staged – with the técnicos (the good guys) versus the rudos (the bad guys), but that doesn’t make them any less physically challenging. In some matches the women also take on men – guys often twice their size – and hurl them over their shoulders. But, however much it’s for show, the ring is still a sheet of plywood on top of stainless steel struts; when you hit it, it still hurts, you still bleed.

I’ve just returned from Sierra Leone where I was photographing amputee football teams – men who have lost legs during the civil war. Most of the imagery we’re used to digesting from Africa is documentary in style, or in bleached, brown tones, which is frequently counter to the vibrancy of colour there. I try to challenge these visual tropes by consciously shooting against them, especially by using lighting in settings you wouldn’t expect. I arrived in Sierra Leone with 10 cases of equipment, and for the Climbing Cholitas series we carried battery-powered studio flash units up to 5,000m to shoot the climbers in a way not ordinarily seen in mountaineering photography.

If possible I want these photos to provide some sort of tangible benefit for their subjects. I don’t want to rock up, take a bunch of pictures and leave again. I’m using the images from the Sierra Leone footballers to drive a GoFundMe I’ve set up to purchase crutches for the players, as they are prohibitively expensive there. And wherever possible I spend time with the people I’m shooting. Just hang out and chat. I owe it to them to produce images that do them justice.

Todd Antony’s CV

Photograph: Todd Antony

Born: New Zealand, 1975.

Trained: Photographer’s assistant.

Influences: Edward Burtynsky, Gregory Crewdson, Nick Brandt – This Empty World.

High point: “That I get to do what I love as my job – travelling the world meeting amazing people and sharing moments with them.”

Low point: “I’d shot an ad campaign in India with an amazing all-female motorcycling group. Just a few weeks later one of the main women in the group died in a motorway accident. She had a young daughter and this amazing energy and personality that shone through and had resonated with all of us working on the project.”

Top tip: “Shoot what excites you and makes something tick inside you. If it doesn’t excite you, chances are what you’re producing won’t connect with as many people as it could.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@At the end of June, Raye smashed through the shiny and carefully controlled veneer that usually surrounds music stars. The British pop singer’s numerous hit singles had made her one of the world’s 200 most popular artists on Spotify, but her label Polydor hadn’t allowed her to make even one album from a four-album record deal she signed back in 2014.

“I’ve done everything they asked me, I switched genres, I worked seven days a week, ask anyone in the music game, they know,” she vented on Twitter. “I’m done being a polite pop star.” Polydor responded saying they were “saddened” to read Raye’s tweets and the two have since parted ways.

She had released one mini-album, five EPs and over 20 singles both as a lead and featured artist (and had written songs for other artists such as Beyoncé, Little Mix and Anne-Marie). One of her newest singles, Bed, with Joel Corry and David Guetta, is the biggest song so far in 2021 to be released by a British female artist. So why had her label left her in limbo?

She is far from alone, and the reasons for artists being stifled by the music business are numerous. Perhaps the artist’s creative vision is at odds with the label’s, or they’re sidelined after the person who signed them leaves the company. A lack of commercial success might make a label reluctant to spend more money on an artist’s career, or if the album they made isn’t deemed to be good enough. These pitfalls mean that the majority of artists never make it – stats from UK music trade body BPI say that only one in 10 signed artists are expected to succeed commercially, although industry insiders suggest this is a generous estimate – and if the relationship does fall apart, any music an artist has made typically remains owned by the label.

Raye at this year’s Brit awards, where she was nominated for British single. Photograph: JMEnternational/JMEnternational for BRIT Awards/Getty Images

Kimberly Anne, who goes by the artist name of Lanta, signed to Polydor in 2013 and found herself in a similar situation to Raye. She spent three years with the label, “being a good artist, doing everything they said,” and changing genres so many times that she felt she lost her “creative compass”.

She lived off the £25,000 advance she’d been given and then spent a year negotiating her way out of the contract. After leaving, she says her self-confidence and mental health were shattered. “I think I have underlying anxiety issues but the whole experience definitely exacerbated it. I became depressed. I didn’t see how I could make music and represent myself any more, my confidence was at zero.” (In response, Polydor said it was the first they had heard of Lanta’s feelings, “which we were very sorry to read – given the substantial changes in the label’s management and staffing since 2013, we can’t comment on them. We take artists’ mental health very seriously and over recent years we have developed a number of resources to support the wellbeing of both our existing artists and those moving on.”)

Pop singer and songwriter Marney, who spent five years stuck in a deal with Sony without releasing any music after the A&R who signed her left the company, says she feels she lost her 20s. “You come out the other end and your friends have mortgages, they’re senior members of staff or just qualified as lawyers or doctors. Whereas you feel like you’ve got nothing to show.”

Singer and songwriter Bruno Major was given the A-list treatment when he signed to the since-dissolved Virgin in the US, which included a first-class flight, a stay in a beautiful hotel in Los Angeles and the pick of musicians he wanted to record with. He even had, he says, a private chef who baked him pies with his name on them. The high life ended abruptly when the label head who signed him was dismissed and the higher-ups decided his album was, Major says, “rubbish” and they wouldn’t release it.

Major says he was devastated and describes the experience as “the worst thing that’s ever happened to me. I had no confidence, no money. And it’s a long way down – when you become the guy that signs a record deal and goes to LA and then you get dropped, it’s humbling.” He has a pragmatic view on the situation now, saying it gave him the impetus to record new music and release it independently, but it taught him a harsh lesson about the reality of major record labels.

“It’s a giant illusion,” he says, comparing it to a TV talent show search. “People think in order to be famous or successful, you go on and the powers-that-be bestow upon you the magic wand of success. But the vast majority of people on the show actually get sunk and legally bound in deals that mean they are never able to release music and they are fucked, basically. The major label system is really not that different, just a little bit more finessed.”

Music industry adviser Mike Burgess explains the labels’ thinking: “There are a huge amount of acts that are signed because they might have the thing the label is looking for, or they might not. But it’s safer to hoover them up anyway, sign them and retain them.”

The problem, though, is that labels often seem to forget that they’re signing a human being rather than a prospect. Ted Cockle, who spent 15 years as head of record label Virgin EMI, where he worked with Lewis Capaldi, Amy Winehouse and Bastille before joining Hipgnosis Songs, says that the decision to delay a Raye album could make sense from a purely commercial perspective: her mini album Euphoric Sad Songs didn’t chart when it arrived last year. But does it make sense from a human one? “At some point, if the artist is seeing themselves as a recording artist and they’ve signed an album deal, in order to keep them energised, satiated and focused, you have to let them make an album,” he says. “It’s a rite of passage.” The artist-development process usually takes around two to three years before acts are deemed ready to release an album – less than half of the time Raye (who would not comment for this article) was kept waiting.

In order to keep an artist energised, satiated and focused, you have to let them make an album Ted Cockle

A lack of substantial record sales might also be the fault of a label’s development approach, rather than an artist whose destiny lies elsewhere. Grammy award-winning producer Jim Abbiss, who has worked with Adele and Arctic Monkeys, says that labels sometimes “try every combination of every genre and style” with a pop star – just as Polydor did with Raye and Lanta – who then “loses sight of what they are. Then, it’s very easy for the label or the management to never commit to things.” Raye’s songs have had productions ranging from deep house to Afrobeats, R&B and dance-pop, and she has arguably lost a strong sense of identity because of it.

There is anecdotal evidence to suggest this process may disproportionately affect women and people of colour. Songwriter Coco Morier, who has written for Britney Spears and Demi Lovato, says she’s seen plenty of young female artists “lectured and berated” by the male studio teams they are collaborating with, and who are “deemed a creation of the label and the producers behind them, instead of them being signed on their talent and allowed to have their creative vision.”

A Black female artist, who wished to remain anonymous, wanted to get out of her deal with Island Records for the vast majority of the time she was signed, and says she was pushed to be “super R&B” and told by her A&R that the chords on her songs “don’t sound Black enough”. She says: “With Black women, sometimes they’ll push you into the more commercially white realm or, in my personal experience, they refuse to see you outside of a stereotype of Blackness and make you feel like if you don’t conform to that, no one will believe you as an artist.” (Island said they would not comment on the allegations of an anonymous artist.)

VV Brown in 2014. Photograph: Robin Little/Redferns/Getty Images

Singer VV Brown has recently written about this, saying she “hated being immediately categorised as R&B” even though she’d written a pop-punk song. Throughout her career, she said she’s seen “countless” Black artists ending up in the same position as Raye. “I experienced it myself. For two years I was unable to release music and was completely neglected.”

These issues aren’t unique to major labels. Another artist I speak to was blocked from releasing her self-financed and self-produced album for two years by the independent label she was signed to, after they said it dealt with “women’s issues” that people didn’t want to hear about. It nearly devastated her financially. “In no other industry would this happen where someone says to you, ‘Oh, here’s a job contract but actually, we don’t want you to come into work, we’re not going to pay you and you can’t go and find another job.’”

For their part, record labels spend a lot of money on developing and promoting new music talent. In the UK, the BPI says that labels pump £250m a year into artist development (A&R) and another £150m on global marketing, which is over 35% of the total £1.118bn labels made from recorded music in 2020. The costs for one artist project alone can reach millions and when artists leave labels, they don’t have to pay back their advances. And thanks to the growing number of companies such as AWAL and BMG, which offer a more flexible alternative to traditional labels, artists now don’t have to enter into restrictive deals in order to get their music released.

Ted Cockle with Lewis Capaldi. Photograph: David M Benett/Getty Images for Universal Music & Soho House

Cockle refers to albums as an “artist appeasement tool”, because promoting albums in today’s track-led streaming age can be expensive and thankless. In 2010, Take That’s Progress was the best-selling album of the year with 1.84m sales, but in 2020, Lewis Capaldi’s Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent topped the list with 456,000, so there is an argument to be had over whether artists are too focused on albums when success and revenue span a multitude of areas (including playing live, merchandise sales, writing songs for others, branding deals and licensing music to film and TV).

Are album deals outdated, then? Yes, says music lawyer Robert Horsfall, who still sees “many contracts from the pre-streaming era that call for the old-fashioned ‘album’ format to be delivered and released”. This seems to be an issue Raye faced: although she’d released enough tracks to fill multiple albums, contractually, she hadn’t yet delivered one.

To their credit, Polydor allowed Raye to leave her deal swiftly and she’s now free to pursue a career as an independent artist. But what about those who end up trapped, unable to release the music they have poured their hearts and souls into? Many of those I spoke to called for better education about the reality of deals in music, as well as some sort of HR department that exists specifically for artists, where they feel supported to air grievances.

When putting this idea to the three major labels, one pointed to its artist relations department, who “support artists in a wide range of ways”. The second said that the company works in partnership with artists and managers “to ensure that creative choices are discussed and decisions are made collaboratively”. The third label said it has an informal reporting process but no formal mechanisms in place. The Musicians’ Union also offers support and advice to members for their contracts and relationships with music companies.

This sort of system isn’t a perfect solution – as Raye tweeted, artists often don’t speak “out of fear” of repercussions on their career. But if more can find their voices, the more likely it is that they will, finally, be heard.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bad news for parents of children under the age of seven this week: PAW Patrol: The Movie has landed on UK screens, all the better to spoon-feed a generation of Covid-hardened kids with authoritarian neoliberal propaganda in the guise of an upbeat cartoon about puppies. That’s right: the early years TV show that criminology professor Liam Kennedy suggests is complicit in “a global capitalist system that produces inequalities” is back!

PAW Patrol’s astonishing popularity has made it a fascinating case study for the tastes and cultural politics of a generation. The show’s move from small to silver screen has highlighted many of those peculiarities. The first thing to say – though it seems obvious – is that parents can’t simply leave their children in front of PAW Patrol: The Movie, as you might with a television show. Perhaps because the film-makers know adults will be watching, it has somewhat dialled down its usually frantic goings-on. Indeed, a somewhat pointed early scene in the film involves a fireworks display in which all the rockets go off at once in a pandemonium of colours and noise, and the man in charge says: “Hey – I’m trying to build momentum here.”

Adults may be relieved with this odd bit of downtime, but in general the film maintains the programme’s deathless vibrancy, a world in which everybody is alert and ready at all times, and where dreaming and imagining are likely to get you run over by a screeching car. This seems of a piece with a modern culture in which children are evidently overly stimulated and connected.

PAW Patrol’s chief singularity is the way young people are called upon to rectify the mistakes or crimes of adults. Ryder, Charlie to the pooches’ Angels, is a 10-year-old vigilante, and in the new film has become a magnate at the head of a lucrative empire. The animals themselves, the movie reminds us, are conspicuously not dogs but puppies – never ageing, like Bart Simpson or Just William. This is important, because it aligns with a sensibility in which youth, unclouded by ambition or other adult considerations, is able to save the day over and over. Perhaps this is pleasing or recognisable to children brought up by late millennials having to become adults in a world where traditional markers of ageing (such as house ownership) are shifting. Also, children raised post-Philippa Perry are probably used to being considered on a more equal footing to grownups than previous generations.

PAW Patrol: The Movie works quite hard to repair some of the most obvious damage of the series, in which only one of the super-pups is presented as female. (Skye is depicted as so girly that not only is her uniform hot pink, but, freakishly, her eyes are too – the properties of biology clearly coming second to gender essentialism in the movie’s universe.) The film introduces a new female character, Liberty (finely voiced by Marsai Martin – the film’s best asset). It remains to be seen if Liberty will become canon: another female puppy, Everest, appears a number of times in the show but is kept to the sidelines. Liberty is a decent enough character, although why this streetwise ragamuffin would yearn to join the ranks of these narcs is unclear. In the end, she is fitted with an apricot-pink outfit of her own.

‘The film draws amusing parallels between the pups’ antagonist, Mayor Humdinger, and another blond North American megalomaniac’ ... PAW Patrol: The Movie. Photograph: Landmark Media/Alamy

The film’s dismaying gender politics are in tune with the franchise’s gross rightwingery, which sees these privatised dog-Avenger types endlessly called upon to undo the failings of various functionaries. A sort of Ayn Randian objectivism prevails in the film, visible most queasily when Chase (the most cop-like of the lot, in his blue uniform and police car) is told that he was “born to be a hero”. The film draws amusing parallels between the pups’ antagonist, Mayor Humdinger, and another blond North American megalomaniac, right down to the grotesque tower that Trump – I mean, Humdinger – erects in his own honour. But the film’s own sensibility is not vastly different to Trumpian individualism, disdain for the state, and capitalist materialism – indeed, in the film the dogs have a new tower of their own, subsidised by selling merch, and come with gleaming luxury gadgets that make Liberty, the poorer dog, swoon with envy.

How PAW Patrol will come to be viewed in years to come is an interesting question: it seems likely that a generation of children coming-of-age in a time of far greater gender fluidity than ever, will have little time for the show’s patriarchal gender performance. In other words, abandoning their children to this ceaselessly cheery neoliberal nightmare for 90 minutes shouldn’t worry parents too much.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Andrew Green and Eddie Otchere – AKA Two Fingas and James T Kirk, whose extraordinary collaborative novel Junglist is reissued this month – came of age at a strange, indeterminate time. It was the early 1990s, post-Thatcher and post-Berlin Wall: a period of fudge and inertia, of recession and housing market collapse, of Britain being forced to leave the European Exchange Rate Mechanism. The Greater London Council had been abolished in 1986 and the city still had no mayor. Tourists were in short supply; bombs – the IRA attacked the Baltic Exchange, Bishopsgate, even Downing Street – were not.

Green and Otchere were from council estates south of the Thames in Vauxhall. The MI5 building had yet to go up in the neighbourhood and it was hard to imagine that the US embassy would one day move there. Where they lived, squatters were common. The fires that often broke out would have caused even more devastation than they did if the high-rise walling wasn’t so stuffed with asbestos. Turning 16, the two teenagers, both creative and independently minded, headed across town to Hammersmith and West London College. There they bonded over a shared love of comics, basketball, kung fu movies. Music, too.

‘We saw how much fun they were having and brought it into our own circles’ ... raving at AWOL in Ministry of Sound. Photograph: Eddie Otchere

Green had been a hip-hop and happy hardcore fan. Increasingly he was getting into jungle. He viewed the club nights he attended as extensions of the house parties of his youth: front rooms cleared of all furniture, huge sound systems, alcohol served in plastic cups, dim lighting, lots of motion. He found jungle intimate and immersive – a sometimes demonised music to which young kids, in darkened spaces the size of chill-out zones, were still figuring out how to dance. It was a music that was impossibly accelerationist. Its rhythms thrillingly alien. Its darkness radiant.

Otchere, a photographer with a keen eye for social semiotics, had noticed that “the white racist kids that I went to school with came back from their summer holidays not racist any more. I was trying to figure out what the fuck happened.” Jungle offered a partial answer:

The rave culture we as Black kids in south London started to experience in the 90s began four years earlier with those white kids. We saw how much fun they were having and brought it into our own circles. By just dancing together, by mimicking each other’s body movements, by being under the same roof, listening to the same music, feeling the same high, taking the same pills: in that magic moment the moodiness was gone.

Jungle had its own subaltern economy. White-label 12-inch records were produced on the cheap, pressed up by tiny independents, spun at clubs and by pirates, sometimes sold from the boots of cars. Cash in hand. Not a word to the taxman. DIY creativity at its most kinetic and entrepreneurial.

Some of that energy was channelled into publishing. Deadmeat, a novel about a Black cyber-vigilante stalking the streets of London, was initially sold at clubs by its author “Q”. Better known is The X-Press, an imprint set up by Dotun Adebayo and Steve Pope in 1992, which published Victor Headley’s Yardie and Donald Gorgon’s Cop Killer. These books were often accused of glorifying violence and of being no-brow trash, but their hefty sales were hard to ignore.

One individual paying particular attention was Jake Lingwood, a twentysomething editor at Boxtree. He had a passion for mod and, as a teenager, had started the zine Smarter Than U!, which he named after a song on the Undertones’ 1978 Teenage Kicks EP. Excited by the energy of the London club scene, he decided to commission a series of novel-length documentations that would allow outsiders to peek into social worlds they might otherwise have felt too intimidated to actually visit or join. He named it Backstreets, and was soon casting about for writers prepared to bash out vaguely workable prose in a couple of months and for an advance of a few thousand pounds.

Goldie receiving a gold record plaque at the Blue Note, Hoxton Square, London. Photograph: Eddie Otchere

By this time, Green and Otchere had figured out, as canny youngsters tend to, that the best way to get free records and tickets – swag – was by writing for magazines. They were penning film reviews for Black lifestyle journal Touch; Otchere was also taking photos for it and had contributed cover images for X-Press titles. He’d even shot something for one of the first Backstreets novels. If in retrospect it seems obvious that Lingwood would ask him to write a drum’n’bass-themed volume – and that he would ring his friend to suggest they collaborate on it – initially there were some tricky issues to resolve.

Neither of them were particularly interested in literary fiction (“a term I despise,” says Green today); the word-length was 50,000 (about 48,000 longer than anything either of them had ever written before); Green was now up country studying film at Northumbria University. Otchere says he’d never even read a full-length novel up to that point, preferring instead the wordplay and poetry of the sleeve notes on Sun Ra LPs.

Still, they said yes. Green remembers thinking, “Fuck it, why not? I was 18 or 19 – full of young person confidence.” He had felt “a weird sense of dislocation” in Newcastle; writing about London was a chance to take stock of his upbringing and the music that had rewired him. The book would be a quota-quickie – like youthsploitation novels such as Wolf Mankowitz’s Expresso Bongo (1958) and Richard Allen’s Skinhead (1970, a key reference point for Lingwood), but also like those pulp fictions historically churned out by the comic and sci-fi writers Green adored. He could stay anonymous – like a graffer or an underground producer issuing multiple releases under different pseudonyms. He and Otchere could even use the excuse of writing it as a way to get on guest lists and jump the queues at otherwise rammed clubs. Research!

Nazlyn performing Sweet Love with M-Beat at The Raw Club, London. Photograph: Eddie Otchere

Green and Otchere decided on a simple narrative arc: a long weekend, Friday through to Monday morning, in the lives of four south Londoners – Meth, Q, Biggie and Craig – who they based on themselves and their mates. It’s often hard to tell them apart, their voices and personalities melting into a polyphonic mix, a scattershot and bantz-heavy flow of the kind that might be heard on a pirate station. They have minor run-ins with the police as they drive across town in Q’s mum’s Cortina, but this isn’t a protest or a journalistic novel; it’s more interested in inner space than in sociological space, the psychology of urban life as it’s modulated by beats and weed.

Otchere, in particular, liked to hammer out his chapters at 4am after returning home from bunning it at clubs. Junglist’s prose vibrates as much as it documents. It’s been happily contaminated by the music it loves, treating rhythm as a virus it in turn can transmit to the reader. Mutant modernism is the stylistic default. It begins with an epigraph – “Jungle is a headfuck. The sound of a transformer banging its head against a wall.” It ends with a glossolalic A-Z that resembles a lysergic take on Molly Bloom’s epic stream of consciousness in Ulysses: “rumblism, rupert, sade, scamming, schott, schwarzenigga, secs, sega, semesterisation …”

Junglist isn’t polished or smooth. It’s, well, junglist rather than drum’n’bassist. A recurring motif is the middle-class “false consciousness” of house music. The prose jabs and concusses, bristles with millennial tension, is galvanised by the “guerilla dance, guerilla musicality” of the scene. There’s also a lot of humour – Boy’s Own knob gags, a chapter in which Craig has strife with the Jehovah’s Witnesses at his Sunday morning front door. A scene in which Meth ruffles Q’s semi-afro while smiling a goofy smile at him is as tear-inducingly tender as anything to be found in more vaunted Black British fictions.

Interior shot of the Lazerdrome in Peckham. Photograph: Eddie Otchere

Most startling is how surreally Green and Otchere chafe against the reportage remit of the Backstreets series and push towards abstraction, evoking nocturnal London in terms of heat and colour, gravity and anti-gravity. One chapter is entitled Craig’s Obsession: Twelve Inches of Plastic in a Quasi-Rotational Plane of Existence and a Parrot. Another begins: “Towards the sky I flew in a surge of tranquillity and found the unlimited existence in the shape of ultramarine.” This is Vauxhall kosmische, prole-art Swedenborgianism, tower-block psychedelia, the dissident spiritualism of William Blake and Thomas De Quincey transmigrating into the rhythmic matrix of Leviticus’s Burial and Deep Blue’s The Helicopter Tune.

Junglist was written before White Teeth, before Brick Lane, before literary publishers made a concerted push to foreground “minority” voices. It predates the rise of psychogeography, whose studied melancholia it has little interest in. It captures jungle in the intense now, as a way of being – not merely as a musical subculture, or as an edgy scene to be snapped, tagged and circulated on social media. Much of its first run had to be pulped after MC 5ive-0 threatened to sue because he’d not given permission for a photo of him to appear on the front cover. It didn’t sell a lot and got scant reviews. The Backstreets series itself fizzled out. At one point, Junglist was reputed to be the most stolen book in the London prison system.

Green went on to work in television, Otchere focused on photography. For decades neither of them picked up or reread the novel. Now, in decelerated, socially distanced times, there’s a palpable nostalgia for the music and momentum of the rave era, its innovations and future shock, its ability to make mayhem and magic in downturn Britain. Junglist – timeshifting, between genres, tonally wrong-stepping – may finally have found its moment. It’s such an avant-pulp anomaly, though, that I wouldn’t bet on it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Society of Authors (SoA) has asked the writers it represents “to be mindful of privilege and of the impact of what they create, do and say” in an email to committee members responding to the recent criticism of Kate Clanchy’s 2019 Orwell-prize winning book, Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me.

In the email, which has since been made public, the SoA also distances itself from comments made by its president Philip Pullman on Twitter. The His Dark Materials author had defended Clanchy, whose descriptions of children of colour and autistic children in particular, have been widely criticised on Goodreads and Twitter in recent days.

Pullman, who has been the SoA’s president since 2013, praised Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me, calling it “humane, warm, decent, generous, and welcoming”. In a now deleted comment, made in response to a tweet he wrongly thought to be about Clanchy, he wrote that those who do not read a book before condemning it would “find a comfortable home in Isis or the Taliban”. Authors of colour who criticised Clanchy, including Chimene Suleyman, Monisha Rajesh and Sunny Singh, went on to receive racist abuse from social media users. Pullman has now tweeted an apology for the harm he caused, admitting that his tweet was a “mistake”.

“Writers of colour (including children) and people of colour who are not writers (including children, again), your experiences and imaginations deserve every kind of respect” he added.

The email from the SoA emphasised that “Philip wrote his comments as an individual, not in the name of the Society of Authors”, and that “President is an honorary position only: he does not play any part in the governance of the SoA”.

Joanne Harris, chair of the Society of Authors. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod/The Guardian

It also stated “We do not get involved in individual debates – or in disputes between authors” but that “we condemn any kind of racist, hate or unprofessional speech.” The union encouraged members to make a complaint if they are concerned about another author’s behaviour.

The email quoted Sunny Singh’s tweet which stated “UK publishing is a hostile environment for writers of colour. This is a structural issue not an individual one. However, it is perpetuated and reinforced by individuals and organisations”, adding “we have no intention of being one of the organisations that perpetuates it.”

Joanne Harris, chair of the SoA’s democratically elected management committee, said “it has been very hard for some of the SoA staff to follow what has been happening on Twitter without breaking our policy of not commenting on social media disputes. Philip and I have both expressed our personal opinions on Twitter, rather than in our official capacity.”

“As Chair of the SoA,” she added, “I’d like to emphasise that not only do we deplore racism and prejudice in all its forms, but all our policies are active policies – they exist to make a real difference for people, and not just as words on a website.”

An open letter, written by the editor and writer Sabeena Akhtar, has today been published by Bad Form, a literary review by and about Black, Asian and marginalised community writers.

“As members of the writing and publishing community we have watched in horror as three of our colleagues, Monisha Rajesh, Professor Sunny Singh and Chimene Suleyman have been targeted, harassed and gaslighted online for rightly pointing out the use of dehumanising, ableist and racist language and questioning the structures and processes in wider publishing that allowed them to get through the editorial process, become published and then lauded. We stand in complete solidarity with the brave writers who challenged this and condemn all attempts to attack them and obfuscate and negate the veracity of their concerns”, it begins.

The letter goes on to say “we cannot silently stand by whilst a group of marginalised women are being targeted by those with power and influence in this industry. We urge our colleagues to speak up and use the resources and influence in their gift as a force for change. Publishing must do better.”

At present, the letter has more than 150 signatories, including writers Nikesh Shukla, Candice Carty-Williams, Sara Collins and Jessie Burton, comedians Nish Kumar and Deborah Frances-White and publisher Kishani Widyaratna.

Suleyman’s publisher Unbound has published a statement on Twitter, condemning the “shameful racist attacks on women writers of colour”. Dialogue Books, the imprint of leading publishing house Hachette that spotlights the LGBTQ+, disability, working class and black, Asian and minority ethnic communities, has also put out a statement. “Dialogue condemns the racist treatment of people of colour, particularly women of colour, on social media over the past week. The publishing industry must learn from the response and the fallout”, it said.

On Tuesday, Clanchy confirmed that she will rewrite sections of Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me. Her publisher Picador released a statement apologising for the “emotional anguish” caused by the book, but has not yet made any further comment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@There are leaps required of artists in this week’s Blue Tick festival, showcasing internet comedy on the big screen. It’s a leap from handheld home entertainment to an (almost) live event. And from short to long-form: this screening of clips by Margate’s Chi With a C (AKA Lucia Keskin) is 90 minutes long. Fellow artists Alistair Green and The Pin, both live acts, may better present their work in-person. No great effort is made to structure Keskin’s videos into a satisfying hour-plus of comedy, yet even discharging her host responsibilities as minimally as possible, we glimpse the effective live act Keskin might become. Her talent and sense of fun radiates from every sketch on screen.

She began YouTubing at 16, opening her GCSE results live on the platform. But the shtick she’s since developed isn’t autobiographical. Most of Chi’s videos are TV parodies – albeit parodies with only the occasional satirical intent. Make no mistake: her facsimile Killing Eve, Vicar of Dibley and Ab Fab skits (Chi’s tastes are surprisingly old school) are humdrum-brilliant. She’s a fine mimic, nailing the spirit, if not always the letter, of every character in the sitcom Motherland. The pleasure is heightened by the deceptive crappiness of the mise en scène: every video finds now 20-year-old Keskin in duff wigs and marker pen facial hair, green-screened against static backdrops. And yet, there’s tech wizardry on display as her multiple selves interact.

She can write a mean joke, too, even if her pastiche scripts can be indistinguishable from the real thing. Is there a point, other than the pleasures of fancy dress and burlesquing TV on the cheap? If not, well, those pleasures can be considerable, as Keskin plays Theresa May on Strictly, bopping to the News at Ten theme. I had a softer spot for her more absurdist sketches that float free of TV source material – like the viral hit that finds two mini Lucias duetting with one another in a cereal cupboard, while lifesize Chi blankly looks on. Ninety minutes may be too much of a samey thing. But Keskin’s compelling comic sensibility – and breakout potential – is clear.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The Phantom of the Opera may be the most deeply uncool musical out there, but there’s a reason it’s been running for 35 years and that’s the tunes. Andrew Lloyd Webber has a true pop sensibility, ladling on the hooks. There are reprises and motifs everywhere, and even similar melodies in two of the big songs. Essentially, never take the unexpected route when the note you want to hear is right there.

That famous descending organ riff and its synth-rock bass may scream 1980s camp, but this is a show committed to bombast, the grisly gothic tale of the murderous phantom menacing a 19th-century Paris theatre unashamedly embraces high drama, backed by a wall of sound when Lloyd Webber’s more dense writing contrasts with the hit melodies.

Old-school fantasy ... Lucy St Louis and Killian Donnelly in The Phantom of the Opera. Photograph: Johan Persson

Winning formulas, of course, still need a refresh, so post-pandemic the show has returned with a new cast. Lucy St Louis (who played Diana Ross in Motown the Musical) is an enchanting Christine, the object of the Phantom’s obsession. She’s beatific, her tone bright with no harsh glare, all delicate vibrato, fine control and escalating power.

As the Phantom, Killian Donnelly (a former Jean Valjean in Les Mis) finds a range of colours from a whisper to a roar. He handles a tricky role, a stalker and kidnapper who is also an alternative romantic lead. He’s a Frankenstein’s monster, sinister yet vulnerable, whose eyes “both threaten and adore” and who tells Christine “fear can turn to love”. No room to interrogate his status as an abusive incel here, just a good yarn. Rhys Whitfield plays Christine’s more trad love interest, the dashing Raoul. There’s a bit of Hugh Grant about him (the edgier real-life Grant, rather than foppish film version) and he’s rich-voiced in the soaringly romantic All I Ask of You.

The show has a dedication to analogue theatrical effects, from trapdoors and smoke to a skull-topped cane shooting fireballs, and, sure, there’s something hokey about the Phantom playing gondolier in the boat to his subterranean lair. But the late Maria Björnson’s maximalist designs, from vivid masquerade ball to Degas-style ballet dancers, set the tone for old-school fantasy. Go big or go home, as they say.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jed Rothstein’s very entertaining documentary is another horror story from the tulip-feverish world of tech startups: its subject is WeWork, co-founded in 2010 by the (allegedly) charismatic entrepreneur Adam Neumann – part CEO, part cult leader. His business model was basically really simple: renting out cubicle-style office space to creatives and freelancers in buildings in which he’d bought short leases on borrowed money. But these tenants got shared facilities such as groovy hangout areas, table football, coffee and snack hubs and the feeling that they were part of a vital experiment in communal creativity, a vision of a new interrelated future.

Neumann waffled on like this endlessly, like Steve Jobs without an iPhone in his hand. The business took off, and the hype and the business journalism adoration took off, too. There were annual bacchanalian “summer camps” that WeWork laid on for its clients: “like Fyre festival gone right”, as someone puts it here. Neumann got a mind-bending multi-billion-dollar investment from credulous Japanese banker Masayoshi Son, which caused his megalomania to go over the edge, just as the business began to slide. Then in 2019 he made WeWork’s bizarre IPO (initial public offering), whose hippy-dippy prospectus was, in the words of one observer, like “a novel written by someone who’s shrooming”, and the emperor’s nudity was now impossible to ignore.

Like Chris Smith’s Netflix documentary Fyre, films like this are beginning to develop a house style for their sheepish interviewees: the people who worked for the crooked company without blowing the whistle and the journalists who went along with it, suppressing their worries. It’s a kind of wry, amused, eyebrow-raised, gee-what-was-I-thinking approach, with a self-exculpatory emphasis on how wildly charismatic and hypnotic the boss was.

Well, maybe all new businesses fake it till they make it, to some degree. I would have liked to hear more about Neumann’s partner and WeWork co-founder Miguel McKelvey (he is so absent I almost wondered if he had been giving some off-the-record guidance) and about Neumann’s formidable wife, Rebekah, who was the “chief brand and impact officer”. This was a workplace where they had a poster reading: “Punch today in the face.” It was the fired employees who felt that impact.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Directed by Maria Schrader, this was a crowd-pleasing favourite at the Berlin film festival earlier this year and its star, Maren Eggert, won the festival’s new gender-neutral best leading performance prize. But I was disappointed with a film whose crises and dilemmas seem laborious and essentially predictable; it does not fully work as sci-fi or satire or comedy.

We are in a world of the near-future (and the city of Berlin itself is certainly very plausible as its location). Eggert plays Alma, an archaeologist with an unhappy and frustrating personal life. She is persuaded by her boss to be a guinea-pig for a new hi-tech scheme: she will road-test a male “companion” robot, programmed to be infinitely considerate and obliging, which will attend to all her emotional and indeed physical needs. So Alma sceptically takes home this dashing humanoid geisha: Tom, played with elegant, fluent German by Dan Stevens. And after a rocky, angry start, after duly dismissing this soulless adventure in existential convenience, Alma inevitably comes to think that there could be something to it. In rejecting Tom, is she simply preferring the headache to the aspirin?

Of course, the gender-switch Stepford Wives story has been tried before, in the gruesome 2004 Stepford Wives remake, and this resembles Matt Kane’s recent midlife satire Auggie and Alex Garland’s more thoughtful and ambitious Ex Machina from 2014. But really, the acting and script are pretty broad, which makes it difficult to take it seriously, and it is not fully successful as comedy. Sandra Hüller (from Toni Erdmann) is good as the corporate director whose job it is to place these robots with their new masters and mistresses, and she delivers a twist that in some ways makes her the most interesting character; I wondered if she would not have been better casting as Alma.

I’m Your Man is released on 13 August in cinemas and on Curzon Home Cinema.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Based on the Marvel Comics.” They always say that, but What If ...?, the fourth TV series in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, is visibly a comic book in moving-picture form. This is the first of the Disney+ spin-offs to be animated, and it glories in the idea of paper pages coming to life, embracing the sharp shadows, rich palette and poppy vim of the publications that started it all. Energetic and flippant, unlike some modern Marvel productions, which tend towards the exhaustingly epic, this is old-school, thwack-pow fun.

The new show’s spryness comes from the premise, which takes advantage of the multiverse set up in the most recent Marvel show, Loki, to explore alternative versions of classic stories. Each half-hour instalment starts with a familiar scene that soon diverges. In the first episode, what starts as a shot-for-shot remake of the scene in the 2011 film Captain America: The First Avenger in which Steve Rogers is injected with super-soldier serum ends with Peggy Carter (Hayley Atwell) getting the treatment instead. She emerges from the lab with a ripped physique, an indestructible shield and a mission to defeat 1940s totalitarianism and the gender assumptions of the day.

The ensuing adventure is a neatly flipped version of the movie. The romantic subplot remains but it’s Rogers, not Carter, who has to be resourceful, to ensure he is not relegated to the status of a plucky spare part. The retro visuals, meanwhile, are matched by the 20th-century sexism Carter must overcome (“Women aren’t soldiers,” sniffs Bradley Whitford’s Col Flynn. “They might break a nail”). She does this by repeatedly punching bad guys in the face. The many dust-ups are accentuated by a half-second of slow motion at the end of each shot, like we’re a kid lingering over a particularly juicy panel in a comic.

Captain Carter’s exploits set out the stall for What If ...? as an invigoratingly inconsequential set of adventures. They are big on action and pleasingly refuse to take the Marvel mythology too seriously. In a later episode in which Shield agents are confronted with Thor’s hammer, one observes that “no one can lift it – not even Jackson. And he does cross-fit.” Then Thor shows up and everyone has a good swoon over his beautiful, lavender-scented hair.

In this anything-goes world, What If ...? can also leap from genre to genre. Apart from Captain Carter biffing the Nazis, there is a space heist that imagines T’Challa (in what turned out to be Chadwick Boseman’s final performance as the Black Panther) taking the place of Peter Quill as Star-Lord in a Guardians of the Galaxy reboot. There is also a serial-killer whodunnit, in which the Avengers never assemble because someone keeps murdering them, prompting Nick Fury (Samuel L Jackson) to turn into a sort of one-eyed Poirot.

That episode features Tom Hiddleston as Loki, giving it the same cheesy ham on British toast he brought to his own series. Generally, the less onerous logistics of a cartoon mean A-listers show up to voice their old characters: Jeremy Renner, Mark Ruffalo, Toby Jones, Stanley Tucci and Dominic Cooper are present and audible, along with Atwell, Jackson, Whitford and Boseman. Robert Downey Jr, Scarlett Johansson and Chris Evans are among those who didn’t make it. An amusingly pompous voiceover by Jeffrey Wright as the all-seeing Watcher – introducing and concluding each story like Rod Serling on The Twilight Zone, but with more of a pan-universal deity vibe – adds another swoosh of starry gloss.

So What If ...? is canon, but not heavy, continuing a run of Marvel TV shows that refuse to repeat themselves. It occupies a very different space to the feverishly imaginative WandaVision, the resolutely vanilla The Falcon and the Winter Soldier or the impishly complex Loki. Viewers who like a bit of superhero gubbins, but who long since gave up on staying across the nuances of the MCU, can approach What If ...? without trepidation. For dedicated Marvel enthusiasts, on the other hand, What If ...? might feel inessential. But the prospect of speculative fan-fiction with a stamp of approval will be hard to resist – especially when it transports them back to the original source of their obsession.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Ofcom has received almost 25,000 complaints over Friday night’s episode of Love Island, in which two contestants had an explosive argument following a challenge.

Viewers of the ITV2 reality show have been increasingly turning to the media regulator when they feel uncomfortable about something seen onscreen.

At least 24,763 complaints were made after contestant Faye Winter’s expletive-laden outburst at love interest Teddy Soares. The incident came after the islanders were played a clip, without context, of Soares telling another contestant that he was attracted to her.

The exchange sparked a debate over Winter’s behaviour and whether Love Island producers should have stepped in to defuse the situation.

Complaining to the regulator has increasingly become an active part of watching reality shows such as Love Island, as many viewers wish to see sanctions imposed on the broadcaster when they feel uncomfortable with the material broadcast.

Love Island received more than 5,000 complaints earlier this series after claims that an episode misled female contestants when they were sent images showing their partners appearing to be unfaithful.

Ofcom has stopped publishing daily running totals of the number of complaints it receives about specific shows, following concerns that it was inadvertently fuelling further media “outrage”. Instead it now publishes a weekly update with details of shows attracting a substantial number of complaints.

In the past five weeks, only 15 programmes across the whole of commercial television and radio received more than 50 complaints. Eleven of them were episodes of Love Island.

A spokesperson for Ofcom, which has yet to decide whether to launch a formal investigation into any of the programmes, said: “We’ve received a high volume of complaints about last week’s Love Island, which is consistent with a trend of growing complaints about high-profile TV shows. We are carefully assessing the complaints we’ve received, before deciding whether or not to investigate.”

The media regulator insists it does not take into account the volume of complaints when assessing whether they constitute potential breaches of the broadcasting code.

It is not clear which particular element of the rules Love Island could have broken. However, Ofcom has taken an increased interest in duty-of-care issues around reality television programmes, amid political pressure following the death of the Jeremy Kyle Show participant Steve Dymond and the suicides of two individuals who had previously appeared as contestants on Love Island.

The regulator now explicitly requires broadcasters to protect the mental health and wellbeing of participants on programmes, with a requirement that content that could cause offence to viewers and listeners must be justified by the context.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When it comes to the pandemic, plenty of films have had their turn in the spotlight. Contagion was one of them, for contextualising the scale of the virus and teaching everybody what an R number was. So was Jaws, with Amity Island’s safety-denying mayor, Larry Vaughn, serving as an analogue for any authority figure who was skeptical about the concept of lockdown.

To some extent, those films make sense. In times of great uncertainty, we reach for the familiar to guide us. But sometimes that’s a bad idea. Because sometimes what they reach for is the Will Smith movie I Am Legend.

You will remember I Am Legend. Coming towards the tail end of his turn as the world’s biggest movie star, the film saw a lone Smith struggling to survive in a post-apocalyptic New York that had been ravaged by mutant vampires (that look more like zombies). I Am Legend has entered the pandemic conversation because a small but insistent group has started to ask a simple question: “Wait, did those nice people turn into mutant vampires because they took the Covid vaccine?”

This isn’t necessarily a new development. Back in December, when vaccine trials were nearing their completion, the rumours that vaccines created vampires became so insistent that Reuters had to publish a factcheck article to deny it. The mutant vampires in I Am Legend became mutant vampires because they were exposed to a genetically re-engineered strain of the measles virus in order to cure cancer (courtesy of Emma Thompson’s ambitious doctor). No vaccines were involved whatsoever. But still, the damage had been done. When a globally respected news organisation has to use its precious resources to explain the plot of a disappointing Christmas movie from a decade and a half ago, you sense the battle has already been lost.

Still, though, the I Am Legend theory regained momentum this week when the New York Times ran a story about anti-vaxxers, claiming that an employee at an eyewear store had refused the vaccine because “she thought a vaccine had caused the characters in the film I Am Legend to turn into zombies”. This, in turn, caused the film’s co-writer Akiva Goldsman to tweet: “Oh. My. God. It’s a movie. I made that up. It’s. Not. Real.”

In truth, it is very hard to find any movie at all where the vaccine is the bad guy. In World War Z, for example, the zombies are created with a virus and the hero has to find a vaccine. In The Omega Man (the second adaptation of I Am Legend after the 1964 film The Last Man on Earth), Charlton Heston only survives a vampire-zombie wave because he is vaccinated. In Outbreak, a virus spreads and the heroes race to find a vaccine. The 1980 Japanese movie Virus ends with the protagonist embracing some vaccinated strangers and declaring: “Life is wonderful.” True, there is the 1973 horror movie Sssssss, where Dirk Benedict is put on a course of injections that tragically turn him into a snake, but unfortunately those injections are not vaccinations. They were designed to turn Dirk Benedict into a snake all along. Once again, it ultimately exists as proof that medicine does its job.

Arguably the only mainstream movie to ever depict vaccinations as a force for evil, in fact, is 2006’s X-Men: The Last Stand, in which a wealthy industrialist discovers an inoculation that targets the gene that gives mutants their abilities. And even that doesn’t work, for a couple of reasons. First, the vaccine in the film is designed to deny mutants their truest versions of themselves, and not even the most frothing anti-vaxxer would claim that the coronavirus was an integral part of their personality. And second, you will remember that X-Men: The Last Stand climaxed with an out of control unvaccinated mutant threatening to tear apart the entire fabric of the universe as we know it, so maybe the idea of a vaccination isn’t that silly after all.

Not that any of this matters, of course. If anti-vaxxers can convince themselves that some half-remembered Will Smith film from 2007 can act as a watertight scientific explanation for not wanting to get jabbed, then they can basically use that rationale on any film. Their arguments are unforgivable for any number of reasons, not least that it sort of makes me want to watch I Am Legend again.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A stretch of Hadrian’s Wall, believed to be 1,900 years old, has been uncovered in Newcastle city centre during routine work on a water pipe.

The three-metre structure is believed to have been built during the earliest phases of the historic Roman wall, stretching back to around AD120. The discovery was made about 50cm below ground by workers replacing a water main under one of Newcastle’s busiest roads.

It had been known that Hadrian’s Wall ran through Newcastle as part of its 73-mile stretch from Wallsend on the River Tyne to Bowness-on-Solway in Cumbria. Its exact location, however, remained a mystery.

Workers from Northumbrian Water uncovered the structure on West Road near the Two Ball Lonnen roundabout just outside Newcastle city centre. A “buffer” would be installed around the historic find to allow waterworks to continue, the company said.

Philippa Hunter from Archaeological Research Services said: “Despite the route of Hadrian’s Wall being fairly well documented in this area of the city, it is always exciting when we encounter the wall’s remains and have the opportunity to learn more about this internationally significant site.

“This is particularly true in this instance where we believe that we uncovered part of the wall’s earliest phase.”

The newly discovered stretch of wall was constructed using large blocks of stone, allowing historians to date it back to the earliest days of the build, as later stages used smaller pieces.

The first sections of the wall are believed to have been built in around AD122, when the emperor Hadrian visited Britain and constructed what became the Roman empire’s north-west frontier for the next 300 years.

Graeme Ridley, a project manager at Northumbrian Water, said: “It is amazing that we have been able to make this brilliant discovery, and we are glad to be working with Archaeological Research Services to make sure that it is properly protected going forwards.

“This is an incredibly special part of north-east heritage and we are honoured to be a part of it.”

Hadrian’s Wall is the most visible and best-known land frontier of the Roman empire, with parts of it visible for miles across northern England. The structure was even famous in its own day, inspiring souvenirs such as small pans bearing the names of its forts. The wall was made a Unesco world heritage site in 1987.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@First globally successful entertainer, then heroic sponsor of the Moderna coronavirus vaccine, and now novelist … Dolly Parton seems determined to prove that there are few things she can’t do.

The singer, best known for country-pop hits including Jolene and 9 to 5, has written her first novel, to be published by Penguin Random House next year. Run, Rose, Run, which is about a young woman who moves to Nashville to pursue her music-making dreams, has been co-written by Parton and bestselling novelist James Patterson. Both UK and US editions will be published on 7 March 2022.

Run, Rose, Run by Dolly Parton and James Patterson Photograph: Penguin Random House

Parton will release an album of the same name alongside the book, consisting of 12 original tracks. She says the new songs “were written based on the characters and situations in the book” and their lyrics will also feature in the novel.

“It’s been an honour – and a hell of a lot of fun – to work with the inimitable Dolly Parton,” said Patterson, who has sold more than 300 million books and has collaborated with other writers on scores of novels including Bill Clinton on 2018’s The President Is Missing. “The mind-blowing thing about this project is that reading the novel is enhanced by listening to the album and vice versa. It’s a really unique experience.”

While fiction is a new venture for Parton, she has written several memoirs in the past, most recently Songteller: My Life in Lyrics.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Instagram has apologised for removing the official poster for Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar’s new film from the social network because it showed a female nipple, after the poster’s designer complained of censorship.

Instagram’s parent company, Facebook, told the Associated Press on Wednesday that several images of the poster for Parallel Mothers (Madres Paralelas), which shows a lactating nipple, were removed “for breaking our rules against nudity” after they were uploaded on Monday.

“We do, however, make exceptions to allow nudity in certain circumstances, which includes when there’s clear artistic context. We’ve therefore restored posts sharing the Almodóvar movie poster to Instagram, and we’re really sorry for any confusion caused,” the company said in an emailed statement.

Allow Instagram content? This article includes content provided by Instagram . We ask for your permission before anything is loaded, as they may be using cookies and other technologies. To view this content, click 'Allow and continue'. Allow and continue

Facebook and Instagram’s longstanding rules – and previous bans – have spurred the #FreetheNipple movement and hashtag on Instagram, which is used by many artists and celebrities to portray nipples despite the rules. The ban does not extend to male nipples.

The poster’s Spanish designer Javier Jaén told AP that he had questioned whether the poster would have trouble on social networks but stayed true to his vision after receiving the personal backing of Almodóvar. “He told me that he had made films with posters his whole life, long before Instagram, and he would keep doing so after Instagram, too,” Jaén said.

“A company like Instagram tells me my work is dangerous, that people shouldn’t see it, that it’s pornographic. How many people are they telling that their body is bad, that their body is dangerous?” he added.

Jaén had written in a post that the poster had been removed from his Instagram page on Tuesday: “As expected, @instagram took down the poster that we made for the latest Almodóvar film #madresparalelas.” After reposting the image, he said, it was allowed to stay. Almodóvar’s production company has been contacted for comment.

Parallel Mothers will open the Venice film festival on 1 September.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“This is the news! Happy now?” Since The Day Today first aired 27 years ago, with Chris Morris’s anchor posing that provocative question, it has remained the gold standard for parodic current affairs absurdity (as well as a guide for all credible news producers of how not to do their jobs).

The show has enjoyed television immortality. For everyone involved – from co-creators Armando Iannucci and Morris through to Steve Coogan, whose now seminal sports hack Alan Partridge showed his face for the first time here – the show changed everything. This week, the original group – minus Rebecca Front, Peter Baynham and, inevitably, the elusive Morris – get together for a gentle grilling by Kirsty Wark in Radio 4’s The Reunion, to examine the show’s significance.

The Day Today has acquired a certain retrospective importance over the years, not just because of the careers it launched but also because, for a long time, it seemed to function as a deeply amusing but remarkably prescient early warning system. Here, prophetically, was the triumph of punditry over expertise, the final victory of presentational hysteria over calm rationality. There were illustrations of the idiocy of vox pops in Speak Your Brains, the segments during which the mesmerising Morris seemed to be able to induce passersby to say almost literally anything.

There was early citizen journalism in the shape of the sharp, ridiculous “Genutainment” slot – which not only anticipated the rise of mobile filming technology but also, somehow, Sky One’s 2016 series Dogs Might Fly, in which pooches attempted to land planes. (“If you don’t do it,” as Partridge would later say in another context, “Sky will.”) The Day Today – along with Morris’s later, even more provocative spoof Brass Eye – was a sign of the places that we, as a culture, might be heading.

Chris Morris, David Schneider, Patrick Marber, Rebecca Front, Doon Mackichan and Steve Coogan in the The Day Today. Photograph: BBC Pictures Archives

Well: we are here now. The show’s subversion of style-over-content current affairs presentation has been outpaced by reality. In fact – possibly to the relief of its creators, but probably not to the benefit of the rest of us – The Day Today might finally have become satirically obsolete. As Iannucci points out himself in the reunion programme: “There is no ‘the news’ any more. You choose your own type of news now.”

The Day Today partly relied upon the notion of a singular, definitive version of the news, whose implicit gravitas allowed all manner of absurd presentational tropes and tics to consolidate unchallenged. But what price satire in the era of Dan Wootton burbling about Covid muzzles on GB News? The Day Today was underpinned not by the idea that the news would be ludicrously subjective, but the idea that it would be presented ludicrously. It was literally “fake news” (although some viewers took it seriously enough to complain about it), but as such it relied on the notion that a version of the news existed that could generally be regarded as “real”.

That does not feel like an accurate assessment of our current situation. We have the ludicrousness and the crazed subjectivity. The Day Today anticipated many things, but perhaps not the extent to which utter shamelessness would become the most valuable currency in modern media.

David Schneider on The Day Today. Photograph: BBC

Fortunately, The Day Today worked on more than one level – which is why it is still worth celebrating and revisiting in 2021. The beauty of the show was that it wasn’t simply satirically sharp; it was – and remains – absolutely hilarious, the work of several singularly gifted comic minds, all beginning to speak their brains simultaneously.

In fact, as Iannucci says, the show was much more traditional than it seemed. Yes, in contrast to much BBC comedy of the time, it was different – it had northerners on it, plus people who hadn’t been to Oxford. But only a few. David Schneider mentions sheepishly that he and Iannucci met in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. But, more importantly, the format was familiar, too, as long as you saw it for what it was. “I was looking for a new way of packaging jokes, basically,” says Iannucci. “Don’t tell anyone, but it’s a sketch show. It’s not like I had some manifesto.”

This, finally, is the genius of The Day Today. It is a sublime sketch show. The recurring characters – such as Patrick Marber’s bumbling reporter Peter O’Hanraha-hanrahan and Doon Mackichan’s oddball business correspondent Collaterlie Sisters – are beautifully realised. The comic density is extraordinary. The details of the various setups, musical parodies and recurring skits are minutely and perfectly observed.

What finally shines through in The Reunion is that The Day Today must have been an utter joy to make. In fact, there is clearly a part of several cast members still wondering if the show might have continued. Did it have the legs to run further? Almost certainly. But, if it had, it is possible we might not still be discussing it with such awestruck delight now. We might have lost the news. But The Day Today lives on.

The Reunion: The Day Today is on BBC Radio 4 at 11am on 15 August and will be available on BBC Sounds
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This week our band announced we were modifying our name from British Sea Power to just Sea Power. This announcement was soon trending on Twitter and triggered more news coverage than we imagined possible – from the Guardian and NME to the Express and Telegraph. TV interview requests came in from GB News, Russia Today, Channel 5 and Good Morning Britain, which we declined. There was broad support from our audience, alongside some disappointment and a fair bit of general flak on social media. The coverage surprised us, being a modestly successful rock group – albeit one with the occasional Top 10 album and a Mercury nomination, plus a BAFTA in 2020 for our soundtrack to the big-selling computer game Disco Elysium.

We haven’t undertaken this name-change lightly. It’s something we’ve been thinking about for years. We of course originally chose the name, circa the year 2000, because we liked it. Others did too. Elbow frontman Guy Garvey said, “Not only do British Sea Power own the best name in history, they’re fucking great.” But this name came with some fairly intricate thinking behind it. As we explained in a statement on our website: “There were at least two lines of thought behind it. There was, literally, sea power – the elementary power of the oceans. Alongside this was the historical idea of ‘British sea power’ – Britannia ruling the waves; the naval power that allowed Britain to dominate the world. When we came up with the original band name, Britain no longer ruled the seas. The name was intended with a kind of wry humour.”

If we were called British Motorcycle Club we wouldn’t be changing our name

In retrospect, our original name was intended with something of the spirit of 1950s situationism – turning a slogan back on itself, looking to give it new meaning. Recently, we’ve been thinking more about the name in relation to history. The idea of British sea power is almost synonymous with the British empire – many nations subjugated by one nation. Yet British sea power could clearly also be on the right side of history. Without it, Nazi occupation of these islands would’ve been much more likely. In our statement, we emphasised that we are in no way ashamed of being British: “Removing the word ‘British’ does NOT indicate any aversion to the British Isles whatsoever. We all feel immensely fortunate to have grown up in these islands. We love these lands.” Indeed, the band now live along the length of Britain – from the Sussex coast to the Inner Hebrides.

If we were called British Motorcycle Club we wouldn’t be changing our name. It was the combination of “British” and “Power” that no longer worked for us. We imagined a youngster at a European festival in the 21st century looking at the programme and seeing a band name including the word “Hungarian” or “Russian” alongside “Power”. It would likely send your mind in a certain direction – quite possibly to the isolationist, adversarial nationalism that has recently taken a hold around the world. We’ve always wanted to be an internationalist band – as heralded in our track Waving Flags, a song of pan-European idealism.

We are in no way disowning our past – we remain proud of the British Sea Power discography. We remain proud of our soundtrack to the 2012 film From the Sea to the Land Beyond, an extended audiovisual love letter to this maritime nation. But becoming simply Sea Power feels like a new start. Now maybe we can just connect with that elemental power of the sea, something that increasingly seems both awesome and frightening. We’ve touched on climate change and green energy in the past. Our 2005 song Larsen B glancingly alighted on global warming via a love song to a collapsing Antarctic ice shelf. In 2011, we played on a boat on the Thames, alongside the Houses of Parliament in aid of an environmental group lobbying for wave-generated energy – lobbying, that is, for sea power.

Some of our audience have expressed sadness at our modification of a beloved name. It has to be said, our fans are amazing – quite a few of them have seen the band over a hundred times; several have attended 400-plus concerts. We hope we can dilute any sadness here, by remaining the band they’ve so kindly invested their time and money in. We feel confident in this – we think our new album is a good one. It’s called Everything Was Forever, set for release next February. Track titles include Green Goddess and Lakeland Echo. The latter is based around the times when our two singers, brothers Hamilton and Jan, would leave their Cumbrian council home on their paper-round, delivering the newspaper of the title. We really do love the places where we grew up. We really do love the British Isles – the physical beauty, our diversity, our people, our culture and much of our history. But now we are just Sea Power – staring out at the wonderful waves, a pastime this island nation understands more than most.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Nanci Griffith, the Grammy-winning folk singer known for her literary songwriting, has died at age 68. Her management confirmed her death in a statement on Friday afternoon, but did not specify a cause.

“It was Nanci’s wish that no further formal statement or press release happen for a week following her passing,” Gold Mountain Entertainment said in a statement.

Griffith, who came of age in the mid-70s folk scene in and around Austin, Texas, was a celebrated country-folk artist – “folkabilly”, as she called it – considered a master of the songwriting craft, with such classics as Love at the Five and Dime and Outbound Plane.

Born on 6 July 1953 in Seguin, Texas, Griffith was raised in Austin. According to a 1999 profile in Texas Monthly, she wrote her first song, A New Generation, and played her first gig at age 12. Griffith worked her way up through Austin clubs in the 1970s before releasing her debut album, There’s a Light Beyond These Woods, in 1978.

She became a collaborator of other folk artists, including Emmylou Harris and Lyle Lovett, and moved to Nashville in the 1980s.

Her album Other Voices, Other Rooms won the 1994 Grammy for best contemporary folk album. She was also known for her recording of From a Distance, from her 1987 album Lone Star State of Mind, which went on to become a popular Bette Midler cover.

Griffith’s work became increasingly political with age, openly criticising George W Bush and supporting Barack Obama. She described her 2012 record Intersection as “a protest album” and called herself too radical for the current state of politics in an interview at the time. It was her last album before she retired in 2013.

“Artists don’t choose to be artists, writers or singers,” she said in 2010. “It’s just something you know you have to do.”

Don McLean paid tribute to Griffith in a statement. “Nanci was a lovely person,” he said. “I worked with her on a TV special we did for PBS TV and on that show, we sang two duets. They were And I Love You So and Raining in My Heart. I never heard anyone sing harmony in a more beautiful way. We should have done an album together. At this taping in Austin, Texas she brought her father to see it. I really loved her spirit it was warm and loving and I’m really sorry to hear she has gone.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Novels by Sam Byers, Salena Godden, and Jenni Fagan have been shortlisted for this year’s Gordon Burn prize for “forward-thinking and fearless” literature. Byers’ Come Join Our Disease, Fagan’s Luckenbooth and poet Godden’s first foray into fiction, Mrs Death Misses Death, are joined on the six-book shortlist by the genre-blurring A Ghost in the Throat by Doireann Ní Ghríofa and nonfiction titles A Little Devil in America by Hanif Abdurraqib and Sea State by Tabitha Lasley.

All are in the running for a £5,000 cash prize and the chance to go on a writing retreat at Burn’s cottage in the Scottish Borders.

The final six was whittled down from a longlist of 12 that included titles by Niven Govinden, Musa Okwonga, Anthony Quinn, Gwendoline Riley, Caleb Azumah Nelson and Courttia Newland. This year’s judging panel was chaired by former winner of the prize Denise Mina. The Scottish crime novelist was joined by writer and poet Derek Owusu, novelist and short story writer Irenosen Okojie and the Guardian’s culture commissioning editor Sian Cain.

Mina said: “An unusually high standard this year made it very difficult to narrow down the longlist, but the books here are all extraordinary.”

Now in its ninth year, the Gordon Burn prize was set up in memory of the author of Fullalove and Born Yesterday: The News as a Novel. Run in partnership by the Gordon Burn Trust, New Writing North, Faber & Faber and Durham Book Festival, the award seeks to celebrate “writing that follows in his footsteps”. Eligible works could be fiction or nonfiction, published in English between 1 July 2020 and 1 July 2021. This year’s winner will be announced at Durham Book Festival on 14 October.

In 2020, Peter Pomerantsev won the prize for This is Not Propaganda, his timely study of “the war against reality”.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Some might say that 95 is a decent age to call it a day. But Tony Bennett, who is retiring from live performance after more than eight decades in the business, is only doing so on strict doctors’ orders.

According to the singer’s son and manager, Danny, last week’s sold-out shows alongside Lady Gaga at Radio City Music Hall in New York will be his last. “There won’t be any additional concerts,” Danny Bennett told Variety. “This was a hard decision for us to make, as he is a capable performer. This is however doctors’ orders. His continued health is the most important part of this, and when Tony’s wife, Susan, heard the doctors she said, ‘Absolutely not.’”

Earlier this year it was revealed that Bennett had been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease in 2016; he has continued to perform live in the five years since. The singer was expected to appear at a handful more US dates later this year but these shows have now been cancelled.

“It’s not the singing aspect but rather the traveling,” said Danny Bennett. “He gets tired. We don’t want him to fall on stage, for instance. We’re not worried about him being able to sing. We are worried, from a physical standpoint … about human nature. Tony’s 95.””

This doesn’t mean the end of Bennett’s working life, and there are already releases in the pipeline. An album with Lady Gaga, Love For Sale, is due in October and will comprise of covers of Cole Porter songs. The two won a Grammy for the 2014 collaboration Cheek to Cheek.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The reopening of theme parks and 12 million new subscribers to Disney+ fuelled a post-pandemic recovery at the world’s biggest entertainment company, which beat Wall Street expectations in the quarter to 3 July.

Disney+ reached a global user base of 116 million in the quarter, ahead of analyst estimates of 115 million, dispelling fears that growth was slowing after the company missed targets in the second quarter.

The reopening of theme parks in the US, France and China helped Disney’s parks and consumer products division return to profit for the first time since the coronavirus pandemic hit. The division made $356m in operating income during the quarter on $4.3bn in revenue.

Disney’s share price jumped more than 5% in after-hours trading as investors and analysts reacted to the post-pandemic recovery of the world’s biggest entertainment company.

Disney, which announced that a 30th anniversary remake of the comedy Home Alone will premiere on its streaming service in November, reported 57% growth in streaming revenues year-on-year to $4.3bn.

Hits on the Disney+ service in the quarter included the Marvel series Loki, plus The Falcon and the Winter Soldier, and the Star Wars show the Bad Batch. Disney released films to stream including Cruella, Pixar’s Luca and Marvel’s Black Widow, which prompted legal action by its star Scarlett Johansson over its underperformance at the box office.

Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk

Across its three streaming services, including Hulu and ESPN+, Disney added 15 million subscribers to take its total base to 174 million.

Disney easily outpaced the slowing growth rate of Netflix, which added only 1.5 million subscribers in its most recent quarter to take its global base to 209m. Disney reiterated its target of 230 million to 260 million subscribers to Disney+ by 2024.

Disney’s total revenue was up 45% year on year to $17bn, beating analysts’ estimate of $16.76bn.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mabel, Sophie Ellis-Bextor and Glastonbury’s Emily Eavis are among the names backing a call for change to end the harassment and abuse of women at gigs and festivals.

Organisers of a new Safe Spaces Now music industry initiative say more than 40% of women under 40 have experienced sexual harassment at a live music event.

The statistic does not surprise Claire Barnett, the executive director of UN Women UK. She said recently released data revealed just 3% of 18 to 24-year-old women had not been harassed in a public space.

“We had a lot of messages from people in that age group saying they were surprised it was as high as 3%. With young people it feels like a constant experience.”

Only 3% of women surveyed said they had not been harassed in a public space. Photograph: Safe Spaces Now

Barnett said any hopes for generational change – that young men might be better than their fathers or grandfathers – had not happened.

“Live music is one of those spaces where people expect to be free. It is escapism, it’s your place of joy, and if that is somewhere we are hearing people are afraid then we need to take action.

“It is not OK for women to be constantly worried about their safety at festivals, to make sure they always have phone chargers on them so they can call someone if they feel unsafe.”

The letter has also been signed by Anne-Marie, Clara Amfo, MNEK and Rudimental. It says the music industry will soon be celebrating as festivals and live events reopen.

“But now we must face our own reality. And this reality is one that our industry has too long ignored: venues, festivals, studios and workplaces are too often not safe spaces for women, girls and marginalised genders.

Revellers at Strawberries and Creem festival, which is aiming to provide better training and safe places to stop sexual harassment. Photograph: Safe Spaces Now

“It is high time we change that, and we have a collective responsibility to take action. This restart needs to be for all of us. Our spaces must provide safety from harassment, violence, and abuse of power. Music should be a place of joy and inclusion for all.”

Barnett said the hope was that festivals, venues, labels and artists would sign up and that would be the first step to discussing tangible measures that will bring about change.

The Strawberries & Creem festival in Cambridge is the only UK festival that has committed to a 50-50 gender split of performers. Next month it will, working with UN Women UK, be a pilot event for how things can be better, with redesigned spaces and better training.

Its co-founder Chris Jammer said organisers were passionate about ensuring events “are welcoming, inclusive and safe spaces for people to enjoy music together.

“We hope that, together, we can set a blueprint for what safe spaces should look like for festivals moving forward – for all of our audience, as well as our artists and staff.”

Safe Spaces Now , a new music industry initiative, say more than 40% of women under 40 have experienced sexual harassment at a live music event.

Barnett said making gig and festival spaces completely safe was the aim. “What inspires us is that we have seen real behavioural changes in other areas way more quickly than we would ever have expected,” she said, pointing to how taboo smoking indoors quickly became.

The return of normal life after the pandemic represented a unique opportunity, she said. “I don’t think we will ever have another time where we re-programme live music from scratch. This is a different opportunity from what we’ve had before. We’ve talked for a decade about nudging towards safety and better behaviour, what better time to think about doing things better.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tom Mayhew is performing live on Zoom every night of this year’s fringe, not from a stage but from his sofa. The story he tells makes clear why, after last year’s cancelled festival, he wouldn’t want another fringe to pass him by. In 2019, Mayhew was going places, with a hit show about working-class identity and a Radio 4 series on a similar theme. He was making a living from comedy, then Covid struck. Cue – in one of the show’s funniest cutaways – a phone call to the jobcentre about more viable jobs he might now do instead.

But here he still is, working in neither security nor warehousing, but making people laugh at their laptops. Or smile, in my case: Mayhew is a self-effacing act, and (Zoom not being the medium to bring a performer out of himself) his show is an unassuming affair. He reflects on high v low art, frets about money while playing Grand Theft Auto and questions the usefulness of Van Gogh as a template for an arts career.

Most of these thoughts are free-floating and don’t cohere into an argument. And while Mayhew’s convictions may be clear on issues such as Marcus Rashford’s free school meals campaign or the “bullshit jobs” phenomenon, the righteousness isn’t always well developed into comedy. Nor is the show’s meandering air redeemed by a finale in which – in classic Edinburgh-show fashion – Mayhew cranks up the emotional intimacy, screening the eulogy he delivered at his gran’s funeral. It makes an agreeable act more sympathetic still, but isn’t especially illustrative of his reasons for sticking with a career in standup.

And yet, there’s enough here to make you glad he did – including a droll interlude in which his 10-year-old nephew commentates on a Stewart Lee routine and another in which Mayhew is abused by his unfortunate spirit animal, a Kim Noble-soundalike pigeon. It’s a likable if low-wattage hour; finally, an act of faith in Mayhew’s comedy destiny that one hopes will be amply rewarded.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tania Lacy’s standup show, Catch a Falling Star, is performed to an empty room and available on demand throughout the Edinburgh fringe. That’s a Covid measure, of course, but the absent audience is appropriate to the story Lacy has to tell: of the former “naughty child of Australian television” whose fame has long since abandoned her. Now “a postmenopausal straight white woman with a Facebook page”, Lacy takes to the stage to recall a career that found her choreographing and starring in Kylie’s Locomotion video, and co-hosting an anarchic pop music show with another Neighbours alumnus, Mark Little. Both were fired after staging an on-air strike.

Lacy’s show seethes with the injustices inflicted on her for being a funny and outspoken woman ahead of her time. The industry, it seems, exploited her then cast her out. Heroin addiction followed. In the early stages of the show, this all sounds a bit self-justifying, as Lacy sings her own praises with minimal self-irony. That isn’t redeemed, as celebrity memoirs often are, by any nostalgic pleasure of our own; few British viewers will have seen any of the telly Lacy is talking about. Nor do the jokes compensate: from the anthropomorphic drugs roleplay to the confused aside about Louis CK, they are not Lacy’s strong suit.

What rescues the show, finally, is our host’s refusal to parrot the usual cliches about fame. You’d expect her have moved on and matured, but Lacy still appears to long for the love of strangers and the leeway it affords to be as crazy as she pleases. I found that a bracingly honest and off-message conclusion, albeit to a show that is bigger on self-projection than laughs.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Kabul, Afghanistan Farzia, 28, who lost her husband in Baghlan one week ago fighting the Taliban, sits with her children, Subhan, five, and Ismael, two, in a tent at a makeshift camp in Shahr-e Naw park. People displaced by the Taliban advance are flooding into Kabul to escape the takeover of their provinces.

Photograph: Paula Bronstein/Getty Images
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Exhibition of the week

Christian Newby

Installation of a hanging tapestry that questions the boundary between art and craft in Edinburgh’s most dramatically situated gallery, converted from a hilltop observatory.

Collective, Edinburgh until 29 August

Also showing

Alberta Whittle

A new film by one of the four co-winners of the 2019 Turner prize that looks at today’s global crises.

Jupiter Artland, near Edinburgh until 31 October

Grinling Gibbons

Rollicking baroque sculpture by the most rock’n’roll woodcarver of the 17th century.

Bonhams, London until 27 August, then touring to Compton Verney

Scent from Nature

Perfume bottles from ancient Egypt and masterpieces of botanical art show how humanity has long coveted floral aromas.

Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge until 29 August

Charles H Mackie

Fresh and evocative impressionistic paintings by this Scottish contemporary of Monet.

City Art Centre, Edinburgh until 10 October

Image of the week

A Picasso in the Bellagio’s Picasso restaurant. Photograph: Courtesy of Sotheby's and MGM Resorts

Sotheby’s is to sell 11 Picasso works owned by MGM Resorts, which have a combined value of about $100m (£72m), in Las Vegas. The plan is to recreate Sotheby’s famous New York auction room in the Bellagio, famous for its musical fountain show and a starring role in the movie Ocean’s Eleven. Many of the Picassos being sold hang in the hotel’s “Picasso” restaurant. Read the full story here.

What we learned

Shayne Oliver is on a mission to bring New York’s queer underground to the world

Janet Kennedy, whose sew-it-yourself patterns defined 1970s childrenswear, has died

No 10 houses art worth £100,000 – Boris Johnson could learn from it

Barry Joule could take back his £20m Francis Bacon collection from the Tate

We are still in thrall to the idea that artists are born not made

Banksy may have visited coastal towns in the UK

We explore whether artistic talent can ever be taught

Photographer Vanley Burke shows how he immortalised black Britain

Gold artefacts from Kazakhstan’s Saka warriors are heading to Cambridge

Creatives are abandoning Instagram after its shift towards TikTok-type videos

A new Escher documentary is interesting, if uncritical

The LensCulture winners have been announced

Hitler weaponised works by mentally ill artists to win his culture war

Todd Antony’s best photograph is of indigenous female wrestlers mid-flight

The illustrations from Jackanory are going on sale

A new book collects the most bizarre Led Zeppelin artwork

The “potato photographer of the year” was announced

We looked at the revolutionary gaze of Margaret Watkins

Masterpiece of the week

Photograph: The Wallace Collection

Thomas Lawrence: George IV, 1822

One of Britain’s most shameful monarchs is portrayed as a figure of listless melancholy against a dark stormy sky. George IV, who was regent for his incapacitated father before inheriting the throne, was despised for his sex life and selfishness. When he died his obituary in The Times effectively said “good riddance”. Here he seems sad and alone, contemplating his wasted life. Lawrence was a prodigy who became hugely successful but is rarely remembered nowadays. This powerful, oddly moving portrait proves he was one of Britain’s great artistic talents.

Wallace Collection, London

Don’t forget

To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign.

Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter

If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.

Get in Touch

If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Created to celebrate the trusty spud, and to raise funds to help people in food poverty via The Trussell Trust, the Potato Photographer of the Year has announced this year’s winning entries
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It is an indicator of almost everything that was wrong with the Rachel Nickell murder investigation that I could not, on hearing of a drama being made about the case, remember if anyone had ever been found guilty. But I remembered the name and face of Colin Stagg as clearly as I remembered that of Nickell. He was the lonely oddball who fitted the profile drawn up by forensic psychologist Paul Britton, and whom the police relentlessly pursued as their prime suspect. An undercover female officer, codenamed “Lizzie James”, was sent to befriend Stagg (or entrap him, as was the view of the judge who threw out the case when it reached trial). Despite the absence of evidence against him, he was found guilty in the court of public opinion and treated accordingly for the next 16 years, until a cold case review led to Robert Napper being convicted of the manslaughter of Nickell.

Deceit (Channel 4), written by Emilia di Girolamo, and based on extensive research and interviews, tells the story of the honeytrap operation and the officer at the centre of it. Niamh Algar gives a phenomenal performance as Lizzie James/Sadie Byrne (not the officer’s real name, as her identity is still protected by court order), a performance layered with certainty and doubt as the officer’s aptitude is stretched to its limit on the most daunting of assignments. Algar shows Byrne’s desire to prove herself in a casually and systemically sexist workplace, which both complements and complicates her desire for justice. You believe and understand her character entirely as, following a plan designed by Britton (Eddie Marsan), Byrne befriends Stagg and inches along the line between encouragement and entrapment. Sion Daniel Young as Stagg does an equally remarkable job – letting all of the man’s unsettling unsavouriness show but never losing touch with his humanity. Our sympathies – or at least enough of them – stay with him to the end.

The problem the drama struggles to overcome is that it is dealing with events that are stranger than fiction. Put simply, it beggars belief that the police relied so unhesitatingly and unquestioningly on a ridiculously vague psychological profile (white man, considered strange by neighbours, probably lives alone or with his mother), and a profiler who believed the odds of two men being on Wimbledon Common at the same time, who both had the kind of sexual fantasies that could have been slaked in such a way, were incalculable. I know the internet was in its infancy back then and we’ve all learned a lot since, but did professors of psychology really exist in quite such a state of prelapsarian innocence in 1992? The only doubt cast on the operation at any point is in a throwaway line or two from Byrne’s colleague Lucy (a woefully underused Rochenda Sandall). Was Britton’s profile really so universally accepted? Surely more of the story lies there?

Deceit is magnificently and stylishly directed by Niall MacCormick, whether in the claustrophobic exchanges between Byrne and Stagg, the profoundly moving moments of revelation or the horror. But another obstacle for the drama is that the professor is at least as creepy as the two murderers we meet. Whether this was a character choice by Marsan or a simple reflection of real events, the effect is the same: another layer of disbelief.

Perhaps it is just that he was a man. Deceit is a study of the wrongs done to women. This ranges from harassment in pubs to professional harms and the greatest outrage of them all. It touches at the end on Napper’s murder of Samantha Bisset and her four-year-old daughter Jazmine, 18 months after he killed Nickell, when the police were still focused on Stagg, and notes the estimated 100 rapes and assaults Napper committed on women in the years before that. The litany of errors by the police that left him free to do so is another story that would defy belief. And that, I suppose, is why they must be told.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As the film festival circuit returns to semi-normal – Cannes wrapped a delayed but successful edition last month, with Venice and Toronto both taking place as scheduled this September – not everyone is keen to return to business as usual. For many cinephiles who are unable, even under the best of circumstances, to travel to all corners of the globe to catch new films, the pandemic-induced wave of online festivals was an improvement, not a compromise. Expect more festivals to consider the virtues of increased accessibility even when local in-person events are possible.

One such example is the Edinburgh international film festival, usually held in June, which is returning to a delayed live edition this Wednesday – overlapping for the first time in years with the Edinburgh fringe – but will maintain a hybrid physical-digital format. (The fringe, too, is making itself available to digital audiences: a number of its performances will stream online.) And while most of the big-name UK premieres in the film lineup will be limited to in-person screenings, a worthwhile programme of 20 features, alongside several short film collections, will be available to view online for 72 hours following their premieres over the next two weeks.

Among them are a few genuine crackers, none wilder than Mad God, a raucous adult fantasy rendered in dizzying stop-motion animation by director Phil Tippett. An Oscar-winning visual effects veteran of such blockbusters as Star Wars and Jurassic Park, here he lets both his artistry and his id run wild. Following an unnamed assassin through a writhing hellscape that feels equally influenced by Dante, Brueghel and Ray Harryhausen, it’s not plot-forward film-making: it’s the world-building, in all its visceral, macabre detail, that grips and fascinates. This has been a passion project of Tippett’s for 30 years, and it comes with the exhilarating madness of truly obsessive art.

There’s somewhat cosier fun to be had in Ninjababy, a film that manages to be very nearly as good as its title. The Norwegian director Yngvild Sve Flikke has made a smart, spiky pregnancy comedy that avoids the sentimental pitfalls of the genre. Instead, it maintains the youthful swagger of its 23-year-old protagonist, Rakel (wonderfully played by Kristine Kujath Thorp), an independent-minded cartoonist with no interest in settling down, who doesn’t discover she’s pregnant until it’s too late for an abortion. Flikke unpacks the ramifications of this dilemma with equal parts empathy and irony, while the film is further enlivened by witty animated interludes that give presence to the life growing inside her. It’s all too easy to imagine Ninjababy succumbing to softened American remake treatment: best to say you saw it first.

Maryam Moghaddam and Lili Farhadpour in Ballad of a White Cow. Photograph: ©Amin Jafari

In a more solemn register, Iranian drama Ballad of a White Cow impressed at Berlin earlier this year, and its shadowed, deliberate restraint has stuck with me. Maryam Moghadam and Behtash Sanaeeha’s film centres on the widow of a recently executed man who seeks to clear his name, and piles up misfortunes in a way that could feel luridly overbearing, but instead takes on the purity of a moral parable. There’s also a tense moral architecture of sorts to Jim Cummings and PJ McCabe’s new film The Beta Test, though it bends and twists with erotic, black-comic impulses. Cummings’s own jockish screen charm perfectly anchors the story of a slick Hollywood agent drawn into a spiral of sexual temptation, brutal self-effacement and cancel culture on the eve of his wedding.

Finally, the highlight of an intriguing documentary lineup is another Iranian selection, Firouzeh Khosrovani’s remarkable Radiograph of a Family, which won the top prize at last year’s IDFA documentary festival. As the title suggests, it finds the film-maker intimately mapping the tumultuous story of her parents’ marriage. The surprise is how Khosrovani persuasively grafts a perceptive sociocultural study of her homeland on to that personal narrative. It’s the kind of jewel that could be lost outside a festival context: I’m glad Edinburgh has taken the extra step of beaming it into our homes.

Also new on streaming and DVD

John David Washington in Beckett. Photograph: Yannis Drakoulidis/Netflix

Beckett

(Netflix)

This old-fashioned wrong-man thriller recently opened the Locarno film festival en route to its Netflix premiere, but don’t be fooled into thinking it’s highbrow. Following John David Washington’s vacationing American as he’s forced to go on the run after a tragic accident in Greece, it’s a formula film through and through – shakily scripted, but with scenery and star power that make it diverting.

Those Who Wish Me Dead

(Amazon/iTunes)

Another thriller of the type that would have been a big multiplex hit in the 90s, Taylor Sheridan’s tale of a forest firefighter (Angelina Jolie) entangled in a murky political conspiracy is at least three types of genre pulp in one, all of them reasonably entertaining. It’s most notable, however, for casting a doughty Jolie – still a megastar, though only a part-time actor these days – as something resembling a human being.

Minamata

(Curzon Home Cinema)

There was a time when a handsomely made, serious-minded biopic starring a heavily made-up Johnny Depp as a photojournalist uncovering a massive industrial waste would have been a big, Oscar-chasing deal. Depp’s stock may have fallen, but he gives his most honest, unaffected performance in some time here, and the film, while no gamechanger, is sturdy and affecting.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The veteran leftwing film-maker Ken Loach has said he has been expelled from the Labour party.

Loach, whose films are regarded as landmarks of social realism, claimed the move by the party was because he would “not disown those already expelled”, and he hit out at an alleged “witch-hunt”.

It follows reports last month that the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, was preparing to support a purge of factions vocally supportive of his predecessor Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership.

Supporters of the former leader have claimed Starmer has rolled back moves to democratise the party and that he has fought some of his own members with more gusto than the Tories.

On Twitter, 85-year-old Loach, a winner of the Palme d’Or for I, Daniel Blake, said: “Labour HQ finally decided I’m not fit to be a member of their party, as I will not disown those already expelled. Well … I am proud to stand with the good friends and comrades victimised by the purge. There is indeed a witch-hunt … Starmer and his clique will never lead a party of the people. We are many, they are few. Solidarity.”

Loach previously left the Labour party in the 1990s, reportedly in disgust at Tony Blair, after three decades as a member. He has also been active in political parties such as Respect and Left Unity that have presented themselves as a radical alternative to Labour. He rejoined the party following Corbyn’s election to the leadership.

The former shadow chancellor John McDonnell tweeted: “To expel such a fine socialist who has done so much to further the cause of socialism is a disgrace. Ken’s films have exposed the inequalities in our society, have given us hope for change & inspired us to fight back. I send my solidarity to my friend and comrade.”

Corbyn was suspended from the party in October last year for saying the problem of antisemitism within Labour was “dramatically overstated for political reasons” by opponents and the media. A disciplinary panel of the NEC lifted the suspension the following month after he issued a conciliatory statement but Starmer refused to restore the whip to Corbyn.

Howard Beckett, a member of the NEC, was suspended from the party in May after he called for the home secretary, Priti Patel, to be deported on Twitter.

A Labour spokesperson said: “We are not going to comment on individual cases. As previously reported, the NEC took the decision to proscribe a number of organisations at its last meeting.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Five singers stand at the lip of the stage, sweet gospel harmonies filling the west London theatre. “Suck your, suck your, suck your mum,” they intone as the crowd hoot and whistle, “Yeah I said it – suck your mum!”

SYM is a track from Kano’s Mercury-nominated 2019 album Hoodies All Summer, just one on which the east Londoner – one of the UK’s most compelling artists, playing live tonight for the first time in 18 months – upends expectation. “Suck your mum” is the most reflex of playground taunts. He gleefully rubs low culture against high, paying tribute to the church and to the schoolyard.

Kano, though, is bringing the disrespect to a system deserving of it. Dressed in an uncharacteristically baggy DMX T-shirt, the grime MC takes the mic, running through a shopping list of British failures of the Windrush generation. A dextrous live drummer and a multi-instrumentalist work feverishly to his right while a hyped-up crowd release 18 months of pent-up emotion in front of him, the vast majority unmasked. Negative lateral flows and vaccine passports were required on the door, so fingers crossed. This gig is in aid of War Child, the charity aimed at alleviating the suffering of innocents in conflict. Before Kano’s set, a spokesperson says War Child are down £2.5m on their expected fundraising because of the pandemic. This is the second occasion this year in which this deep-thinking rapper has staged his emotional repertoire for a good cause. The last was June’s Glastonbury live stream, where Kano pretty much stole the broadcast with his energy.

His commitment does not falter all evening as he measures out anger, joy, humour, shock and mischief, as well as more subtle feelings: disappointment, teeth-sucking indignation. There is reload after reload tonight, when the track and its response are so fiery they demand to be reprised.

“Run it again!” he hollers midway through a strobe-lit Pan-Fried. His early rapid-fire hit Ps & Qs sends everyone nuts – twice. 3 Wheel-Ups, from 2016’s landmark LP Made in the Manor, is another jubilant “reload ting”. The vibe in the moshpit is seriously pre-pandemic.

Kano at Shepherd’s Bush Empire. Photograph: Andy Hall/The Observer

With little new material to showcase – not a criticism, just an observation – the set is mostly a bonsai, all-in-black version of his triumphant all-in-white 2019 set at the Royal Albert Hall. There are no guests. Across town, another gig is under way in regrettable symbiosis with this one: Gorillaz at the O2 Arena. Kano, a frequent guest on Gorillaz tracks, might have been there had he not been playing his own show.

One vocalist who would have absolutely lifted the roof off this venue is, unfortunately, over there instead – beloved Jamaican dancehall star Popcaan. Kano’s Popcaan collaboration Can’t Hold We Down is nonetheless one of the highlights of the night, paying tribute to Kano’s Caribbean roots: everyone sings along to the canned Popcaan hook.

Over his last two records, Kano has been determined to tell a multiplicity of grime stories – those adjacent to the ever-present and necessary street stories: about people having barbecues, people raising a toast, people just being people. On a day where the August weather cooperated, his track T-Shirt Weather in the Manor – about how nice London can be in the sunshine – could not be more apposite. As the gig spills out on to the pavement afterwards, a Caribbean oil-drum grill is doing brisk business, perhaps the most time-honoured of pop-up eateries.

At the other end of the emotional spectrum, Trouble drives home the randomness of violence. The singers repeat, again and again: “we don’t want no trouble”.

But, as Kano tells it, trouble finds young black men when they “touch the road”, their mothers frantic with worry about what might happen to their sons, or what their sons might be forced to do. In the middle of the track all hell breaks loose: the soundtrack to a stabbing. It could happen anywhere, suddenly, no matter the weather. Kano demands that you not look away.

One key element that does absolutely carry over from Kano’s Albert Hall performance and the rest of the 2019 tour is the music, and the many fine players fleshing out these tunes. A four-strong horn section and a four-strong string section swell the ranks, bringing artistic ambition, islands vibes and a pulsating sense of community.

If the strings are awkwardly stuffed away behind the band, the horns roam freely, as they would at carnival: the tuba blasting the basslines, the trombone shouting the hooks. The din is cleansing. Kano’s message, though two years old, is evergreen: stop the violence because it “don’t make money”. The system is rigged. But as the brass, strings, singers and percussion die down, Kano smiles: “It’s a new day,” he offers.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“As a boy, my main interest in nature was finding the tallest tree to climb,” says the British photographer Levon Biss. However, after travelling the world, his curiosity shifted to nature’s most minuscule structures.

For his photo series The Hidden Beauty of Seeds and Fruits, Biss immersed himself in the collections housed at Edinburgh’s Royal Botanic Garden , sifting through its 3,500 historical specimens. “I was stunned by the variety of designs that exist to disperse seeds. Some are truly ingenious,” he says, singling out the hairy-stemmed electric shock plant, “an innocent-looking seed pod until an animal (or human) decides to bite!”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What term do you want to search? Search with google
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Bucket, spade, sun hat and a can of spray paint: the essential holiday kit if you are one of the world’s most famous artists – the elusive Banksy.

The graffiti artist from Bristol, whose work now sells for millions of pounds, has confirmed this weekend that he is responsible for the appearance of several new works dotted across seaside resorts on the east coast of England.

Speculation has already been rife that Banksy was the man behind an entertaining outbreak of fresh graffiti images, which include a seagull hovering over oversized “chips” – made from insulation material – in a skip and a rat relaxing in a deckchair with a cocktail.

Allow Instagram content? This article includes content provided by Instagram . We ask for your permission before anything is loaded, as they may be using cookies and other technologies. To view this content, click 'Allow and continue'. Allow and continue

Now an Instagram video clip has been released, making the provenance clear. The footage, which is just over three minutes long, is called A Great British Spraycation, and shows the artist – identity as ever obscured – taking a summer road trip in a beaten-up camper van with cans of paint stashed inside a cooler.

In solidarity with many Britons for whom the pandemic regulations have meant a summer break abroad was impossible, the artist who works under the pseudonym Banksy has obviously decided to celebrate a stretch of available coastline. So far, his holiday tour has taken in Lowestoft in Suffolk and Gorleston, Great Yarmouth, Cromer and King’s Lynn, all in Norfolk.

In the video he can be seen working on the murals, interrupted by the odd comment from a curious onlooker.

Banksy’s sunbathing rat appears on a concrete sea-defence wall on a beach, while elsewhere he has painted in a mechanical claw that seems to dangle above a public bench – threatening to pluck up anyone who sits there like a soft toy in an arcade game.

One of the new works by Banksy, on the side of a house in Lowestoft. Photograph: Banksy/PA

His giant seagull is ready to swoop down on a skip full of oversized “chips”, while a fourth image makes a sharp reference to the refugee crisis playing out on Britain’s southern shores. It shows three children sitting in a rickety boat made of scrap metal. As one looks ahead over the bow, the other is bailing out water with a bucket. Above them Banksy has inscribed: “We’re all in the same boat”.

In a nostalgic gesture towards the prosperous history of England’s declining seaside resorts, the artist has also painted a dancing couple in black and white on the roof of a bus shelter. The pair appear to move to the music produced by an accordion player in a flat cap.

In recent years, Banksy has moved closer towards overt political commentary in his art – campaigning on the poor treatment of migrants, his opposition to Brexit and radical Islamic discourse. He has also criticised the priorities of the international fine art market.

In March, Banksy raised £16.7m – a world auction record for the artist – for health projects with the auction of a painting depicting a child playing with a toy nurse, instead of the Batman or Spider-Man toys peeking out of a basket. The painting, entitled Game Changer, was donated to Southampton general hospital during the first wave of the pandemic.

In March, groups in Reading expressed “huge disappointment” after a mural by Banksy on the side of a former prison was defaced with red paint and the phrase “Team Robbo”, probably a reference to the graffiti artist King Robbo, who was in a long-running rivalry with Banksy before his death in 2014.

The artwork, entitled Create Escape, appeared on the red brick wall of the former Reading prison on 1 March and showed an inmate escaping lockdown using a knotted spool of paper from a typewriter.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The 2021 Strictly Come Dancing line-up has been unveiled in full, which can only mean one thing. It’s Christmas already. Merry Christmas everyone!

But who are these brave celebrities who have dared to develop a close friendship with a professional dancer that has a statistically high likelihood of ending their marriage? Below you will find them all, ranked from worst to best in terms of probable success.

Sara Davies

Crowning glory … Sara Davies. Photograph: BBC

Sara Davies is currently most famous for two things: appearing on Dragons’ Den a full decade after everyone stopped watching Dragons’ Den, and inventing a machine that makes envelopes. As such, it doesn’t matter what happens to her on Strictly. She could win, or shatter her pelvis the instant she’s introduced to her partner, or anything in between. This is already the crowning glory of her life, and we should all be giddy on her behalf.

AJ Odudu

Trailblazer? … AJ Odudu. Photograph: BBC

Every year that I’ve done these rankings, I’ve had to pretend to be mystified about why black female contestants tend not to progress very far on Strictly, and now I have to do the same with AJ Odudu. The motto here, as if you needed to be reminded, is that you should never trust a voter base that enjoys clapping along to television theme tunes.

Dan Walker

Good sport … Dan Walker. Photograph: PA

Fun fact: every single time I have ever mentioned Dan Walker in print, he has sent me a tweet in response. So if it’s OK with you, I’m just going to address this next bit directly to him. Hello Dan, well done for being on Strictly Come Dancing this year. I honestly can’t see you doing very well, but it’s good that you’re making the effort. Does this mean that you’re trying to raise your profile so you can jump ship to ITV for more money? Please don’t tweet at me Dan, I’m being rhetorical.

Judi Love

U OK hun? … Judi Love. Photograph: BBC

You may know Judi Love from her appearances on Loose Women, This Morning and Celebrity Juice. But I’m more interested in the fact that she has a column in OK! magazine. Nobody who writes anything for anyone is in good enough shape to dance. If I started dancing right now, I’d be in the back of an ambulance with an exploded heart within minutes. On that basis, I’m worried for Judi.

Greg Wise

Sage bet? … Greg Wise. Photograph: Dillon Bryden/BBC/PA

Greg Wise is an actor and writer, and was probably booked because Strictly wanted Emma Thompson, his wife, to be in the audience each week. His inclusion is a difficult one to call; my Twitter followers are absolutely convinced that he will win, but they also thought that Labour would win every election since 2010 and didn’t see Brexit coming. Probably better to assume he’ll be terrible, then.

John Whaite

History maker … John Whaite. Photograph: BBC

Until recently, Whaite was best known for winning the third series of The Great British Bake Off. Now, though, he gets to make history as one half of Strictly’s first all-male partnership. As such, it doesn’t matter whether he’s any good at dancing or not, because his presence means that The Discourse will honk into town and grind our bones to dust long before anyone’s had the chance to properly assess him. Good luck to him.

Rhys Stephenson

Losing battle? … Rhys Stephenson. Photograph: BBC/PA

Now, you are unlikely to know who Rhys Stephenson is unless you regularly watch CBBC. And if you regularly watch CBBC, then you are too young to text a premium-rate number in order to vote for a contestant on a televised dancing contest. What I’m saying is that Stephenson had better be absolutely goddamn spectacular on the dancefloor, or else he’s toast.

Ugo Monye

Fancy footwork? … Ugo Monye. Photograph: Dave Benett/Getty Images

As a former England rugby player, Monye will go one of two ways. Either he’ll show a Matt Dawson level of physical deftness, or his body will be such a mess of strain and injuries that he’ll lurch about the floor like an arthritic Frankenstein. Either way, I’ll be watching keenly.

Tilly Ramsay

Father’s daughter? … Tilly Ramsay. Photograph: BBC/PA

Tilly Ramsay is the daughter of Gordon Ramsay, but don’t let that put you off. Tilly seems more agreeable and better composed than her father who – as if it needs to be said – would be no good on Strictly. So there’s that?

Rose Ayling-Ellis

Flying the flag for Albert Square … Rose Ayling-Ellis. Photograph: BBC/PA

John Whaite isn’t the only Strictly contestant to be making history this year. Rose Ayling-Ellis – best known for her role on EastEnders – is set to become the show’s first ever deaf contestant. It must be daunting to be the figurehead for an entire community, but this is Rose’s chance to prove to the world that deaf people can do anything, including dancing better than Dan Walker.

Robert Webb

Dark horse? … Robert Webb. Photograph: BBC/PA

You’ll remember that, roughly one million years ago, Robert Webb took part in a dancing competition and did quite well. But then his heart packed in and he almost died, so he was unable to take part on Strictly. As such, his inclusion this year technically qualifies as a comeback, and – even though he’s bound to get dumped at some point in the anonymous middle stretch of the series – he should still count it as a lap of honour.

Katie McGlynn

Soap veteran … Katie McGlynn. Photograph: BBC/PA

You might know Katie McGlynn from her role as Sinead Tinker in Coronation Street, or as Becky Quentin on Hollyoaks, or as Scout Allen on Waterloo Road. Or you might know her from social media. Or you might not know her at all. Maybe you’re not even going to watch Strictly Come Dancing this year and you plan to go your entire life without knowing who Katie McGlynn is. Bit weird that you’re reading this if it’s the latter, but I won’t judge you. Either way, Katie will be voted off just before the Halloween episode, and there’s nothing you can do to stop it.

Adam Peaty

Making a splash … Adam Peaty. Photograph: BBC/PA

Clearly something has gone terribly wrong here. Usually when an athlete takes part on Strictly it’s after they’ve been retired for a few years and are punting around for a transition to television work. But Adam Peaty literally just won two gold medals at the Olympics. Literally. The man has barely got off the plane home from Japan. What on earth is he doing here? Either way, he’s clearly in tremendous shape and will undoubtedly stomp all over the competition.

Nina Wadia

Fans’ favourite … Nina Wadia. Photograph: BBC/PA

Can Nina Wadia dance? Nobody knows. Does Nina Wadia have a fanbase large enough to see her to victory? Unsure. But listen, Nina Wadia being on Strictly Come Dancing means that Nina Wadia gets to be on television a bit more, and that’s the important thing. Even if she’s useless – even if she loses control of her legs entirely and ends up injuring a member of the studio audience – I vow to vote her through to the bitter end.

Tom Fletcher

Family affair … Tom Fletcher. Photograph: BBC

Fletcher is a talented songwriter and children’s author, but make no mistake: he is only here because his wife won I’m a Celebrity last year. Can you imagine living in that house? Can you imagine cowering in your room to escape the sheer passive aggression of Tom and Giovanna endlessly trying to outdo each other on their comparative reality TV popularity? The endless red-eyed, ear-splitting arguments about whether or not doing a quickstep to an ironic novelty hit is more gruelling than having to share a campsite with Vernon Kay? It’d be like Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf. Tom had better win Strictly, for the sake of his marriage.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Phil Wang is trying to think of a comedian who isn’t an introvert. When he’s really pondering a subject hard his eyes typically roll upwards, his pupils almost disappearing into his eyelids, like he had written the answer to the riddle on the ceiling above him earlier. Eventually he alights upon one candidate, but doesn’t want to name him in case the comedian would take offence at being called an extrovert.

“Gosh, maybe I can’t think of any,” says the 31-year-old Wang, finally. “Probably I don’t even know what an extrovert is any more. I don’t think extroverts really need comedy, in a way. They don’t need a formalised setup in order to interact with people. That was the main appeal about standup, now I think about it, for me as an awkward teenager: it was a formalised setup for interacting. People had to listen to me. And if they interrupted me, they were being rude. And they should leave.”

Wang chuckles. “When I get up on stage to do standup it’s usually – is often – the first thing I’ve said that day,” he goes on. Really? “Maybe that’s too extreme, but it feels like that sometimes,” he says. “But there have definitely been days when my gig is the first thing I’ve said to anyone all day.”

Before there’s a mass outpouring of sympathy for Wang, a couple of notes should be made: a) he seems remarkably content with his own company (alongside “an addiction” to playing random strangers on chess.com); and b) whatever he’s doing in his life is working pretty well for him in his career right now. His standup special, Philly Philly Wang Wang, is now on Netflix. Then, in September, he publishes his debut book which he reluctantly concedes is “part” memoir, Sidesplitter: How To Be From Two Worlds At Once. He’s also performing standup around the country, culminating with two nights at the Lowry in Manchester in October. If you do want to avoid Phil Wang this autumn, good luck.

Wang’s book and Netflix special are tonally very different: Sidesplitter is elegantly written and unexpectedly moving; Philly Philly Wang Wang showcases his ability to do an excellent vocal impersonation of sperm. But both jump off from the same point, what he calls “my circumstances”. Wang’s mother is a white British archeologist who volunteered for VSO in Malaysia where she met his father, a Chinese-Malaysian civil engineer. He was born in Stoke-on-Trent, but moved to Borneo when he was three weeks old, and mainly stayed there until he was 16. At that time he came back to the UK, where he has lived ever since. He now where he has spent half his life in Asia and half here, and it has made him think a lot about the multicultural experience and being mixed race, and other subjects that don’t always find their way into comedy routines.

At the outset of Philly Philly Wang Wang, he makes a distinction between “cricket Asians” and “eats-weird-shit Asians”. Wang is part of the latter group, he says, and he tells a gleeful story of stuffing a tarantula into his mouth at a street market. The Covid pandemic has, he accepts, been “bad for the brand” for his part of Asia: a cautionary tale of what happens when you eat “one piece of weird shit too far”. Today, we meet in a Vietnamese restaurant, where Wang has a more conventional bowl of hu tieu nam vang, rice noodles with pork, shrimp and a poached egg. “Thanks for coming to my office,” he says when I arrive.

Mainly, though, Wang has concluded that being mixed race means he will never entirely feel at home in either of the places where he has roots. Or anywhere else for that matter. This could be a bleak sentiment, but Wang concentrates on the positives. “There’s a trade-off,” he says. “The joys of feeling truly at home somewhere and being from somewhere are great. But then I feel like having an international life and having lived in different places is also great. But it comes at a cost. And the book is about the process of coming to terms with that and realising it’s also a gift – not something to be regretful for.”

‘Race is something people are always aware of, but never really talk about, which is fertile ground for comedy’: Phil Wang. Photograph: Netflix

When Philip Nathaniel Sin Goi Wang was told as a teenager that his family were moving to the UK he was thrilled. (Almost everyone in this country mispronounces “Wang” but he gave up correcting them about a decade ago.) He was very happy in Malaysia, with his two sisters and “163 cousins”, doing the martial art Shorinji Kempo every Saturday in the dojo run by his uncle David. Wang was given a crash course before he left for England so he received his black belt – an honour somewhat tarnished by nepotism, he now concedes.

“I was really excited about moving, I was really looking forward to it,” says Wang. “Because I had this idea of the UK and the West as this great culture where you could do things. Where you could be things. Where you could make things. Where literature was made, and film and television, music and all these things. But yeah, it was a shock to find out just how Asian I was, when I moved over. Yeah, that was a surprise.”

Wang had landed in Bath, “a spa town for people who find Cheltenham too ethnic”, he writes in Sidesplitter. He did well at school academically, but didn’t exactly integrate and it was this that led him to put himself up for his school’s comedy show. “It was because I felt so uncool and alien,” he says, “that I was like, ‘I’m going to show people that I’m funny. That I’m interesting. That I’m worth their time.’” His material for the performance was heavily influenced – OK, stolen – from the Canadian comedian Russell Peters and the American standup Jim Gaffigan. “But I wasn’t paid for the gig,” says Wang. “So they’ve got no legal recourse. I want that in print.”

Life became easier for Wang at university, where he studied engineering at Cambridge. The crowd was more diverse and his comedy was hitting its stride. In his second year he won the influential Chortle Student Comedy Award; in his third he was taken on by an agent; and in his fourth and final year he was president of Footlights. In the 80s and 90s, this would have been a fast track to creating and starring in a sitcom or Radio 4 show, or at least a Radio 4 show, but Wang points out that some of the lustre of Oxbridge comedy has worn off now. “We’re living in quite an anti-institution era, as far as popular culture goes,” he says. “So being a part of an old institution that’s predominantly associated with the white man is a poisoned chalice. I think it hinders as much as it helps now.”

Instead, Wang’s rise has come through a steady accumulation of credits on comedy specials and panel shows: Live at the Apollo, 8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown, Taskmaster. His first appearance on Live at the Apollo in 2016 was, Wang thinks, a particularly important break, and introduced audiences to one of his signature tics, where he repeats his own name for comic effect. “I wanted people to remember my name because I wasn’t known then,” he says. “So it was just, ‘This is my name. This is my name. This is my name. Remember me from the show.’ It was calculated, but now it’s become more like a recognised shtick.”

Comedy is my way of interacting

Then there was Wang’s beef, one-sided admittedly, with Tom Hiddleston. It started in 2018, when Wang appeared on the TV show Room 101 and pitched the actor as one of the things he wanted to be consigned to oblivion: the world, he argued, doesn’t need all three of them – Benedict Cumberbatch, Eddie Redmayne and Hiddleston. “I just thought it’d be funny to get a living famous person – a very popular one – into Room 101,” recalls Wang. “But I also find him bizarre and quite obnoxious and strange. Just watching his interviews – him singing Michael Jackson in Korea, doing an impression of Robert De Niro in front of Robert De Niro.”

Frank Skinner, the presenter of Room 101, rejected Wang’s nomination, but he wasn’t finished yet. In 2019, he tweaked a Chinese commercial for Centrum women’s vitamin supplements, in which Hiddleston prepares breakfast for an unseen recipient, by inserting his own incredulous, horrified reaction shots, recorded at an apartment he was staying in in Melbourne. He posted the new – ingenious – video on Twitter and it has since been watched 6.6m times.

“I thought, ‘This will get a few hundred retweets,’” he says. “But the mad thing is it’s probably the most anyone has seen of any of my work. That one Sunday I spent writing, filming and editing that little clip was more exposure than all these TV shows. It’s just such a strange world now. There are times when I think, ‘What am I doing, doing standup? I should just be making videos every Sunday.’”

In his 20s, Wang began to make modest changes to his look. He had always worn thin, frameless spectacles hoping, he thinks, that people wouldn’t realise he was wearing glasses at all. Then, one day in Specsavers, he popped on a pair of oversized frames as a joke and saw they suited him. He had never thought much about his hair, but decided to finally spend money on a cut. “It’s arrogant to call it a transformation,” says Wang. “I mean, who knows if it’s even better, but it feels better. It’s certainly more expensive.”

Partly the new look was inspired by the fact that Wang was dating more. He’s cagey about whether he has a girlfriend now – a chunk of the Philly Philly Wang Wang show is about being single – but he’s clear in Sidesplitter that he would like to have kids one day. “That’s an urge that’s in you, or it’s not, and I’ve always had it,” he says. “But I never think I’m going to do it anytime soon. Having kids is like learning a language. I’m like, ‘It’s going to be so great when I know French.’ But I never go, ‘OK, now’s the time to sit down and learn French.’”

‘I hadn’t realised how much I use standup to process my own thoughts’: Phil Wang. Photograph: Pål Hansen/The Observer

A recurring theme in Wang’s recent standup is that he’s getting old. He’s not really of course, but he genuinely believes he is changing. Some changes are trivial (a bad back), others more thought-provoking (realising he’s not as left-wing as he thought). “Living life is just a constant disappointment, but your parents were right the whole time,” he says. “They say you become more right-wing as you get older and with a few notable exceptions it’s true, you do.”

The pandemic, meanwhile, has forced Wang to face uncomfortable truths about his own altruism. “Oh, yeah, I haven’t helped a soul,” he reflects. “I thought I was going to buy old people their shopping, I was going to volunteer at vaccination centres. I haven’t helped a single person all pandemic. At this point it is actually impressive.

“People were like, ‘Yeah, the pandemic’s going to bring people together,’” Wang goes on. “It’s probably going to make us more selfish. It’s made travel harder, it’s made countries more insular. It’s made communities more atomised. Pushing us further on to social media has made us more tribal. I’m not advocating for pure selfishness. But I think it’s funny confronting the uncomfortable truth that we’re all fundamentally selfish agents. And comedy is uniquely positioned to point that out and make fun of that and revel in that.”

This, for Wang, is what he loves about standup. One time, after a gig in London, a white middle-class couple from Essex came up to him – and the comedians Pierre Novellie and Nish Kumar – and said they had enjoyed the show in the main, “but enough of the race stuff, eh?” Wang found the comment, and the ensuing discussion, enlightening. In Malaysia, everyone had talked about race all the time: that’s what happens in a country that is highly racially diverse, where the largest ethnic group – the Malays – make up only half the population. In the UK, where 80% of the population is white British, the subject can remain more of a taboo.

“You’d be forgiven for thinking that all we talk about is race at the moment,” says Wang. “But this surge over the last year is only because we’ve suppressed it for so long. It’s erupted. And you should talk about it. The longer you suppress it, the more negative emotions fester and bubble and boil. It breeds a poisonous subculture. It’s something that people are always aware of, but never really talk about, which is usually fertile ground for comedy, right?”

For now, Wang says there is mainly joy and relief that he can perform again. The past 18 months has made him realise how much he needs comedy. “I just felt so rudderless,” he admits. “I hadn’t realised how much I use standup to process my own thoughts. I started having weird dreams and going a bit nuts because I wasn’t processing my thoughts in that way any more.”

Wang’s even relishing the prospect of human contact. “It helps for an introvert like myself to just go out in one intense burst, and then retreat to be on your own again,” he says. “It’s the introvert’s dream in many ways.” Wang smiles, “And you don’t have to wake up too early.”

This article was amended on 16 August 2021 to make it clear in the body of the text that Philly Philly Wang Wang is now on Netflix.

Phil Wang’s Netflix special, Philly Philly Wang Wang, is streaming now and his book Sidesplitter is released on 16 September (philwang.co.uk). He is on tour this autumn.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A vision of cherry blossom, pink and white against blazing cobalt skies, runs floor to ceiling all through the entrance corridor to this show. The sight dazzles and bewilders, releasing afterimages that dance around the viewer with every step. The effect is hyperreal – and conspicuously achieved through digital photography – yet the experience feels both entirely timeless and completely Japanese. You could be walking through the blossom to some ancient Shinto temple.

Mika Ninagawa (born 1972) is one of Tokyo’s most popular photographers. Her neon-bright blossoms appear on bullet trains and billboards. They are as recognisable as the real flowers but as traditional, in their 21st-century way, as the prints of Japanese artists running back through the centuries. All are displayed together in this captivating survey of Japanese art – watercolours and painted scrolls, photographs, lithos and woodcuts – with Tokyo at its heart. And every image is a graphic evocation of some stupendous scene that invites the eye to enter in and wander like some spellbound tourist.

Edo – nowadays known as Tokyo – has transformed itself from fishing village to castled city, from the capital of a vast empire to a scintillating, 24-hour metropolis. The city is ever changing and yet somehow always the same. The earliest image here, a 17th-century ink sketch on gilded paper, presents a jostle of rooftops and market stalls, graceful bridges and bustling businessmen. The latest paintings and cibachromes show effectively the same scene in postmodern configurations and hopped-up colours.

The show follows no chronology, gathering all the images around the city itself, like an immutable stage

It is a city of love hotels, where courtesans entertain their tumescent clients in delicate prints, the merest gap in a kimono acting as a peepshow. Celebrated prints by Utagawa and Hokusai set the scene, alongside contemporary photographs of exhausted ladyboys and modern geishas in false Maybelline lashes.

It is a city of nightlife and noodle bowls, salarymen in sharp suits and thunder-faced actors, bicycles and parasols and figures picking their way through the Tokyo rain and snow across graciously curving bridges. All of which could be happening at any time over the past four centuries, roughly the timespan of this exhibition.

Even the opening images, which show three of Tokyo’s bridges by atmospheric twilight, might be from the same decade. But look closer, and one shows the river below with a subtle tremor, something like electronic interference, and hazy skyscrapers in the distance. It was made in 1993 by Mototsugu Sugiyama. Yet it speaks straight to the 19th-century bridge views of Hiroshige hanging alongside – and with the most palpable reverence.

Good Evening Sumida River, 1993, colour woodblock print, by Mototsugu Sugiyama. Photograph: © Ashmolean Museum,University of Oxford

For that wonderful Japanese tradition of ritualised viewing – of the moon over Fuji, geese against a winter sun, cherry blossom or snow-capped summits – has always had its parallel in art. The Famous Views (of Fuji, or Edo, or the Tōkaidō highway to Kyoto) are such a cherished form of print sequence, and made by so many different artists, it is easy to become confused between them at the Ashmolean. But one series that stands right out, for sheer anomaly, is a collection of Tokyo views from the 1930s.

For almost 80 years, ever since the arrival of American boats in Edo Bay in 1853, and the opening up of Japan to western trade, European artists had learned the lessons of Japanese prints – tilted space, flat planes, absent shadows, abrupt compositional jump cuts. But now, in some kind of curious feedback loop, Japanese artists were imitating the west. These scenes of Tokyo look, briefly, like Whistler Nocturnes or paintings by Degas, before reverting to their own tradition.

The western connections startle every time. Here is the Japanese emperor attending a kabuki performance in 1887, got up like Prince Albert with all the ladies in Victorian crinolines. The Tokyo Tower, exactly modelled on the Eiffel, appears in several cityscapes like a delicate Meccano toy. The first skyscraper emerges in 1898 – but the apex resembles a temple, and the print itself is expressly traditional.

That is one of the high pleasures of this enthralling exhibition. It follows no chronology, gathering all the images around the city itself, like an immutable stage, in which only the players come and go. There are moments of consequent comedy: the 60s Citroën drawn up in front of the Shinto shrine, the manga teen viewing the blossoms, above the fabulous satires of Akira Yamaguchi, sending up the obsession with tradition, particularly in his painting Postmodern Silly Battle.

Cardboard Houses, Tokyo 18 April 1994 by Ryuji Miyamoto. Photograph: © Ryuji Miyamoto, courtesy Michael Hoppen Gallery

Tokyo rises; but it also falls, victim to earthquake, flood and typhoon. Its destruction in the second world war is the subject of shattering photographs here, but also of astonishing feats of reconstruction. Japanese artists, so sharp-eyed and precise, notice tents for homeless people fronted with brave cardboard doors, and houses ingeniously constructed from umbrellas. The film-maker Meiro Koizumi portrays an actor on a street corner trying to call his dead mother, but always ending up at cross-purposes with random administrators. Mika Ninagawa’s flashbulb photographs illuminate only a 2.5 metre radius, yet they capture a city of lost souls and loners.

But the prints almost always exceed the photographic truths. There is even a deliberate comparison in a black and white shot of a modern prostitute sitting beneath an enlarged woodcut of a courtesan. Only the pale face in the print conveys the absolute isolation of the women – a lunar shape adrift in outer darkness.

This picturing of the world is so unique that every print in this shows draws the viewer more tightly into the scene, trying to work out how the printmaker numbered all those parasols without repetition, how the snowflakes appear to melt on the Tokyo roofs, how the distant fireworks read on the eye so much more explosively than anyone could expect from three scarlet spirals against a paper-white ground.

Sudden Shower at Ōhashi Bridge, Atake from the series One Hundred Famous Views of Edo, 1857 by Utagawa Hiroshige. Photograph: Ashmolean Museum, University of Oxford

Its subject may be Tokyo, but this is ultimately a superbly various survey of Japanese graphic art – and most particularly of the incomparable Hiroshige (1797-1858). His prints are so inventive they offer another kind of sightseeing altogether. Sailboats on the sea are tiny white rectangles, outlined in black except for the lower edge where they mysteriously dissolve in water. An eagle spreads its wings above the bay, the water birds below an array of perfectly judged black dots on the waves.

And in his great vision of a sudden shower over a Tokyo bridge, Hiroshige somehow describes the way darkness graduates into light, and air holds moisture in a rainstorm. A black band at the top of the print represents both outer space and the heavy rainclouds shedding their burden. The bay below is turning white. Figures dart across the bridge between, dodging the needle-sharp striations so carefully cut into the image. These are not the literal facts of a downpour, with its billions of droplets, so much as the truth of how it looks and feels.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This country has two more national anthems than most: God Save the Queen, Three Lions and the Killers’ Mr Brightside, a song so anthemic it punches the air in its sleep. Yet the US band have never written a great ballad. This album still doesn’t deliver one, but it’s gentler and more introspective than usual. Singer Brandon Flowers – still stentorian, still pleading, a Meat Loaf Springsteen – explores Our Town, America through 11 dramatic monologues based on his Utah childhood. There’s a married cop who kills his girlfriend’s abusive husband, a yearning assembly lineman, an opioid addict, various down-homes nursing their “barbed wire dreams”.

Previously, the greedy brilliance of the Killers’ music diverted attention away from gauche lyrics such as “are we human or are we dancer”. It seems Flowers often wavers between poetic and demotic, then misses both. Is cutting grass or cooking eggs in bacon grease “working class”? And “it’s our local hero sports bar” doesn’t feel like something a human - or dancer - would say. Still, there are piquant observations set to lush soundtracks, and Flowers’s profound empathy is palpable. Probably their best album since 2004’s Hot Fuss.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Sharjah, UAE Afghan men work at a scrapyard where vehicles imported from Japan, the US and Korea are dismantled and their parts exported to Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran

Photograph: Karim Sahib/AFP/Getty Images
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Photographer Bob Wick is retiring from the Bureau of Land Management after 30 years documenting public lands across the western United States. This selection shows the diverse beauty of the landscapes, and the work of the BLM in protecting the wildlife and people that inhabit them
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When he was a child, Marvel Harris had always felt joyful in the rain, but in his teenage years he’d forgotten that feeling. In adolescence, Marvel, who is autistic, experienced depression and gender dysphoria which provoked eating disorders and self-harm. In 2017, he embarked on gender transition and documented every stage of that process in a series of self-portraits, which are painful to witness and profoundly affecting. This picture was taken outside Marvel’s parents’ house in the town of Zutphen in the east of the Netherlands. He was recovering from gender affirmation surgery and elated by the fact that he could once again feel the inner childhood joy of a rainstorm.

Marvel, now 26, started taking his self-portraits, he says, because he found it “really difficult to express what was going on in my mind”. At first, the photographs helped him to speak about his feelings with his family. Later, when he shared the pictures with therapists and friends, they encouraged him to put them online, to help others who might recognise themselves in his images. His camera provided an unflinching closeup of his traumas, as well as a tender account of the support he received from those close to him. Marvel, a book of his pictures, is the winner of this year’s Mack first book award.

“At first, the focus of my project was my gender transition,” he says. “But along the way, I found out that it’s about an ongoing search for myself: being a human with feelings, who is continuously developing.” Storms have become a useful measure of this progress. “Even in the darkest of times, something like the rain can make me incredibly happy,” he says. “If I ever feel like I am losing this capacity again, I will remind myself that rain can be my remedy.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@© 2021 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (modern)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@This week, the award-winning makeup artist Bjørg Serup made her bitter public farewell to the Danish film industry.

“I am on sick leave with a work injury due to serious stress and cannot expect to be able to return to the film industry or any other full-time job again,” she wrote in an article published in Ekko, the country’s film industry magazine.

The reason? Stress-related cognitive impairment, which she blamed on the way production times and budgets have been slashed to meet the current near-bottomless demand for Danish drama.

This year, Serup started working on the return of director Lars Von Trier’s 90s cult hospital comedy The Kingdom, which she enjoyed, and last year she did the makeup for the award-winning real-life crime miniseries The Investigation, and the Norwegian royal drama Atlantic Crossing.

A scene from The Kingdom Exodus. Photograph: PR

It was this summer, after a historical drama she was working on was postponed causing it to clash with another project, that she fell apart.

Serup’s article came two days after 415 people in the Danish film industry, including several well-known actors, signed an open letter to the country’s production companies warning that the sheer volume of work and stress was leading to “harassment, bullying and threats to smash people’s careers”.

“People who are just doing their jobs should not have to report sick with depression and stress, or leave the industry altogether just because the lemon just needs to be squeezed a little more,” the letter read.

The production designer Emilie Nordentoft, who organised the letter together with the actor Dorte Rømer, said that the hunger for content from streaming companies like Netflix, HBO and Amazon was pushing the industry to breaking point.

“We have the streaming companies now in Denmark, we have HBO, we have Netflix, and it’s great that we have this variety, but it creates a situation where the demand for content is constant,” Nordentoft told the Observer. People simply have to run faster, and when people are under pressure they start to yell, and it’s not OK to yell.”

She said that the letter had its origin in a closed Facebook group she had set up for those who felt bullied.

“I started to get calls and messages from people whispering how good it was that we were doing this. But they’re shit-scared. And I understand why they’re scared because they’re being bullied. It’s like, ‘we’re gonna smash your career, you’re never gonna come back’.”

Netflix currently has two new series, Chosen and Elves, in the pipeline from Jannik Tai Mosholt and Christian Potalivo, the makers of the company’s hit apocalyptic miniseries The Rain, and has also wrapped production on the Nordic noir crime series The Chestnut Man and the thriller film Loving Adults.

HBO released its first Danish original series this year, Kamikaze, and Apple, Amazon and Disney are all seeking to commission Danish series.

Jørgen Ramskov, chief executive of the Danish Producers’ Association, agreed that the demand from streaming services was pushing the industry to “full capacity”.

“We have situations where production companies are unable to produce because they’re not able to get the skilled labour,” he said. “We don’t have it a lot, but I think we are very close to the edge.”

Meta Louise Foldager Sørensen, the chief executive of SAM Productions, which has produced two Netflix original productions, The Chestnut Man and Ragnarok, and is currently making a new series of the hit political drama Borgen, was forced to delay.

“I just postponed the production a month because we couldn’t get a production designer,” she said. “I have huge problems crewing.”

Charlotte Munck and Soren Malling in The Investigation. Photograph: Per Arnesen/BBC/misofilm & outline film

For her, it’s a golden age, though. “The business is booming. Many of these streamers coming to Denmark have a huge appetite, which is a wonderful, positive thing,” she continued. “But their time schedules have their roots in countries with other working cultures. I love working with Netflix, they’re a really nice partner, but I find it very hard to meet their expectations of how fast we can make a TV series, yet have happy workers.”

Denmark’s film industry started to punch above its weight in the 1990s with the emergence of directors such as Lars von Trier and Thomas Vinterberg, but it was only when the crime series The Killing and the political drama Borgen became surprise international hits in 2012 that Danish TV drew the interest of foreign broadcasters. Foldager puts Denmark’s success down to “storytelling”, while Nordentoft credits “very dedicated, hardworking people”.

For both Foldager and Ramskov, the solution to problems with bullying and working conditions is to make sure that the existing system through which film-workers can report abuses and insist on union rules is working. “We have to get knowledge of what’s going wrong in order to act on it,” Ramskov said. “If we just have these rumours about how terrible this situation is and how awful the conditions are, it’s very difficult to act.”

In her article, Serup said that the issue was structural rather than a question of a few bullying producers and directors.

Sofia Helin as Saga Norén in The Bridge. Photograph: Jens Juncker/BBC / Filmlance International AB, Nimbus Film / Jens Juncker

“When I started making movies, they spent eight weeks on a feature film,” she said. “The last films I have made have been period films. They have been given five-and-a-half weeks. Budgets have by no means been sufficient.”

Nordentoft argues that industry workers were in a sense being punished for their strengths. “What I’ve heard from people is that they have discovered that Denmark, apparently, is a country where film workers are highly efficient,” she said. “But we also need to have the time that it takes. We’re not robots. It’s not a factory where you just spit out films. And sometimes it can feel like a factory.”

Netflix, HBO and Amazon all declined to comment.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@