My wife and I have been together for about 10 years, and it has always been pretty clear that we have different sexual tempos; I want far more sex than she does. Recently she told me that she views sex with me as special, but that she wouldn’t be that interested in having it with someone else. She said she views it as an expression of our love, but her sex drive isn’t very high. However, she went on to say that she would be fine if I wanted to go out and have meaningless sex myself. After my initial reaction (a slight frisson of excitement, I must admit) I found myself quite put out by the suggestion. If I was to have more sex than I am having currently, I’d like it to be with my wife, rather than with strangers. Am I being too demanding? Should I bring this up with her? Or should I take her up on her offer and try sleeping around to fill that sexual need?

When a partner gives this kind of permission they do not always mean it, and rarely think it through. Aside from the physical risks, there are plenty of emotional and relationship hazards. Even “meaningless sex” is quite loaded with “meaning” in the context of a sexless marriage and I’m not surprised you are questioning it. It could damage your relationship. Your first idea is the wisest – to confirm your desire for your wife and begin to seek ways to interest and engage her more. It is important to avoid assuming either that she is no longer attracted to you or that she simply has “a low sex drive”, per se. There are a number of reasons why a person might not match a partner in libido; some are fixable, while others need to be investigated. Seek help together to understand if there is a hormonal, relational, psychological or physiological reason for your desire mismatch.

Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders.

If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@My family and I are deep into our second summer of staycations, and, given that a weekend in a static caravan in Filey now costs more than a month on Mustique, we’re having the proper, stay-at-home kind. But how can you relax when assailed by tedious life admin, dirty laundry and the ominous damp patch on the wall, without a hint of away-from-it-all exoticism to get you in the mood? I have no idea. My usual at-home “downtime” consists of scrolling through Twitter to top up my cortisol levels or staring guiltily at the garden I’m too lazy and clueless to tend. Even my chickens, usually excellent stress-busters, are embroiled in some sort of intractable avian psychodrama. I obviously need help, so I asked some experts, then tested their home relaxation tips, to find out if it really is possible to have a relaxing holiday at home.

Day 1

The life coach

The Austrian holistic life coach Heidi Hauer trained with the terrifying French business school Insead: I bet she doesn’t have a teetering pile of unopened post by her front door. Nor would she consider gnawing a melted, then resolidified, golem of cheap chocolate to be “me time”. Her main tip? “Be super-specific about what days you are on holiday and what days you’re hanging around at home.” Delineating days for chores and days for relaxing avoids that frustrating, not-really-on-holiday staycation feeling: “The clearer you set boundaries with regards to your time, the better.” Hauer also suggests a preparatory tidy up and fresh flowers to give home a holiday feel.

I pay my 19-year-old son to cook dinner. We eat at 9.30pm, but his roast potatoes are excellent

“I am on holiday this week,” I declare to my family, then confuse them by spending hours vigorously clearing the sitting room of unopened boxes from our move (four months ago). I bring in some hardy surviving flowers from the garden, which, combined with an unprecedentedly uncluttered eyeline, prove a surprisingly powerful mood booster.

In the name of boundaries, I pay my 19-year-old son to do some gardening and cook dinner. That means I feel annoyed, not guilty, that the roses aren’t deadheaded. We eat at 9.30pm, but his roast potatoes are excellent.

Hauer also suggests listing your favourite holiday activities to ensure you do them at home. Mine (viewing saints’ bones and eating local cakes) are resistant to home application. I like trying new cafes too, so I insist my husband accompany me to our nearest one. It’s a shopping centre Costa – not quite the desired “local gem” vibe – but the terrace offers an excellent view of the Marks & Spencer car park.

The verdict: The day is humdrum, but the benefits last all week. 6/10.

Day 2

Sound therapy

This is supposed to suit people who find meditation impossible. Since my every attempt at meditation ends in grinding teeth and making mental shopping lists, I’m keen to try it.

“The good thing about sound therapy is that it’s a passive type of relaxation,” says therapist Farzana Ali. “Your practitioner does the hard work for you.” Using bowls, gongs and chimes, Ali creates a soundscape. “Your brain resonance can’t help – through a process of sympathetic resonance – matching up to the sound waves it’s hearing. It takes you to a more alpha-dominant brainwave state.” (That’s the good, relaxed, kind.)

Poor Ali has a challenge on her hands: I hate sound, yes even most music. I often fantasise about holidaying on an uninhabited Nordic island, but would probably get annoyed by the waves.

Bravely, she suggests a couple of recordings. Lights off, headphones in, eyes shut and legs up as recommended, I take a morning break to listen to the first. After a few guided breaths, Ali starts to play. My sound-phobe’s vocabulary can’t really describe the low, continuous sound that resonates in my chest, joined intermittently by a higher one, but I’ll go with “not unpleasant”. Actually, I quite like it and listen again that afternoon.

In bed last thing, I try Ali’s “gratitude sound bath”, which has a greater range of sounds, again over a low resonant one. I find the sensation calming: no one is more surprised than me.

The verdict: Good vibrations. 7/10.

Day 3

Beach yoga

Looking at water is relaxing, and so is yoga (except the kind with bare-chested ostentatiously head-standing men), so the two combined must be relaxation nirvana. Tom Harvey (AKA “Stretch”) of Ocean Flow Yoga, which offers yoga classes streamed from a spot overlooking Fistral Beach in Cornwall, doesn’t disagree: “Watching the colours of the ocean and the sky as people practise from their mat at home can really help to boost relaxation levels. The soft blues and greys and greens are very calming.”

I try a recorded “flow” class: the exquisite, empty beach and instructor Jen’s soft Cornish burr are a huge improvement on the blank walls and robotic voice of my usual yoga app.

The problem is that when I start to follow along, I lose sight of the beach, instead eyeballing the overflowing laundry basket in downward dog and the loathed wallpaper in side plank. After 20 minutes, I resort to my usual yoga class pose: lying in “corpse”, scrolling through takeaway menus. The live beach class is more successful. I turn on my camera to prevent cheating and angle myself to get more of an eyeful of the seascape, staring at it during tough, twisty sequences.

I wouldn’t normally (ever) exercise on holiday – I consider it what my best friend calls “taking a gift horse to the glue factory” – but this is quite pleasant.

The verdict: A namastaycation. 6/10.

Mindful drinking, bibliotherapy and bathing all work … although possibly not at the same time. Photograph: Richard Saker/The Observer

Day 4

Mindful drinking

My normal holiday (and life) MO is aperitif-intensive, but a dehydrated, dread-ridden Negroni hangover is not a summer experience I wish to replicate.

“Having a drink is such a beautiful relaxation ritual,” says Camille Vidal, of the mindful drinking platform La Maison Wellness. “But alcohol has a counter-effect. You might feel in the moment that you are relaxing because it slows down the connections in your brain. But it’s a bit of a sticking plaster, which will not allow you to relax long-term. It will affect your sleep, and will not allow you to wake up the day after feeling energised and like your full self.” Vidal’s recipes are low- or no-alcohol, with relaxing bonus ingredients; I ask her to recommend a day of mindful drinking.

Supplies prove challenging. Even the big Sainsbury’s doesn’t stock Alain Millat white peach nectar, so I use a pouch of peach baby food instead in my Peach me I’m Dreaming. Another concoction requires a £39.99 “endorphin spirit” containing CBD, “nootropics” and “adaptogens”, but I meanly substitute a cheap can of allegedly CBD-based pop.

Despite this, I love the defiantly self-indulgent process of making elaborate mocktails, macerating grapefruit peel, brewing honey and lavender tea, juicing limes and garnishing huge glasses with watermelon wedges. I even shell out for Vidal’s recommendation of booze-free Martini Vibrante, which tastes authentically bitter. A free bottle of Wild Life ultra-low alcohol wine with soothing lemon balm and miracle plant ashwagandha I wheedle from its Cornish makers is nicely refreshing, but my French husband is disgusted that it even exists.

Despite eating only salty, crispy things and hummus all day for the full aperitivo experience, I am probably the most hydrated I have been in my adult life. I’m peeing all night, but bouncily clear-headed the next day. Is this my “full self”? It’s alarming, but I like it.

The verdict: Juicy. 8/10.

Day 5

Bibliotherapy

How on earth can I capture that feeling of guiltless, total absorption in a book I only get on holiday, I ask the bibliotherapist Ella Berthoud. And what should I read?

I’m gripped by her recommendation of LP Hartley’s The Go-Between (“A fabulous classic set in a heatwave in 1901 … beautifully written and highly evocative”) and ditch the trashy thriller languishing on my Kindle for it. I’m disconcerted, however, when she suggests I Hula Hoop while reading. “It’s something I recommend to people if they are distractible. If you are doing something else with your body, it stills the voices in your mind.”

Dubious, I acquire a hoop and, using a HulaFit introductory tutorial, give it a go. My “hooping journey” as the instructor, Carla, calls it is neither elegant nor dignified, but I’m thrilled when I get the hoop to stay up. Reading, however, is farcical: I lose the rhythm if I even try holding a book. I fall back on another of Berthoud’s recommendations: comedian Mel Giedroyc reading her novel, The Best Things, on audiobook. “Gripping, funny, positive and life-enhancing,” is Berthoud’s review, and that goes for the Hula Hoop too. I laugh and manage 15 minutes of gyrating. Days later, the hoop is still calling me with its siren song. I keep sneaking off to try again.

Berthoud’s other alarming suggestion is reading aloud. “If you’re reading aloud, you’re forced to go into that world together.” Emboldened by a (non-mindful) cocktail one evening, I insist everyone listen to me read from Sum, a collection of very short, philosophical stories by the neuroscientist David Eagleman (“Perfect for sharing with your teenage sons,” says Berthoud). It feels awkward – we’re not a “read aloud” kind of family – but they listen and apparently enjoy it.

It’s weird, and weirdly moving.

The verdict: Cock-a-hoop. 10/10.

Day 6

Bathing

I’m desperate to score a hot tub to create a DIY version of those French thalassotherapy spas where you’re sprayed with a riot hose then wrapped in a seaweed burrito by an unsmiling woman in a lab coat (my favourite kind of holiday). But if you want to amuse a hot tub renter this summer, ask to borrow one. “Fully booked until 31 October”, and “300-400% increase in demand” are sample responses. Thwarted, I resort to a £6 paddling pool: on a cold, windy day sitting in it is horrible, even with eight kettles of boiling water.

I love the idea of baths but our bathroom is no serenity temple. I heat the room, put on some Bach and light a candle

A bath it is. Suzanne Duckett, the author of Bathe: The Art of Finding Rest, Relaxation and Rejuvenation in a Busy World, and the founder of the wellness site Onolla, describes bathing as “a shortcut to finding peace and calm as a way to de-stress and be more mindful.” I love the idea of baths but am too restless to enjoy the reality and our cluttered bathroom is no serenity temple. Following Duckett’s advice, I heat the room, put on some Bach and light a fancy candle. I add Epsom salts (“an excellent source of magnesium, a miracle mineral that aids sleep and calms the nervous system”, says Duckett) and my own magic bullet: Elemis Aching Muscle Super Soak, a bone-melting bath infusion, which should come with a warning about operating heavy machinery.

I get in. Then I get out three times: to trim the smoking candle wick, lock the door and turn off the extractor fan. I crank up Yo-Yo Ma, to hide the fact I have committed this unforgivable domestic crime from my husband (something, humidity, blah). Finally, I close my eyes and try to relax. I manage five minutes before cracking and reaching for my phone. “Does anyone want my water?” I text. “It’s full of expensive stuff!” The eldest does – he also needs a lift to Nando’s in 15 minutes, so I get out.

Despite this dismal performance, the heat and potions work their bizarre alchemy. I feel deeply, thoughtlessly switched off for hours, possibly endangering other road users and Nando’s patrons.

The verdict: Point deducted because my son left the candle burning, using approximately £8 of pricey wax. 9/10.

Day 7

Crowdsourcing

Trying out what others do to relax at home seems like a great idea until my call for “zero effort summer holiday meals” yields two inexplicable suggestions that I make my own soup. Despite this ominous sign, I persist, crowdsourcing a range of relaxation tips.

What have I learned? To Hula Hoop badly, for a start Photograph: Richard Saker/The Observer

Radio Garden allows you to listen live to radio stations worldwide online. I try Maghreb pop from Casablanca, a financial talkshow from Lagos and Japanese hard rock: it’s brilliant and transporting.

Massaging in hand cream is OK, but makes my computer mouse greasy and I only manage 20 seconds before I get bored. “Lying flat on the floor”, “staring out of the window” and “fantasising about your enemies’ demise” basically describe my normal working routine.

People apparently watch videos to relax. I don’t mind Cooking Haru – a pleasingly neat Korean cookery channel with a light jazz soundtrack, silent Japanese travelogues or cows using scratching brushes. But night-time footage of cars in Dubai reminds me of the climate emergency, and autonomous sensory meridian response scalp massage is just weird. Finally, my whole week is ruined by watching a blackhead extraction so disgusting that even with a soundtrack of ethereal Renaissance polyphony (I’m combining it with another suggestion), I only manage 25 seconds and feel nauseated for hours.

The verdict: Hell is other people’s ideas. 2/10.

What have I learned? To Hula Hoop badly, for a start. But my most important takeaway (in addition to the Deliveroo mountain that sustains me all week) is that a staycation won’t feel like a holiday unless you commit to it. So turn off (blackhead videos), tune out and drop everything: if it works for me, it can work for anyone.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Tommy Jessop was 22 when he first saw a character with Down’s syndrome on screen. “It was … me!” he says with a grin, sitting in his family’s living room. In the BBC TV drama Coming Down the Mountain in 2007, Jessop played a disabled teenager despised by his older brother. It captured Jessop’s ability to fully realise his characters on screen. “Making viewers feel emotions is my passion in life,” says Jessop.

In person, the 36-year-old is animated company. There are many things Jessop thinks are either “brilliant” or “wicked”, including but not limited to: receiving an honorary doctorate in arts from the University of Winchester, his “top secret” new acting project, being a volunteer usher at the Theatre Royal, Callum Wilson and Allan Saint-Maximin from Newcastle United, Bradley Walsh’s The Chase, and presenting an award at the 2021 Bafta ceremony. His recent passion project is cooking, where he shares the results on Twitter with his nearly 30,000 followers. (“I’ve made flapjacks and cakes, shepherd’s pie and fish pie,” he says.)

Jessop has made a career out of overcoming obstacles. Growing up in Hampshire, he developed a taste for the limelight appearing in junior school plays. “I enjoyed being the centre of attention,” he says. His mother, Jane, believed it might just be a phase but Jessop kept getting cast. After he left school, Jane founded Blue Apple Theatre, a group dedicated to assisting actors with learning disabilities in taking their next steps on stage.



Her son, never ducking a challenge, took the lead in the Blue Apple Theatre’s touring production of Hamlet. “That was one of my personal highlights in my career,” he remembers. “I learned how to sword fight and to do the famous speech, to be or not to be.” No less than former Royal Shakespeare Company legend Mark Rylance told Jessop his performance was “phenomenal”.

Jessop was fortunate enough to be selected from hundreds of applicants for the Talent Fund for Disabled Actors – a bursary scheme organised by the BBC, Channel 4 and the Actors Centre – which helps nurture talent by running sessions for young people with top directors and industry figures. He started getting key TV roles in medical dramas such as Casualty and Holby City, building up his confidence and knowledge of the craft. Critically acclaimed dramatic roles followed in short films such as Innocence and Fighter.

Without question, however, Jessop’s biggest role so far was playing Terry Boyle in Line of Duty, Jed Mercurio’s hugely popular TV crime thriller. In seasons five and six, Jessop plays an unwitting victim, who, through “mate crime”, is first tricked into storing a dead body in his freezer, then subsequently framed for murder. At one dramatic moment, Boyle is interrogated, then nearly drowned in a freezing lake. “Being on set was literally like being in a James Bond film,” is Jessop’s memory of his on-screen near death experience, comparing the temperature to “living in Antarctica” and expressing his gratitude to his “brilliant” castmate Vicky McClure for giving him a hug to warm him up.

The results were viewed by 11 million people, including, to Jessop’s delight, the Queen. “I was literally speechless when I read that story,” he remembers. “It was really quite overwhelming.” The only drawback to appearing on a major BBC show was the ongoing health checks. “Well, you might let the Guinness World Records know: I took 21 Covid tests. It was very tough.” He clearly loved every other aspect of the experience – and was certainly not fazed by the description of his character as a “local oddball” by superintendent Ted Hastings. “This is showing the world what this ‘oddball’ is really capable of doing: in character I’ve even planned a murder!” says Jessop.

Asked what advice he would give other young actors with Down’s syndrome, Jessop believes you can be the agent of your own success. “Keep on dreaming and believing,” he says. “One day you really will reap the rewards of your hard work.” He believes passionately that disabled people need to be given chances to appear on screen, playing a wide variety of characters rather than merely timid victims or infantile objects of pity. “Look at the type of people I’ve played: a murderer, a fighter, a thief, a fisherman, a football fan …”

Jessop warms to this theme. “People have outdated views about disabled performers. We have jobs and hobbies, we fall in love and out of love. Please let us show you what we can do in life and in film. If we are on screen, people will know that we can live interesting lives and have skills and talents.”

Jessop believes that we can expect to see more multifaceted performances in the future. “The biggest challenge is to persuade producers and showrunners to believe in performers like me. People making short films seem to believe in us and trust us as performers to create amazing work – people making feature films need to learn from them. Just let us play characters with the same hopes, dreams and adventures everyone else has!”

He feels there is so much more progress to be made. “I’m breaking down barriers because there was no writing for actors like me, because they didn’t know we could play the roles.” He is profoundly grateful for the industry support he has received, but issues something of a challenge: “I can play any role you throw at me. Just give me a chance.”

Want to see more creator stories like your own? Be inspired, check out Adobe Diverse Voices
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“I was going to take out the wire from my bra and hand it to her!” whispers an annoyed voice from behind me. I turn to see who it is, and in that moment, my life changes.

I am at Istanbul airport. It’s 2004, a few years after 9/11, and there is still heightened security around air travel.

I have been through the metal detector countless times, emptied my on-board luggage, and am standing barefoot on the cold vinyl floor. I don’t know it yet, but I have just met the woman who will save my life.

I’m trying to put my breeze-block of a laptop back into its case, along with my other prized possessions, when the owner of the underwired bra joins me at the security table, chattering away happily.

This never happens to me. People assume I am aloof – partly because I am introverted, partly because my head is full of stories, ideas and a to-do list at every given moment, and also because of what others have described as my “resting bitch face”. The woman clearly hasn’t had the memo, and carries on asking questions. Taken aback, I answer, and the universe sings.

We often ask people about the day they met their romantic partners. We rarely ask them about the day they met their soulmate. Celtic wisdom speaks of “Anam Cara” – soul friends, who share their innermost selves without judgment. Muslim scholars say that souls are soldiers; those who enlist for God’s love recognise each other on the Earth plane.

I wouldn’t have believed either of these things until I met Sabena Sultan. I had been through a difficult arranged marriage, and was recently divorced, culturally alienated and trying to find where I belonged. I had seen little kindness outside of my family in years, and I didn’t know anyone else like me.

I had flown to Istanbul from Manchester, and was en route to Karachi to spend a couple of weeks with my grandmother. Sabena had boarded at Heathrow to catch the same connecting flight. The universe decreed that we walk through security at the same time, fly the same airline, and be booked on the same flight back.

“You told me you were going to seek solace at your nani’s house and write,” Sabena says, when I ask her what she remembers about that day. She is a scientist, and, characteristically, she sends me a detailed list of memories of that day. “You were wearing Converse, jeans and a pink scarf. I’d just changed out of jeans and into a shalwar kameez, but you told me you couldn’t be bothered with that and that is why you wore a kurta with your jeans. I thought you were really cool.”

Crossing cultures is like being at the pick’n’mix sweet bar, it is a little random, and two people rarely get the same bag. As a second-generation British Asian woman of Muslim heritage, I had never met anyone who had picked the same bits of culture and faith as me, let alone had almost identical life experiences.

To be a conservative Muslim and a liberal seemed a contradiction to most people, but not to Sabena. She was warm and open and really liked my answers to her questions. Especially when I told her I was divorced. “Me too!” she said, with more joy than I had expected. The deal was sealed.

I had never had a best friend before. Something about the phrase had always felt childish and constrictive to me, but there was no other way to describe what we became to each other.

We were two independent-minded Muslim women navigating our lives post-divorce in a culture that didn’t understand us, and, out and out, judged us. We gave each other a safe haven to talk about lost love, squandered potential and the youth we had sacrificed to intergenerational trauma and cultural acceptability. But it wasn’t all heavy. We laughed at ourselves. We talked about poetry and classic Indian film tracks, and we understood each other’s cultural references.

When I was the victim of racism at work, I would call her every day after leaving the office, saying: “I’m too old for this bullshit.”

She coached me through my vulnerability issues when my current husband proposed, and nudged me to stay when I was tempted to cut and run before the wedding.

After I became a mother, she told me truths that made me feel seen, at a time when I felt most invisible. And, having navigated parenthood a few years earlier, she keeps me going with words of experience and wisdom, and the kind of advice that comes from unconditional love.

“No, you don’t look big at all,” I had told her, when she was heavily pregnant with her first child. “I was the size of a house!” she reminds me. And I can’t disagree. But what good would it have done to tell her? This is what our friendship is built on – the knowledge that the other person can handle whatever life throws at them, but that they just need someone to believe in them.

Sabena has celebrated my highs, and held on to me through the lows, like the rope that holds a climber to a cliff. On the days I have wanted to jump, she has pulled me back up. She is the keeper of my secrets, and a voice of sanity in my otherwise tumultuous life. She is the best friend a woman could hope for, and more.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As any gardener who’s ever bedded in a courgette plant in spring, fondly imagining they’ll make a couple of chargrilled Ottolenghi salads, will testify, they’re fecund little things – a happy courgette plant will produce more green offspring than even Yotam has recipes for. Well, perhaps not, but sometimes simple is good, too, especially when eaten hot from the pan, and preferably with your fingers.

Prep 10 min

Drain 30 min+

Cook 20 min

Makes 10

500g courgettes

½ tsp sea salt

40g plain flour

½ tsp baking powder

20g fine polenta or cornmeal (see step 3)

4 spring onions

2 eggs, beaten

Nutmeg

15g fresh herbs of your choice (optional) – I like dill

100g feta (optional)

Olive or vegetable oil, for frying

1 To drain, or not to drain

Courgettes are, it’s said, 95% water, which risks leaking out into the batter, so diluting it and making the finished fritters soggy. You can make perfectly decent versions by simply grating the courgettes straight into the flour, but if you have the time, it’s well worth getting rid of some of that moisture before cooking.

2 Grate, then squeeze dry

To do so, coarsely grate the courgettes into a colander or sieve, add the salt and toss. Leave to steep for 30 minutes to an hour, until wilted, then squeeze very thoroughly by hand, wringing out as much liquid as possible. (This also has the benefit of seasoning what is, let’s be honest, a rather delicately flavoured vegetable.)

3 Coat in flour

Put the courgettes in a large bowl. In a second bowl, mix the flour, baking powder and cornmeal (the latter will give your fritters a lovely crunch, but if you don’t have any, make up the weight in extra flour or fine dry breadcrumbs) until well combined, then stir into the courgettes. (You can easily substitute a gluten-free flour here, if that’s a concern.)

4 Add the onions, eggs and nutmeg

Trim and finely chop both the white and green parts of the spring onions, and stir into the fritter mix. Add the beaten eggs, too, and finish with a good grating of nutmeg (which I think goes particularly well with the creamy blandness of courgettes, though you can substitute your own favourite spice).

5 And the herbs and feta (if using)

Finely chop the herbs and crumble the feta, if using, then add both to the courgette mix.

There should be no need to add more salt, especially if feta is involved, but check by covering the base of a frying pan with oil (I use olive oil), put over a medium-high heat, fry a small blob of the batter until crisp and taste to check the seasoning. Adjust as necessary.

6 Fry in batches

Dollop large spoonfuls of batter around the pan and flatten them slightly, bearing in mind that these are not pancakes. Cook for a couple of minutes, until golden brown underneath, then carefully flip and fry on the other side. Lift out on to a cooling rack or a tray lined with kitchen paper, and serve immediately, or keep warm in the oven while you cook the rest.

7 Variations on the theme

This is a very adaptable recipe, which is fortunate, because you may be eating courgette fritters regularly until the season has run its course. You can make obvious swaps, such as replacing the feta with cubes of halloumi, and the dill with parsley, or go for cheddar and jalapeño, chorizo and parsley, or small cooked prawns, patted dry, and coriander.

8 Or try out on other veg

Treat other seasonal gluts in the same way: marrows; tomatoes, deseeded, flesh chopped and salted like the courgettes (no need to squeeze them out); peas and sweetcorn (which don’t need salting); broad beans (ditto, though I’d peel them and lightly blanch bigger ones first, because they can be tough); chard or other leaves, blanched, wrung dry and roughly chopped … even big bunches of soft herbs.

9 And/or serve with a dip

To make a quick dip to go with your fritters, mix 100g plain, whole milk Greek yoghurt with a small crushed garlic clove, a tablespoon of extra-virgin olive oil and a pinch of sugar, then season to taste. Just before serving, strip the leaves off a small bunch of mint, roughly chop and fold through.

UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Mickey Drexler, the former CEO of Gap, has said the clothing giant should not have collaborated with Kanye West because he is “not a corporate person”.

The 10-year Yeezy Gap partnership was announced in June and has produced three puffer jackets, most recently a red one, a version of which West wore at the pre-release listening party for his forthcoming album, Donda.

Mickey Drexler.

Photograph: Seth Wenig/AP

Drexler, who ran Gap between 1983 and 2002, said last week that, despite West’s previous work with Adidas, the collaboration was a bad idea. “I probably shouldn’t say this, but I told [West] he shouldn’t do the deal because it doesn’t make any sense,” Drexler told Yahoo Finance Live.

“I have a lot of friends at Gap still, but it doesn’t work for someone like Kanye. He is not a corporate person and Gap is a big corporation … He is a smart guy, but he shouldn’t have done it. And I don’t think they should done it, either.”

The puffer jacket in electric blue. Photograph: Yeezy/Twitter

Drexler revealed that the release of the first, blue puffer jacket made the company $7m (£5m) overnight, while shares in Gap jumped 42% after the partnership was announced. The black Yeezy Gap jacket is being resold on sites such as Stock X for about £500.

In June, Gap confirmed plans to close all 81 of its physical shops in the UK and Ireland.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Name: Allotment wars.

Age: There have been heated arguments over allotments for ever, or at least since there have been allotments. But this one is new.

Which one? The one in the village of Bearsted in Kent.

What’s the issue? A proposal, known locally as Project A, to move the village allotments. Some are for, others ... you guessed it ... are against.

Here’s an idea, admittedly an old-fashioned one: put it to a vote. Call it, I don’t know, democracy? Or Demo-cress-y?

Are we doing veg puns? Because I’m sure there is a war and peas one in here somewhere … Not your best. Anyway, they did that, a vote. That’s the problem.

What is? The vote. Some people are saying it was rigged.

Who does, Donald Trump? Was this on Wiki-leeks? Hoe hoe hoe – very funny. No, some of the villagers are said to have become suspicious when it emerged that some of the votes in the online poll might have come from foreign IP addresses.

Russian interference! In the Bearsted allotment war! Putin wants his say in where Blighty’s (hopefully blightless) potatoes are grown. He’s probably got a satellite on it, Spud-nik … No, the village sleuths are exploring the possibility that the IP addresses could have come from South America and Australia.

[Adopting Australian accent] “We’ll show those poms, and their pommes de terre, who’s in charge.” Possibly. The relevant authorities are reportedly investigating.

GCHQ? The parish council. When they get back from their holidays.

Why do people want to move the allotments anyway? To expand the tennis club. And new allotments would be created across the road.

But, as an allotmenteer myself, I know it takes years to get an allotment the way you want it. It was you! Unless you’re the Taff’s Well poisoner? Or both?

Who the hell is the Taff’s Well poisoner? No one knows, obviously. But someone in Taff’s Well, near Cardiff, has been spraying the allotments there with weed killer.

Whatever for? Again, no one knows. Villagers have set up security cameras to try to find out. They think the culprit might have been using a water pistol to attack the plots through the fence.

It’s all conflict and division – what happened to The Good Life? Allotments are much sought after; more than 100,000 Britons are on the waiting list for one after a lockdown surge of interest. A poll this year found that having one is among the three most popular life goals.

Do say: “Project A? Turnip down. I’m against it – from my head to-ma-toes. Keep calm and carrot on …”

Don’t say: “Anyone for tennis?”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The recipe

Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Wipe 4 large peppers, halve them lengthways, remove their seeds, then place them in a baking dish or roasting tin. Tuck around them 250g of cherry tomatoes. Bake for 40-50 minutes, letting the peppers blacken here and there. They are ready when they are soft enough to collapse with a little pressure.

For the lentils, peel and finely dice 1 large carrot. Then do the same with 1 medium sized onion. Put them in a saucepan with 2 tbsp of olive oil and place over a low to moderate heat. Finely dice 1 stick of celery and add to the pan, with a couple of bay leaves and 2 cloves of garlic, peeled and squashed flat. Add a couple of sprigs of thyme and leave to cook at a gentle pace, stirring regularly, for about 10-15 minutes until the vegetables have softened and are lightly toasted.

Add 200g of small green lentils to the pan, pour in enough water (about 500ml) to cover them and the vegetables by about 3cm. Bring to the boil, then lower the heat and simmer for 20 minutes or until the lentils are just tender. Add a little salt towards the end of their cooking time.

Remove the peppers from the oven, place in a shallow bowl and cover, leaving them for 10 minutes to loosen the skins, then peel – it should come away easily – and slice each pepper into 4 and place them on a dish. Chop the tomatoes and add to the peppers along with any roasting juices from the pan.

Drain the lentils, stir in 60ml of olive oil, a generous handful of chopped parsley leaves, a handful of basil then add the peppers and tomatoes. Serves 4

The trick

The sweet and fruity caramelised juices from the peppers and tomatoes form the heart and soul of the dressing, so scrape every drop of them from the roasting tin with a rubber spatula.

The twist

This is a good dish for a quick supper, but also to serve alongside slices of mozzarella or grilled halloumi. It’s also excellent with rare beef.

Follow Nigel on Twitter @NigelSlater
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After a poll revealed that nearly two-thirds of working mothers do not have enough childcare during the school summer holidays this year, three parents describe the childcare challenges they will be facing this summer, and how they have been affected since the pandemic began.

Marie, 40, from Sheffield, is mainly struggling to secure adequate holiday childcare for her three-year-old.

“Holiday clubs here only take school-age children and his nursery is term time only. The only option I’ve found is enrolling him and my five-year-old in a nursery that can accept both ages, at a cost of £100 per day, which I can’t afford.

“I’m a single mum but am roping in their dad, who lives in London, to come and stay with us for a month this summer so that we juggle the childcare between us, and for two days per week we’ll both be working around them at home.

“They’ll have to watch a lot of TV, like during lockdown, since we have no other options, and of course we won’t be as effective in our jobs as we should be. It would be ideal if some paid childcare leave was an option, but at least I can take one week’s unpaid leave for childcare if I really need to.”

Marie only has 25 days of holiday a year and cannot understand why there is no more provision for the school holidays.

“I don’t see why there aren’t more holiday childcare providers available for all ages as there’s so much demand among all the parents I know. We are all so exhausted.”

Kris, 46, from Fakenham, Norfolk, was, like many other parents, unable to secure summer holiday provision.

“Thankfully my wife and I have the same summer holidays as the kids, since we’re both teachers, but in this area there is next to nothing for primary school children in terms of summer childcare, because the town’s local daycare has all but closed due to the pandemic.

“From the beginning of the first lockdown our kids’ school had no before- or after-school club. We had to fight to get any childcare. We even contacted our MP, who said there was nothing he could do. I was very unimpressed.”

Both Kris and his wife work full time, and although the school eventually reinstated some before- and after-school care, they felt they had no other choice but to change their hours to meet their new childcare needs.

“I’ve now stepped down from my senior team position and from September will have a pay cut of around 25% to be able to manage the childcare. Our normal provision won’t be coming back for some time.

“For parents who don’t have school holidays off it must be a complete disaster. We know other people who have changed or given up jobs and cut hours because of the lack of childcare in our town.”

Louise, 41, from south-east London, who works in a senior position in the medical sector, says not having childcare since the pandemic began has severely affected her health, and that her hopes to find at least some cover for the summer holidays in the form of holiday clubs were also largely dashed.

“Most of what’s out there has either stopped because of the pandemic or is full. We got our two boys into a daily activities camp for two weeks, for £50 a day per child: hugely expensive. But I live in fear of getting the call that they can’t manage my son. He’s five and potentially has autism, which takes ages to get diagnosed because of the pandemic. It’s all very isolating.

“I work full-time from home. My husband is a lawyer and also works full time. We’ve fallen off a cliff. We also have a nine-year-old with a special educational needs care plan at a mainstream school.

“After the Christmas lockdown, our childminder, who was great, sent a text message and said she had to quit and find work at a nursery due to all the restrictions. Since then I’ve tried to get the boys in the after-school club but after a couple of sessions they told me not to bring them back as they couldn’t meet their needs. I’ve looked for childminders but there are so few near me and they have no availability.”

The result was and remains not having any childcare at all.

“It’s absolute anarchy in our house. There’s just no end in sight, and I think this is the new normal for us. We’re going to have to get used to it, and I’m going to have to try and get my employer to allow me to work only certain times or go down to part-time hours.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When New Orleans lifted Covid-19 restrictions for bars, restaurants, and music venues this past May, Ruston Henry Jr, 30, went to Kajun’s Pub. He had a mission: to sing at a karaoke night for the first time since the pandemic started. His comeback song was the 90s ballad Kiss from a Rose by Seal.

“​​Normally I’m very reserved, but when I do karaoke I feel like I can show a different side of me,” he says. “I missed it so much.”

I can relate. For 17 months, I’ve yearned to watch a stranger recover from heartbreak by growling You Oughta Know; to applaud someone’s dauntlessly tender attempt at singing Halo; to belt out a Michelle Branch duet with my friend Isabel while a cluster of unconditionally supportive patrons cheer us on.

During the worst of the pandemic, karaoke seemed like a distant beacon of light, something to look forward to when Covid was eradicated and we could collectively celebrate. Instead, we’ve stumbled toward the finish line: bars have opened and closed again, mask mandates have been lifted and restored. Karaoke venues across the US, Canada and England are largely open at the moment, to varying degrees depending on location. But with the Delta variant on the rise, karaoke’s return has not marked the carefree party we pined for.

“I wouldn’t go to karaoke right now,” says Dr Kimberly Prather, an atmospheric chemist and aerosol expert at the University of California-San Diego. “One side of me is happy to see people enjoying life. The other side of me is concerned.”

From a public health standpoint, Prather’s caution makes sense. An unmasked mouth can send aerosolized Covid-19 virus particles flying a distance upwards of 6ft. That’s a lot of potential contagion in a single room, particularly one where the uniting purpose is to serenade dozens of others, passing around a communal microphone covered in the previous singer’s respiratory dew.

Dr Jelena Srebric, the acting associate dean of research at the University of Maryland’s A James Clark School of Engineering, studies indoor and outdoor air quality. She says that without higher vaccination rates, indoor karaoke has the potential to be super-spreading – particularly when performers are unmasked. That’s especially true in the age of Delta, now said to be as contagious as chickenpox.

“You wouldn’t drink water from a poisoned well,” says Srebric. “Why would you go to a bar without a mask, without being vaccinated?”

‘I do not feel safe’

Before lockdown orders were imposed in New Jersey, Cat Chez, who has run her company Karaoke Cat for over 20 years, says she felt uneasy about working amid the intensifying pandemic.

“I was so relieved,” she says of the eventual shutdown. “You can’t wipe Covid away from the outside of a mic.”

Though Chez is now back in business, she remains worried for everyone’s health and safety. She got rid of physical song books, and now uses a mobile system to take singer requests. She covers the microphones with protection, one layer for the vaccinated and two for those who haven’t had their shots: a layer of mesh and another of plastic. A large percentage of her guests are unvaccinated, she says, even with rapidly climbing case counts of the Delta variant.

“I do not feel safe,” says Chez. “I had so many people come up to me without masks on even before the mask mandate was lifted. It’s very possible that’s how I got Covid and spread it to my own children.” Her daughter still suffers breathing difficulties and heart abnormalities from the virus.

We’re playing into the virus by continuing activities that allow it to spread Dr Kimberly Prather

Jeff Ng, the owner of San Francisco’s Pandora Karaoke & Bar, says that nightly crowds haven’t yet returned to pre-Covid numbers – a phenomenon he attributes to the exodus of tech employees more than pandemic precaution. But the club has been steady since reopening in June.

“Once people heard masks were optional they just threw them all away,” Ng says of San Francisco bar patrons in general. The karaoke enthusiasts, he notes, have come back with similar fervor.

“They have not slowed down at all,” says Ng.

But Delta is complicating the situation. Last Tuesday, the CDC recommended that even vaccinated individuals resume wearing masks in public indoor spaces, in locations where cases are surging. In late July, the San Francisco Bar Owner Alliance, a local industry group, began recommending that establishments require proof of vaccination or a 72-hour negative Covid test from patrons wanting to come inside.

To non-expert outsiders, these safety measures may seem extreme. For many scientists, they are not extreme enough.

“We’re playing into the virus by continuing activities that allow it to spread,” says Prather. “The longer we do that, the longer our lives are on hold. We can still live life in other ways. Just don’t pick the riskiest activities, for a little bit longer.”

The diehard’s dilemma

Around the world, Covid cases continue to be transmitted in venues where karaoke has returned. In April, South Korea ordered closures of nightclubs and karaoke bars yet again, citing fears of a possible fourth wave. More recently, in mid-July, Singapore reported its largest increase in domestically transmitted Covid cases in 10 months after 42 new cases were linked to a karaoke lounge. (Karaoke is still against the rules in Singapore. The lounge was supposed to be operating as a bar and restaurant.)

But some karaoke stalwarts see the emotional satisfaction, and maybe just the fun, as worth the risk.

Following a statewide ban in August last year, New York City diehards attempted, unsuccessfully, to take the hobby underground. And last fall, after 80 Covid cases were traced back to a single bar’s karaoke night in Quebec, some pushed back against the province’s move to temporarily ban the activity. A Quebec performer known as Billy Karaoke told the Canadian Press that karaoke has “a therapeutic effect”, and that during the pandemic, “it’s more essential than ever”.

Indeed, singing has long been recognized as emotionally and psychologically beneficial. A 2016 study led by the Centre for Performance Science at London’s Royal College of Music showed that singing in a group significantly reduced levels of cortisol, a stress hormone, in participants. A 2015 study conducted by the University of Oxford found that participants who sang together bonded faster than participants who completed non-musical activities in each other’s company.

But communal singing was also linked to one of the highest-profile early outbreaks of the pandemic. In March 2020, a choir practice in Washington state resulted in 52 Covid cases. Two people died.

In a subsequent study on the release of aerosol particles while singing, researchers at Sweden’s Lund University concluded that loud and consonant-rich singing tends to significantly spread aerosol particles. According to the study, the louder the song, “the greater the concentration of aerosols and droplets”.

Singing does not need to be silenced, but it should be done with appropriate measures to reduce the risk of spreading infection Jakob Löndahl

“Singing does not need to be silenced, but presently it should be done with appropriate measures to reduce the risk of spreading infection,” Jakob Löndahl, associate professor of Aerosol Technology at Lund University, said in a media release. Löndahl and his team ultimately recommended singing while socially distanced and wearing a mask, in an environment with good ventilation.

Dr Paul Kwak, an otolaryngologist and voice expert at New York University’s Langone Voice Center, adds a caveat to the Swedish study’s findings.

“You can get pretty loud without spewing a lot of aerosols,” Kwak says. “It really depends on how people get loud.”

Kwak is currently examining the correlation between aerosol dispersal and voice efficiency. Highly trained singers typically have more voice efficiency than amateur singers and according to Kwak, are likely to emit fewer aerosol particles. But because karaoke tends to attract amateur singers, the opposite may be true.

Kwak says there is room for optimism. It’s not the singing itself that’s problematic, but the environment in which the singing takes place. Any indoor venue with poor ventilation and a high population of people will present more risk than an outdoor venue with a reduced and socially distanced group.

So, what would a safe karaoke setting look like at this phase of the pandemic?

“If people really have to do karaoke, can they do it outside?,” says Prather. “The risk would plummet. It will never go to zero, but it would be better. Inside you are completely relying on the ventilation. Without masks, indoors is a bad place to be.”

Outdoor karaoke would be safer, echoes Srebric, but simply being outside is not a guarantee against aerosol spread. “If we’re talking about urban quarters surrounded by buildings, that significantly reduces how much air you’re getting.”

Barring fresh air singalongs, Prather suggests that indoor karaoke establishments carry hand-held carbon dioxide censors so that operators can measure the amount of “rebreathed air” in circulation. Close contact spread won’t be solved by ventilation, she says, so air filtration should also be a priority; Prather recently worked with a school board to have particle-counters installed, but HEPA filters are an easily acquired protection that should be placed close to where the singers perform.

“The best thing you can do to control this virus is to block it at the source,” she says, noting that lapel microphones under masks, which are being used more frequently in professional fields, could also be used in karaoke settings to reduce aerosol spread.

It’s a difficult predicament. As Bertolt Brecht once wrote: “In the dark times, will there also be singing? Yes, there will also be singing, about the dark times.” In the saga of karaoke during Covid, the spiritual comfort of singing through the dark times comes at the risk of perpetuating the dark times even further. We can sing in our showers, can’t we?

But the joy of karaoke is in the fellowship. For there to be fellowship, we need to survive.

“People need to understand that you cannot sing on a microphone that someone else just sang on if you aren’t vaccinated,” says Chez. “Karaoke is great therapy, but we don’t want anyone ending up in the Covid unit.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The pub garden, or beer garden – that beverage befittingly muscling in and rowdily taking sole possession of the name – has come into its own during Covid. But I have always thought beer gardens the crowning glory of the pub experience.

Summer is upon us. Ostensibly. Which means sitting astride the benches of picnic tables dappled in sunlight, knees touching. The atmosphere is jovial under the influence of the sun. Cocktail umbrellas are matched by the real thing, shading burning shoulders. Cool drinks grasped and gulped thirstily. Caps pulled down to protect eyes. Gravel crunching under trainers as rounds make their way back from the bar.

I love the cosiness and dark wood of pubs, the fireplaces and the argyle-patterned windowpanes, but I so much prefer drinking and socialising outdoors. Even more so when the surroundings are beautiful. The greatest pub gardens are those vast ones by the sides of rivers or canals, or merging with countryside. From spring onwards, I strongly assert my position that any choice of venue should have a garden or a city rooftop. Otherwise it feels as though the light is wasted.

As a former smoker, I used to have that inbuilt temperature control that smokers have – untouched by the cold. Or rather, not untouched, but willing to ignore it in order for one’s fix. And so in winter I could be found with friends huddled outside, our smoke making silver shapes under the light from heaters. “Nipping out for a fag” was also a good way to take stock on a night out, or enter into a sidebar with a friend. (Or get away from the attention of lecherous strangers, frankly.)

I don’t smoke now, but there was something about the stoicism of the public, wrapped up in bubble coats and beanie hats, enduring nippy temperatures to drink outside under the initial Covid opening up, that was endearing and proud-making. We were cold, but we were desperate, and we were grateful.

Now that the weather is warmer and the world is opening up, I am even more delighted to drink in the happiness and togetherness of the pub garden.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I’m not usually good at things that could be considered slightly cringeworthy. There are certain displays of collective emotion, jubilation or despair that I find too earnest to bear. But the first day of this year’s Wimbledon – my enjoyment of which I wrote about recently – reminded me of how much I can get down with a standing ovation.

As a pre-match announcement was made that Dame Sarah Gilbert and her team, who developed the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, and some NHS staff, were seated in one of the boxes, a deafening ripple of seemingly endless applause filled the court. Then, perhaps realising this wasn’t sufficient praise and appreciation, the crowd rose to their feet. A closeup of Gilbert’s face saw her quite dumbstruck and overwhelmed, tears dancing in her eyes. It was partly thanks to Gilbert that the crowd were able to be there at all. It was extremely moving.

Part of the reason I love theatre is the prospect of a standing ovation at the end; the communal recognition that we have been lucky enough to witness a first-class performance, and therefore want to congratulate the cast and everyone working behind the scenes – for months, no less – on their successful efforts.

The Mexican wave at sporting events can, of course, tip into tediousness, as can anything when it becomes too much of a good thing. If a wave continues to roll, the endless sitting and standing is an irritation – like the person in the middle row at the cinema who keeps getting up for a wee. But the initial stages are a joy; especially because usually they happen in dull sections of play, and I very much approve of the sentiment of “screw it, we’ll make our own entertainment”. It also amuses me to observe the reluctant people being broken as they, sheepishly, eventually join in. The kiss of death for the Mexican wave at a high-profile event is a politician’s involvement. Always at least two beats behind.

We have been denied crowd and audience participation for so long now that it is still an adjustment seeing thousands of people in an arena, stadium or arts venue. Still an adjustment being part of one. But, as the saying goes, absence makes the heart grow fonder, and as the other saying goes, you don’t know what you’ve got till it’s gone. I will be increasing my leg work in the gym, readying myself for many more standing ovations to come.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Every parent of a young child in lockdown either knows this fact or is about to learn it: you don’t get to choose where they find their joy.

For example, my two and half year old son likes to listen to the Thomas and Friends Storytime podcast. It is, by some margin, his favourite thing to do. By a similar margin, the opening “toot toot” of the podcast is my least favourite sound on the entire planet, which now activates my fight or flight reflex every time I hear it. But due to some quirk of evolution, I find myself unable to deny my boy his train show, as it gives him the kind of happiness unattainable to adults without the use of class-A drugs.

Nonetheless, I am genuinely confronted by how much I hate this show and the trains therein. Some of this can be chalked up to entering our fourth week of lockdown with no end in sight. Most of it can be chalked up to Thomas and Friends Storytime being a bad show about trains who I hate.

There are lots of interesting reasons to hate this show, but I’m not getting into any of them here. This is simply a list of all the trains in the show, ranked by how much I hate them. This ranking is not definitive. Those in a similar position to me may wish to make their own list of trains they hate from their child’s train podcast. It doesn’t need to be a train podcast specifically that’s driving you insane in lockdown. For me, however – and I really cannot stress this enough – it is.

9. Nia

Nia is the least objectionable train in my son’s train podcast, possibly because she’s afforded so little airtime. I can’t tell you much about Nia, other than that she’s painted orange, which is fine, and that she was once tasked with bringing an elephant to the Sodor Animal Park and the elephant ran away, which is not.

8. Gordon

A lot of people don’t like Gordon, who is haughty and rude, but I feel an affinity with this train because the contempt in which he holds all the other trains on the Island of Sodor comes very close to matching my own. There aren’t a lot of Gordon-centric episodes in Thomas and Friends Storytime, but as if to make up for this, the actor shouts each of his lines at an upsetting volume. Gordon doesn’t get into adventures like the other trains, and seems to be very into the core business of “being a train”. It is for this reason alone that he does not rank higher.

7. Henry

‘Henry is not entombed alive in the podcast, which is a great shame.’ Photograph: Publicity image

I’m told that there’s a famous episode of the old TV show where Henry is bricked up in a tunnel for all eternity as a punishment for disobedience. I am not exaggerating when I say that if this happened to any of the trains in Thomas and Friends Storytime, I would take my shirt off and run around the living room like I’d just won the World Cup.

Henry is not entombed alive in the podcast, which is a great shame.

6. Diesel

Diesel is a diesel-powered shunting engine and is the closest thing Thomas and Friends Storytime has to an antagonist. Why is he the antagonist? Well, when the Reverend W. Awdry was dreaming up the magical Island of Sodor to delight and entertain a generation of children, he decided to establish a blood feud between the diesel and steam powered engines. I can only assume he did this for his own inscrutable Protestant reasons, and the end result is a kind of completely incongruous, sectarian tension that runs through the series. Diesel is the head of the diesel faction on Sodor and once stole a Christmas tree. Pathetic.

5. Rebecca

My son has episodes that he likes more than others. Thomas’ Animal Friends, featuring Rebecca, is his favourite episode of all, and as a result I know Thomas’ Animal Friends better than literally any piece of media or art I have ever encountered. I have more clarity around the events that unfold in Thomas’ Animal Friends than anything that has ever happened to me in my actual life, including the birth of my son. It is for this reason that I would like to see Rebecca the Large Tender Engine exploded by huge amounts of dynamite.

4. Cranky the Crane

I’ll be the first to admit that Cranky The Crane is not a train. He still makes my list.

3. James

In 1896, the Lumiere brothers premiered their film L’Arrivée d’un train en gare de La Ciotat. It’s a 50 second clip of a train arriving at a station, and when it was first shown in Paris, the audience were so terrified that they ran screaming from the room. This was prescient, as 125 years on, it is my exact reaction when James The Red Engine appears in any episode of Thomas And Friends Storytime.

James is billed as “the funny engine”. To begin with, this is a lie. James does nothing at any point in any of the episodes that could even be generously described in those terms. The podcast’s insistence that James is comic relief might be what tips me over the edge in lockdown, ripping our speakers from the wall and walking them, and myself, into blessed traffic.

2. Thomas

The only reason that this guy isn’t at number one is that the other day we were at the park and my son held out his arms and ran down the path and said “toot toot I’m Thomas!” with a huge smile on his face which was the best thing to happen to me all week.

Nonetheless, Thomas is a huge piece of shit and no doubt about it. J.R.R Tolkien once said that “cellar door” was the most beautiful sounding phrase in the English language. This was only because he had never heard the phrase “Thomas The Tank Engine has been turned to atoms by a futuristic beam weapon”.

1. Percy

And so, by default, Percy, The Green Engine, is my most hated engine on Thomas and Friends Storytime. He is in most of the episodes and says things like “Last one to Tidmouth Sheds is a broken boiler!” without any consequence from a sane God.

That’s the list. I do not wish to discuss the trains any further.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Interviewing Shayne Oliver is a conversational rollercoaster. We hurtle from cult 90s guitar bands to Arthur Jafa, from the problem with political correctness to the pressure on creatives, from Kanye West to Vin Diesel, with little warning of which thrill or spill is next. “I’m such a scatterbrain,” he says at the end of our call. “I’m sorry.”

But Oliver is far from a scatterbrain. He is best known as a fashion designer, the former vogue-dancer who founded the critically adored label Hood By Air, or HBA, in 2006. However, he is no longer limiting himself to clothes. Oliver is moving into music, having formed Anonymous Club – a “creative studio” focused on young talent that began as a series of parties. The studio’s debut release is Screensavers Vol 1, a compilation album based on Oliver’s demos, executive produced by Yves Tumor.

It’s a mix of dark noisecore, grungy sounds, bolshie hip-hop and dancefloor-ready tracks. It features acts such as Izzy, the model and musician from hardcore duo Dead Dogs; Sabrina Fuentes of Pretty Sick, the rock band she founded at the age of 13; and Tama Gucci, model, singer and mainstay of Miami’s queer underground. Oliver also stars – at least in a persona called Leech; for which he is painted white, with breasts, and wears only a wig and Nike Air Jordans.

“I would call it .. comedy,” he says, deadpan. Oliver is ambivalent about the sudden rush to recognise previously ignored creatives of colour, as representation became a hot button issue in culture over the past year. “Right now, the idea of Black popularity, I wouldn’t say it’s bad, but it’s a little vulgar, you know? I was like, ‘How can I do interviews without representing a Black face?’ That’s how it started.” Hence the white makeup? “Exactly. I feel like I want to save my Blackness for my creations.”

Transitioning is really specific. When you don’t have the resources, transitioning is really hard

One of Oliver’s missions with Anonymous Club is to show that you don’t have to be a superstar to be successful. “Alternative celebrity is being wasted in this generation because everyone wants to be highly popular,” he says, using Vin Diesel as an example. “He had been a queen of alternative classic cinema, like XXX, then went on to carve out a huge part of pop culture [in the Fast & Furious films] based on that.”

Oliver is also keen to create a platform for queer people outside what he sees as an increasingly academic culture. He feels uneasy about political correctness shutting out, as he sees it, those without an Ivy League education. “You can be in an evolutionary queer conversation because your friends are very well adapted to the conversations around queer rights. But what if you’re way more queer than anyone in your group? What if there is no one there yet to understand, ‘Where am I sleeping tonight?’”

This perspective comes from formative experiences. An only child born in Minnesota, he was brought up between the US and his mother’s native Trinidad. In 2000, when Oliver was 12, they settled in New York and he attended Harvey Milk High, a school for LGBT students, while getting an education in the ballroom scene – a world familiar to anyone who has seen the 1990 documentary Paris Is Burning, or the Ryan Murphy series Pose.

‘There’s an Uber outside’ … Oliver got Sabrina Fuentes out of bed. Photograph: Torso Solutions

It was here that he saw some tough realities. “I have been around so many trans women who went through the system, and had to go through shelters to get hormones, and it wasn’t glamorous,” he says. “I’m not saying every transition has to be brutal. I’m just saying that those women getting to that level was extreme. I don’t agree that you can facilitate and idealise the philosophy of queerness and then it’s all OK. It’s not OK.”

Oliver started walking in the Butch Queen Vogue Fem category at balls as a way to “imitate” the inspirational women around him. He considered transitioning himself. “But I just had different avenues I wanted to go down. And transitioning is really specific. When you don’t have the resources, transitioning is really hard. I had to choose how much I could dedicate to that and/or being successful.”

In 2006, at the age of 18, Oliver launched HBA with his friend Raul Lopez. By this point, he had graduated from Harvey Milk and dropped out of the highly rated Fashion Institute of Technology. He was immersed in New York nightlife from balls to electroclash nights in Williamsburg, and parties with the late artist Dash Snow in the Lower East Side. He paused the label in 2009, consumed by DJing at GHE20G0TH1K (pronounced “ghetto gothic”), the club founded by his friend Jazmin Soto, AKA Venus X. With a music palette that ran from Lil’ Kim to Marilyn Manson, and a distinctly inclusive door policy, it’s now so legendary that in 2019 Dazed & Confused named it a “club night that changed the world”.

Oliver says the “anything goes” atmosphere made GHE20G0TH1K special: “I remember when we were all in lingerie and DJing with all our privates exposed. The night was hot and everyone in New York was out, and we were playing the most insane music and everyone was getting naked and having fun. It was a freedom moment where everyone was fucking loose and losing their minds on a dancefloor in the middle of Brooklyn.”

Oliver relaunched HBA in 2012, and the label’s shows quickly created a buzz in fashion and beyond. There were soundtracks by Arca and DJ Total Freedom, with designer and DJ Virgil Abloh and Kanye West sitting in the front row. Male models wore dresses, the makeup gently mocked the contouring worn by the Kardashians, wigs were attached with chains, and a black-and-white speckled great dane joined everyone on the runway. Inclusive casting was consistent, with rapper A$ap Rocky walking alongside trans artist Boychild.

‘Fashion can be harsh’ … Hood By Air. Photograph: Victor Virgile/Gamma-Rapho/Getty Images

The clothes – with punchy graphic prints, oversized silhouettes and simple sans-serif branding – made the label successful. But Oliver sees shining a light on his community as the real achievement. “The [show] we did for AW14 was on the Chelsea Piers and we had all the girls come from the ballroom scene to vogue and rip it,” he says. “To this day, I can’t even watch it without getting emotional. That was a monumental moment to me.”

However, with so many creative elements involved, Oliver felt increasingly conflicted. “Fashion can be really harsh,” he says. “I remember seasons where [the fashion press] were like, ‘The music was really loud and horrible.’ And Alejandra [Ghersi, AKA Arca] and Total Freedom worked really hard on it and everyone in their world was raving about it and the work was so good.” In 2017, after a collection that included a collaboration with Pornhub and had photographer Wolfgang Tillmans on the catwalk, Oliver instigated another hiatus. For three years, he worked on projects with brands including Helmut Lang and Diesel. He announced HBA’s return in 2020, alongside the Anonymous Club.

Oliver’s time in the ballroom scene has bled into Anonymous Club, which has seen him taking on a maternal role. Sabrina Fuentes says Oliver got her out of a depressive, bed-bound state to work on tracks like the dark and wavy Ketamean. “I was like ‘I cannot come’ and he was like ‘That’s too bad, there’s an Uber outside.’ I got in and we went to the studio and made music.” Tama Gucci, meanwhile, says working with Oliver on tracks including reverb-heavy Lunch taught him a different perspective. “I’ve developed a new method of songwriting,” he says, “where we start with just a simple noise and write around how it makes us feel. I’ve realised it’s easier for me that way.”

Model behaviour: Anonymous Club star Tama Gucci Photograph: Torso Solutions

Gucci loves Oliver’s ear – “I’m always surprised at how many bizarre tunes he knows!” – but Fuentes says it’s a combination of full-tilt creativity and a caring nature that makes him exceptional: “He’s definitely one of the best artists and creative minds to come out of New York in the last 30 years. It’s rare that someone has that quality of warmth, bringing out the best in people, as well as being talented and driven.”

Working across art, music and fashion with a coterie of talent, Oliver has been painted as the new Andy Warhol, but nicer. He does see some similarities, but is nonplussed. “I have never said I wanted to create a factory,” he says, then catches himself. “I have only said that once – because I liked the fact it was silver.”

He is more inspired by Arthur Jafa, the film-maker and artist best known for 2016’s Love Is the Message, The Message Is Death. Using collaged clips ranging from Barack Obama to police shootings, Beyoncé to the LA riots, and Kanye West’s Ultralight Beam as the soundtrack, Jafa made what the New Yorker called a “crucial ode to Black America”.

It’s not just about the work, though. “I love a really weird Black man,” says Oliver. “I think being the Black weirdo is way harder than being another kind of weirdo. The work always gets wrapped into politics, which is always something people expect from Black people – that everything you do is political.” He pauses to take a rare breath. “I like it when you see these kind of men existing. That is really cool.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Climate activist Greta Thunberg has used an interview with a top style and culture magazine to call out fast fashion companies for “greenwashing”.

In an Instagram post to accompany her appearance on the cover of the first issue of Vogue Scandinavia, Thunberg spoke out about the contradiction between mass produced fashion and sustainability.

“Many are making it look as if the fashion industry are starting to take responsibility, by spending fantasy amounts on campaigns where they portray themselves as ‘sustainable’, ‘ethical’, ‘green’, ‘climate neutral’ and ‘fair’,” Thunberg wrote. “But let’s be clear: This is almost never anything but pure greenwashing. You cannot mass produce fashion or consume ‘sustainably’ as the world is shaped today. That is one of the many reasons why we will need a system change.”

“The fashion industry is a huge contributor to the climate-and-ecological emergency,” she continued, “not to mention its impact on the countless workers and communities who are being exploited around the world in order for some to enjoy fast fashion that many treat as disposable(s).”

Vogue Scandinavia • first issue pic.twitter.com/LCUkVANqRK — 𝕄𝕖𝕘 (@fasshionlover) August 8, 2021

In her interview for Vogue Scandinavia, she said: “The last time I bought something new was three years ago and it was secondhand. I just borrow things from people I know.”

Thunberg added that there was a misconception around the attitude of activists.

“This is some kind of misconception about activists, especially about climate activists that we are just negative and pessimists and we are just complaining, and we are trying to spread fear but that’s the exact opposite,” she said. “We are doing this because we are hopeful, we are hopeful that we will be able to make the changes necessary.”

The cover image of the magazine, which shows the activist in a woodland scene petting a horse, was shot by photographer Alexandrov Klum. Vogue Scandinavia is edited by Rawdah Mohamed, the first hijab wearing woman of colour editor at a western fashion magazine.

The interview was published after the release on Monday of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report which showed a critical global heating threshold of 1.5C may be breached far earlier than previously expected, potentially within a decade.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Singer Frank Ocean has announced a luxury fashion line that will produce jewellery and silk scarves.

The brand, Homer, has been three years in the making, and is the latest non-musical project from Ocean, whose most recent album, Blonde, was released in 2016. Ocean has previously created magazines, designer trainers and furniture.

Frank Ocean x HOMER pic.twitter.com/9dlHVfy8MH — RENOWNED (@YouAreRNWND) August 7, 2021

“Hand on my heart, this project has kept my mind moving and my imagination turning throughout it all. All of my work now is dedicated to my family. Everything,” he wrote on Instagram. Last year, his 18-year-old brother, Ryan Breaux, was reportedly killed in a car crash. “My hope is to make things that last, that are hard to destroy, set it in stone.”

The collection will feature 25 pieces of high-end jewellery, ranging from anime-inspired pendants to diamond bracelets and gold rings, all of which have been made in Italy and are inspired by “childhood obsessions” and “heritage as fantasy”, according to a press release. In the catalogue, which accompanies the collection, Ocean teased a Homer collaboration with Prada on some clothing items, including brightly coloured anoraks and a rain jacket, which is similar to the one he wore to the Met gala in 2019.

#FrankOcean just launched a luxury brand HOMER, introducing the line as an official collaboration with #Prada pic.twitter.com/N2HpBZHAPL — S7Media (@Secret7Media) August 7, 2021

Speaking to the Financial Times at the weekend, the singer said he named the collection after the Greek author of the Iliad and the Odyssey because: “Homer is considered the father of history and history is meant to endure – the same as diamonds and gold – and I know Homer used papyrus, but I’ve always liked the idea of carving history into stone.” The items will range in price from £284 to £1.4m. “I don’t want our work to be any less expensive than Cartier,” he said. A post on Instagram showcasing items from the collection featured positive comments from actor Timothée Chalamet, model Adwoa Aboah, photographer Tyler Mitchell, actor Yara Shahidi and singer Rosalía.

Sales of men’s jewellery spiked during the pandemic, thanks, in part, to an increase in “top half” dressing for Zoom meetings and the influence of Connell’s chain, which featured in the BBC TV drama Normal People. The items will be available via the Homer shop, which opens today at The Jewelry Exchange in New York’s Lower East Side.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Terry towelling, the absorbent towel-like fabric synonymous both with 1950s poolside glamour – thanks to Emilio Pucci – and 1970s Bognor Regis bonhomie – thanks to Butlin’s – is back. It can be found everywhere this summer, from cult Spanish brand La Veste to Gap to Balenciaga, and is even being used in lingerie – Rihanna recently took to Twitter to post a video of herself in lime-green terry undies.

But terry towelling is just one tiny, practical cog in the broader moment for all things holiday style. Where gorpcore, a term coined in 2017 by fashion website The Cut, described city slickers dressing in the utilitarian clothes of long-distance hikers, what we could call “holidaycore” sees beach kaftans reinvented for city streets, and tangy sun-lounger stripes finding their way on to dresses and bucket hats worn in town. It sees the sort of pieces that scream tropical island jollies, such as crochet tops and basket bags, à la Talented Mr Ripley or Jane Birkin, peppering UK parks.

According to shopping platform Lyst, there has been a 192% increase in searches for beachwear this summer compared with the same period in 2020. The beach aesthetic has, according to Lyst’s Morgane Le Caer, “recently been taking over social media platforms such as TikTok” and now, she says, “it is also shaping up fashion searches”.

In normal summers, of course, it would not be worth mentioning that holidaywear is doing well during the summer holidays. But this year, with travel outside the UK more complicated than a cryptic crossword, it says something about the way we are choosing to dress even while at home.

Gwyneth Paltrow in holidaywear in The Talented Mr Ripley. Photograph: AA Film Archive/Alamy

“I think we’re all looking at alternatives to our usual summer holidays, which have been restricted this year. So trying to embrace and wear at home or to a friend’s house things we would maybe normally save for a holiday seems like a good idea,” says Mona Ghafoori, the founder of Tort, a London-based company that makes colourful eco-resin versions of the plastic “tortoiseshell” hair accessories often to be found in beachside souvenir shops.

Two summers ago, these kind of accessories might have been worn with pride on a return to daily life while there was still sand between your toes. Not now. “There’s something about clipping your hair up in a hair claw that’s very holiday,” says Ghafoori. She says the brand received many messages during lockdown from people saying how much a new clip lifts their mood: “They’ve almost become that holiday accessory you can wear all year round.”

It makes sense. During a year in which people have decorated their houses with palm prints and planned holidays on Pinterest – creating boards full of places they hoped to visit on future trips – clothes have become another way to psychologically transport ourselves.

“Many people are craving their pre-pandemic lifestyles,” says fashion psychologist Shakaila Forbes-Bell. “As such, they have begun utilising their wardrobes as a tool not only to experience escapism but also to regain a sense of normalcy. You may not be able to hop on a plane and unwind on a beach … but you can … [dress] the part to amplify the experience of your staycation.”

There is, she says, science behind it: “studies have shown that outlandish dressing or simply dressing in a way that is outside of your day-to-day can carry a tension-release dimension.”

For fashion historian Tony Glenville, “childhood memories, and security in the staples of the childhood beach wardrobe” are symbolised by these beach-ready garments. Perhaps, as with terry towelling, it might be “pieces we recognise in difficult times from old family photographs and which conjure up memories”.

Another factor encouraging this sudden spike in bikini tops on city streets is, of course, the television behemoth of summer: Love Island. Watching people in trunks and bikinis flirt on beanbags under a Spanish sun is bound to sink into the national psyche and leave people wanting to flaunt an “underboob” or wear short shorts, even if just to their local supermarket.

“Much as in the way Bridgerton inspired many to adopt ‘royalcore’ aesthetics,” Forbes-Bell says, “shows like Love Island will undoubtedly influence consumer behaviour, with holiday-style dressing gaining appeal despite restrictions on mass tourism.”

Glenville is all for dressing for jollies, even at home: “If holidays are difficult but it’s sunny, just wear ’em wherever and whenever. Fashion isn’t in a place to dictate; the consumer is. If they want holiday and they want to wear it now, so be it!”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@New life in Lille

Family-run business Le Colonel have launched a unique upcycling initiative called This Is How We Do which invites consumers to send their pre-loved garments to their workshop in Lille to be repurposed and given a new lease of life. Send an old dress or shirt to be repurposed into a selection of scrunchies, eye masks or face coverings. The repurposed items can either be sent back to the original owner or sold on to a new home, with a percentage of the profits being donated to The Good Planet Foundation . £40 to repurpose an old item, upcycled items from £10, lecolonel.com
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What’s the secret to ice-cream? Can you ever get that light, creamy texture without a machine?

George, Bristol

For ice-cream fanatic Felicity Cloake, there is a distinct advantage to making your own ice-cream: you can choose exciting flavours and “eat it all yourself”. While she doesn’t see the point in churning vanilla (“you can buy such nice ones, after all”), now is the time for stirring cherries, blackcurrants and the like through custard. (For fellow ice-cream enthusiast Nigel Slater, that means heating milk and vanilla, plus double cream, if you fancy, pouring into egg yolks whisked with sugar, then heating again until thickened.)

Flavour decided, it’s then mostly a question of equipment. Kitty Travers of La Grotta Ices in London has the scoop (sorry): “A really fantastic ice-cream is 50% ingredients [for flavour] and 50% machinery [for texture].” During her years teaching at the School of Artisan Food, Travers found Cuisinart ice-cream makers to be a popular choice, while Cloake has a reconditioned Gaggia stashed in her shed, not that she always uses it. “I’m often inclined towards no-churn ice-creams to save getting it out, which is a faff,” Cloake says. She’s in good company, too, because Slater doesn’t think a machine is essential, either. He writes: “You can make a perfectly fine ice-cream with a fork and freezer box. The trick is to let the mixture freeze around the edges, so only the centre is still soft, then beat briefly with a whisk or fork, bringing the glistening crystals into the middle, then return it to the freezer.” Repeat every hour or so.

As in life, it’s all about setting expectations. Machines whip as they freeze, adding air (for lightness), while the agitation of the mix creates small ice crystals (for smoothness). “It’s hard to recreate that by hand, unless you’re using an old-fashioned paddle,” Travers explains. I’m assuming George doesn’t have one of those to hand, so he’ll need to look elsewhere. Egg yolks are “fantastic for creating satiny, smooth custards”, Travers says, while Cloake favours condensed milk – its high sugar and low water content help achieve that “almost velvety consistency”.

Don’t get cute with sugar, though. “It’s what gives ice-cream its creamy texture,” Travers says, “so if you take out too much, you’ll end up with an icy texture.” You could, however, go for a mix of ordinary and liquid sugars: Travers suggests golden syrup (“it has a delicious flavour and dense consistency”), while Melissa Clark opts for honey. She writes in The New York Times: “Not only does it improve the texture of the ice-cream, but it also adds its inimitable caramelised sweetness.” High-pectin fruits such as apricots, plums or gooseberries will help with texture and avoid iciness, too, Travers adds.

And don’t forget a splash of booze. Thanks to its low freezing point, you’ll get a more scoopable result, says Cloake, who whisks whisky or rum into condensed milk, vanilla essence and salt, then combines with beaten double cream. And if all else fails, employ your food processor, Travers says: “Mum confounds me by never using a recipe when she makes ice-cream. It freezes very hard and icy, but then she Magimixes it before serving and it always comes up lovely.”

You could, of course, deviate from ice-cream altogether. “If I didn’t have a machine,” Travers says, “I’d make semifreddo.” Go all out with different flavoured layers (think neapolitan), or slice and stick it in a cone. “It’s not exactly ice-cream,” she adds, “but it is rich, smooth and delicious.” Sweet.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In one of the communal gardens that skirt a dusty, tangerine block near the Palladium in Garbatella is a small forest of tomato vines. Yesterday (and I am writing this on 13 July), the cherry ones were almost all ripe, hundreds of bright, red balls netted in twisting green, while the bigger, heart-shaped ones were still green bags. I curbed my kleptomania, despite the fact several tomatoes were poking so far through the railings that they seemed to be trying to prod me. I thought I had curbed my son’s, too, by shouting so loudly that a woman looked out of her window. But then later, when we sat down for wine and lemonade in a trendy but hugely likable place called La Mescita, I’m sure there was a seed on his lip.

We took another route back to the car so we could enjoy another part of Garbatella, a Roman neighbourhood sometimes referred to as a borgata – a hamlet on the outskirts – and at others a quartiere paese, which translates loosely as “village within a city”. In another garden under a pale yellow lotto (or block), we spotted more bounty in an orto, or vegetable garden, of the kind that brings out deep envy in me: of the tomatoes and peppers, aubergines, onions, as well as of the care the owner took to grow them.

Garbatella was born, officially, on 18 February 1920, part of an ambitious plan of urban extension around the industrial zone of Ostiense. The principal architect was Gustavo Giovannoni, who was also a historian, engineer and urban planner for whom progress, modernity and the changing role of industry in city planning were fundamental. He was also a passionate supporter of the garden city movement, one born out of the work by British urban planner Ebenezer Howard, which called for a return to nature with village-style communities in peri-urban settings, and realised in Welwyn and Letchworth garden cities, and Marino on the northside of Dublin. Along with two other architects and the Istituto per le Case Popolari (a national building society dedicated to low-cost public housing), the team researched and developed an unique style of low-density housing (detached, semi-detached and blocks) grouped around common gardens, using inexpensive local materials – tufa, stone and brick – indigenous materials that gave a sense of identity and place.

If you do have a place to grow vegetables – an orto, or garden, a terrace or huge window box – lucky you, and use whatever is ripe. For those of us who don’t, use whatever you can buy or find to make this pasta all’ortolana – the sauce is an incredibly sociable one.

In another block, kids played on bikes and hoverboards, while a group of women sat on a low wall chatting in the garden – their communal piece of what Howard described as this “beautiful land of ours, with its canopy of sky, the air that blows upon it, the sun that warms it, the rain and dew that moisten it”.

Pasta all’ortolana – pasta with lots of vegetables

Remember to cut the vegetables so they mirror the pasta shape you’ve chosen, and that the cheese here is not just an ingredient, but an edible concierge who makes sure everything comes together.

Serves 4

1 red onion, or 1 small leek

1 carrot

1 stick celery, destringed

1 courgette

1 small aubergine

1 small red pepper

1 handful sweet cherry tomatoes

400g-500g dried pasta (linguine, spaghetti, fusilli, farfalle, mezze maniche)

6 tbsp olive oil

1 pinch red chilli flakes

Grated parmesan or pecorino, plus extra to serve

1 handful basil

Cut the vegetables according to the pasta shape you are using: so, long, thin strips if you are using long pasta, or small dice if you are using short. For all shapes, quarter the tomatoes.

Put the water on to boil for the pasta. Cover the base of a large, deep frying pan with oil over a medium-low heat, add the onion, carrot and a pinch of salt and cook, stirring regularly, for about seven minutes. Add the courgette, aubergine and pepper, cook, stirring, for five minutes, then add the tomatoes and chilli flakes. Stir and squash the tomatoes with the back of the spoon, then leave to cook while you add salt to the boiling water and cook the pasta.

Once the pasta is ready, drain or lift it directly into the vegetable pan, add a handful of the grated cheese and the basil, and toss everything well. Serve with more cheese for those who want it.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The shadow of a palm frond falls on a young woman in a bikini, holding an emerald-coloured cocktail in one manicured hand. A negroni glows from the depths of a darkened bar; a tray of fruit-laden glasses sits beside a swimming pool. The #cocktail hashtag on Instagram is a passport to a magical land of aspirational drinking, where everything comes garnished with rose petals and nobody ever seems to get hangovers.

Its inhabitants are a mix of amateur enthusiasts reviewing their latest discoveries, and professional “ginfluencers” making a living from creating lusciously photographed cocktail recipes or sponsored posts promoting this rhubarb gin or that new tequila. Colourful drinks are popular, says Inka Kukkamäki, a full-time drinks influencer whose @onthesauceagain account has 21,000 Instagram followers. “Something a bit interesting and unusual, or just something simple like a negroni – any kind of negroni twist becomes popular. The Italian aperitivo culture has really spread into the UK in the last year.”

Originally from Finland, but married to a Scot and living near Florence in Italy, the 33-year-old splits her time between distillery visits or tastings, devising recipes for her blog and social media accounts, and advising food and drink brands on social media management. An entry-level influencer, she explains, might be sent free bottles to review and write about. But the real money is in working with alcohol brands on paid campaigns, a lightly disguised form of advertising, although she insists she only chooses brands she genuinely likes in order to retain readers’ trust. Influencers have, she thinks, clearly affected pandemic drinking habits. “No one could go to bars, they start having drinks at home, but don’t want to use the same old bottle of wine and maybe you miss cocktails – so they turn to Instagram and get ideas, and follow the people they feel more connected to.”

This has been the year of the home cocktail, shaken up to enliven Friday night Zoom with friends or mark the end of an otherwise formless day’s working from home. And the habit seems to be sticking now lockdown is over. Waitrose recently reported a 148% rise in sales of the Italian aperitif Aperol this July compared with last year, and a similar leap in searches for its online espresso martini recipe.

David Powlson, a 44-year-old consultant in paper production, got the bug in lockdown when his west London running club could no longer hold its monthly pub meet-ups, switching to virtual beer, wine and cocktail tastings instead. “Since then I’ve continued making one pretty much every night,” says Powlson, who favours mint juleps. “You feel like you’ve learned something as well – you start looking things up on YouTube.” Social media has helped demystify the whole process, with mixology videos booming on TikTok and furloughed bartenders offering private Zoom lessons in martini-making.

Catrin Roberts, who works for the Welsh television channel S4C, became part of a Saturday night cocktail-making rota among neighbours on her Cardiff street during lockdown. It started, she says, as a spin-off from cooking more elaborate meals to entertain her five-year-old triplets. “We made the children prawn cocktails and they kept asking for that, and one weekend my husband said: ‘Why don’t we make cocktails for ourselves?’” Not long after, she left one on the doorstep of a neighbour living alone; before long, several households were swapping weekly daiquiris and caipirinhas in a Covid-safe manner. “We’d text to say: ‘There’s a vitamin supply on your doorstep,’” says Roberts, who scoured the internet for new recipes. “We make different ones, that’s been the good thing – we’ve discovered new cocktails and found out a lot more about people on our street.”

Like Powlson, who sometimes halves the alcohol in a recipe, she says they are “relatively measured” about their intake. But having lost their sense of taste to Covid, spirits were one of the first things she and her doctor husband could taste again, and cocktails felt like “a celebratory thing” in dark times. Three units of alcohol is still three units, but drinking it from a pretty salt-rimmed glass feels more elegant. The rituals of muddling and measuring elevate it beyond the realms of just getting sloshed – even if that’s exactly what an alarming number of us have been doing.

The Rev Richard Coles, the radio presenter and author, recently lost his partner to alcohol addiction and, speaking to the Radio Times in June, warned against the “glamorisation” of booze, calling for TV dramas to bring “realism to a distorted picture” of “how we poison ourselves” with alcohol. More people die worldwide from alcohol than cocaine, he pointed out, reflecting the former’s status as a legal, socially acceptable and frequently romanticised drug.

Contrary to popular belief, alcohol consumption fell in England during the first lockdown and held steady in Scotland, according to a study from the Alcohol Research Group at the University of Sheffield. But headline figures conceal more complex individual stories. Andrew Misell of the charity Alcohol Change UK, which campaigns for better treatment for addicts – and for Britons to drink by considered choice not default – says about one-third of people drank more than normal in lockdown, with similar numbers drinking less and the rest seeing no change. But one in four adults in England and Scotland were already drinking over the chief medical officers’ low-risk guidelines of no more than 14 units pre-Covid, and Misell says it’s heavy drinkers who were more likely to increase their intake in the privacy of lockdown.

“There has always been a thing in this country about boasting about drinking,” he says. “It goes across the whole spectrum from blatant bragging about how smashed you were last night, through to more polite euphemisms and mock regret the next day.” Birthday cards revolve around beer, gin and prosecco jokes, while the high street is awash with booze-themed mugs, coasters and cushions. Over the past decade, says Misell, a popular culture that normalises overdoing it has merged with an online culture of glossing over negatives, which teaches us to share elegant pictures of clinking champagne flutes rather than ugly images of the morning after. “You have the perfect storm, which is the tendency of social media to make us want to present a much better version of ourselves than is actually true, along with our national tendency to make jokes about alcohol,” says Misell.

And all this happens in a commercial grey area where Facebook mums posting about #wineoclock rub shoulders with bars advertising happy hour, conventional brand adverts, and influencers plugging #sponsored content. Accounts like @onthesauceagain carry warnings that they’re for over-18s only, and use the #responsibledrinking hashtag; since her posts emphasise quality over quantity, Kukkamäki says she isn’t worried about her readers overdoing it. “When I drink cocktails, I can’t drink much – you maybe have two and that’s it.” But not everyone is so responsible.

The Advertising Standards Authority’s code on alcohol marketing – which bans the linking of booze to sex, violence, irresponsible behaviour or improved mood – applies to alcohol marketing online, and its reach does extend beyond conventional ads. In 2018, it rebuked the Scottish Gin Society (representing gin producers) for sharing Facebook memes including: “Shut up liver, you’re fine! Gin?” and: “I only drink gin on two occasions: when I’m thirsty and when I’m not thirsty”, prompting the organisation to complain of “po-faced, fun-free, nanny state judgment”.

But similarly booze-soaked content produced and shared by millions of ordinary users is virtually impossible to regulate, and that too can have an impact.

“We’re doing half the job of the alcohol marketing companies for them, because we’re the ones who share the pictures – the Aperol spritzes on holiday or whatever,” says the writer and sobriety campaigner Catherine Gray, whose 2017 bestseller The Unexpected Joys of Being Sober made the case for positively choosing not to drink. She hasn’t touched alcohol for almost eight years but says even she struggled early on with summery images of Pimm’s and strawberries, or ice-cold ciders in a beer garden.

When she first quit, she recalls, the most common response was pity. “It was: ‘Poor you, that must be terrible, what happened?’ It was still that very binary black-and-white thing of two types of drinkers: normal drinkers who get to carry on, woo hoo; and alcoholics who have to quit and live a terrible life. There was no other story.” Her new book, Sunshine Warm Sober, is however a paean to the longer-term pleasures of staying booze-free in a world she thinks is changing, where not-drinking is beginning to look aspirational too.

“In this country we treat alcohol like it’s another food group, an essential part of life – every teenager, it’s assumed they’re going to grow up to be drinkers,” says Gray. “But a lot of them aren’t now. Rates of drinking are even lower among generation Z than among millennials.” And lockdown may, she argues, have given more of the so-called “sober curious” – people flirting with quitting – a chance to stop without having to explain themselves to friends. Even the original 90s party animal Kate Moss is now teetotal, she points out, and the drinks industry is increasingly investing in alcohol-free brands to suit changing tastes. In a few decades’ time, Gray argues, boozing might become more like smoking; not the unthinking norm, but something a minority choose to do.

But if that idea is too much to swallow, perhaps Britons are at least beginning to recognise that there is more than one path to #goodtimes, leading to more honest conversations about how and why we drink. Who wouldn’t raise a glass to that?
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The last time I remember packing for a weekend away it was back in November 2019 and that was to go to Paris to see my uncle.

Thus it was that a recent three-night stay away saw us so unrehearsed for jaunts, we didn’t know what to pack, so we packed everything. The combination lock on the suitcase had long been forgotten, which wouldn’t have been an issue had someone not decided to lock it with all their clothes inside (if this is you, there is a Korean woman on the internet who can help you).

58% single origin chocolate, no palm oil but peanuts! D&Ds may well remind you of another peanut-based product

We headed to Snape Maltings, one of my favourite places, which sits near the Suffolk coast, just inland from Aldeburgh where all the trendies go. Snape Maltings has a small but lovely array of shops (and, of course, a wonderful concert hall) and it was here that Pump Street used to have an offshoot of its superb bakery. Sadly no more, but you can still buy its chocolate in a well-stocked deli section.

If you are expecting me to tell you about a new chocolate I discovered here, you will be disappointed. Instead I’m excited by what I brought with me, which was a new product, by Doisy and Dam: Peanut D&Ds, £1.99 for a grab bag of 80g, available from Holland & Barrett.

These are multicoloured little pebbles with a crunchy sugar coating, 58% single origin chocolate, no palm oil but, of course, peanuts! They may well remind you of another peanut-based product and they are no less moreish.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Jonnie’s Blade Camp

10pm, Channel 4

Ahead of the start of the delayed 2020 Paralympic Games in Tokyo, champion Paralympic sprinter Jonnie Peacock leads this two-part documentary series, beginning a year-long training camp to help five young amputees become sprinters. In this first part, Jonnie meets the five hopefuls and gets them started running a race with their prosthetic blades. A visit to the motion capture lab at Roehampton University then helps the kids work on their potential muscle weaknesses and imbalances. Ammar Kalia

The Secret Life of the Zoo

8pm, Channel 4

This week we meet a parrot with a 007 tag number but, unlike his namesake, James Bond the hyacinth macaw mates for life: he is currently mourning the late Miss Moneypenny. There’s less romance in the Malayan tapir enclosure, where 500kg Margery has been stealing her partner’s food. Ellen E Jones

Write Around the World With Richard E Grant

9pm, BBC Four

Who better to lead a literary travelogue than Grant, who looks – to borrow a phrase – as though he owns many leather-bound books, and has an apartment that smells of rich mahogany. This week, he retraces the steps of F Scott Fitzgerald, Alexandre Dumas and more in the south of France. Hannah J Davies

Black Monday

9pm, Sky Comedy

The long hangover continues in the uneven Wall Street comedy starring Don Cheadle and Regina Hall. Mo (Cheadle) is still trying to party like it’s 1987 – but is struggling to keep up with Nomi. Dawn (Hall) is going to absurd lengths to convince her parole officer that her job is what it seems. Phil Harrison

Daisy Maskell: Insomnia and Me

10.35pm, BBC One

The breakfast radio presenter investigates her lifelong struggle with insomnia in this documentary. Having survived on only a few hours of sleep for as long as she can remember, Maskell examines how Covid lockdowns may have exacerbated the problem. AK

The Devil’s Throat

11.05pm, Channel 4

This Bulgarian thriller is the latest of the Walter Presents foreign language acquisitions. When a body is discovered in the Rhodope mountains, detective Filip Chanov is dispatched to investigate. He identifies it as a retired police officer and a mutilation points towards a possible cult affiliation. PH

The Wild Bunch. Photograph: Allstar

Film choice

The Wild Bunch (10.45pm, TCM Movies)

Sam Peckinpah’s masterpiece: a glorious, bloody, elegiac western in which William Holden’s gang, out of time in Texas 1914, are drawn by their code of honour into a suicidal reckoning with despotic General Mapache. Robert Ryan is outstanding as the lawman forced to betray his old friends. Paul Howlett

Live sport

Cycling: Tour of Denmark 2.50pm, Eurosport 1. Stage one coverage from Struer to Esbjerg.



Cricket: Manchester Originals v London Spirit 6pm, BBC Two. The Hundred match live from Old Trafford.



Swedish Speedway 6pm, Premier Sports. Round 13 coverage of Elite League racing.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Silma and Binit had been married for two years when they found out they were expecting a “planned, unplanned” baby in December 2019. “We weren’t actively trying, but we knew we wanted to have a baby the following year,” says Silma, sitting in her garden in London. “So we were ecstatic. Really, really happy.” Everything was normal at the 12-week scan in January, and they felt ready to tell their friends, family and colleagues. Silma is a pharmacist at a busy London hospital; Binit works in finance.

Fast forward to March 2020; the day before the couple’s 20-week scan was scheduled, lockdown was announced. The local hospital they had booked in with had already been badly hit by Covid admissions, as well as staff shortages as medics were redeployed or self-isolating. “It was all a bit of a panic,” says Silma, “so I went in on my own, thinking – how naive it was of me to think this – I was there to find out if it was a boy or a girl. I didn’t even want to know, particularly. I had just always thought that’s what the 20-week scan was about.” Binit, who was not allowed to accompany Silma, was waiting outside. He is a softly spoken man who says as much about his feelings with his eyes and his silences as with his voice; he is clearly still traumatised by the memory of that wait.

Their baby, Mia, was moving too much for the sonographer to get a proper reading, but they could see enough to suspect a ventricular septal defect, or hole in the heart. As more tests were done over the coming days, more problems emerged: defects in the aorta, a potential problem with the aortic valve. Scanning for foetal anomalies is extremely advanced, and yet it can rarely deliver with absolute certainty what parents need to know: whether their baby will survive after birth, and for how long; how much surgery he or she will need, and what the success rates are.

Jane Fisher is the chief executive of Antenatal Results and Choices (ARC), which supports parents after scan findings. “Once you’ve put the probe on, you can’t unsee what you’ve seen,” she says. “You can’t unsee a brain defect – not fatal, but horrific, very, very minimal brain function.”

“Some foetal abnormalities will be not survivable,” says Dr Brenda Kelly, a consultant in obstetrics and fetomaternal medicine at Oxford University Hospitals NHS trust, “and in many respects, those are easier to work with. If you can see that the foetus has developed without kidneys, you know that’s incompatible with life. But ventriculomegaly [enlarged ventricles of the brain], what does that mean for future development?”

At least 5,000 pregnancies a year in the UK end in a termination for medical reasons (TFMR). Three pregnancy charities – ARC, Petals and Tommy’s – are trying to lift the taboo around the issue, after surveying more than 1,300 people who have been through the experience. Almost three-quarters didn’t feel their loss was treated like a miscarriage or stillbirth – they didn’t feel they would get the same compassion, or that they could talk openly about their experience. Afterwards, 87% felt guilty, 80% isolated. While grief is the unavoidable consequence of tragedy, the wall of silence makes everything worse.

“Terminations have always been the hidden part of this whole journey, the shameful bit we don’t really want to talk about,” says Karen Burgess, the founder of Petals, whose background as a counsellor in the field of pregnancy loss is audible in her deeply compassionate voice. “Then parents are sucked into that vacuum – they feel as though they have to hide away in shame.”

Samantha and Sam, from Bristol, discovered anomalies at a 17-week scan; it was later confirmed that their baby’s skull was not developing and she would not survive more than minutes if she went to term. Samantha, who had got pregnant naturally after a long struggle, while they were just about to embark on IVF, uses almost the same words as Silma: “At the 20-week scan, what can go wrong? You just find out whether you’re having a girl or a boy.”

Roughly half of couples don’t even know what anomalies a scan might reveal before they get a diagnosis. But Fisher believes the problem is not just a lack of public awareness. “Sonographers say: ‘If only they had better information, it would be all right.’ It wouldn’t be. Everyone is completely shattered by the reaction they have. We get a lot of calls from women who are really shocked by how shocked they feel. They feel like it undermines the unconditionality of their love. That it’s still their baby. That they should still love it. There are women who feel like their whole identity has collapsed.”

Suddenly, couples find themselves in a world of diagrams and complicated terminology, odds that can’t map neatly on to emotions. Kelly has to deliver bad news to parents “at least one Monday a month. It’s like the policeman’s knock in the middle of the night. Part of you is doing a jigsaw puzzle – you’re picking up the bits and pieces to make a diagnosis and you’re trying to work out what the next test is going to be. Part of you is walking up a path, at three in the morning, dead of night, and you know that as soon as the door opens, you’ll crush the parents with the news you’re going to give them.”

Depending on the accuracy of the estimated due date, and the battery of further tests, time is often now very short. Twenty-four weeks is the legal limit for most terminations in the UK (except for Northern Ireland, where a termination between 12 and 24 weeks can only be performed if there’s a severe risk to the mother). After that, termination is still legal if there is a “substantial risk of significant handicap”, which would be for a doctor to decide.

Silma and Binit were already further along than they thought – 22 weeks at the 20-week scan – waiting for genetic test results that would take 10 working days. The picture looked bleak: not only did Mia have congenital heart defects, but cardiologists also expected problems with her lungs. Binit recalls being told about the possible outcomes, and thinking: “Fine, there might be an x% chance of the baby surviving all the surgeries and leading a normal life, but what if it’s not that? What if she’s the per cent that doesn’t make it through the open heart surgery?” Covid added a layer of uncertainty, as communications between departments got lost in the chaos, and labs were overwhelmed processing coronavirus tests. “My fear was getting lost in the system because of all the Covid issues,” Silma says.

“On the psychological side,” Fisher says, “people’s capacity for dealing with uncertainty was really impacted by the pandemic background. They may have been able to cope with a bit of uncertainty, but it was just too much.”

Silma and Binit decided to terminate their pregnancy on the weekend of the 22nd week. On the Monday, Silma went into work; after all, she was still a pharmacist, and her team had never been so busy.

“On Tuesday, we went to the hospital thinking everything would happen then, and it would be over and done with within the next day or so. And they said: ‘You did know that you have to have an injection into her heart, to stop her heart beating?’ And I said: ‘No, no one explained that to me.’”

This is a very common experience for couples having what’s known as a medical termination, Burgess says. “There’s not enough information about what it means. They’re going to go through labour and birth a baby. That has a massive impact; the woman is often not ready for that. The partner will then say: ‘I don’t want that – there must be something else that can be done.” So then they go through what they call a surgical termination, which a lot of hospitals can’t provide. So then the woman has to go and find an abortion clinic.”

Kelly says: “These things aren’t discussed in a public arena because people find them distasteful.” The “most difficult part” of the process, she adds, is stopping the baby’s heartbeat. “It is just unspeakably tragic, for families who desperately wanted that child.”

Counsellors in the field generally agree that, if the hospital has the right level of support, the right facilities – a bereavement suite to labour in, so women don’t have to be among women who are carrying healthy pregnancies to term – a medical termination is better, psychologically, than a surgical one. But that’s a lot of ifs, and there is an unspeakable amount of trauma and distress either way. When Silma went in to deliver Mia, they didn’t even know if Binit would be allowed to be with her; it was up to the staff on the day (in the event, he was). Neither remembers the labour clearly – to Binit “it was a blur”; “I was completely numb,” Silma says. They could hear other women having their babies, or walking out with them. Mia died on 3 April and they said goodbye the following morning, a moment Silma starts to describe before being overwhelmed. Binit takes over, looking at Silma. “It was tough, seeing her. You couldn’t let go. It was really hard.”

Samantha, similarly, went through a medical abortion, and afterwards “we went into our shell. Obviously we’d told our parents and very close friends, but I hadn’t openly told loads of people that I had a termination, I just said: ‘We lost the baby.’ I don’t really know why. And does it matter? At the end of the day, you lost your baby.”

Silma and Binit “were open with everyone”, he says, and Silma’s colleagues in particular were a rich source of support. “It’s very different from if you’ve had a miscarriage or a stillbirth,” Silma says. “It’s not a natural death. You’ve ended your own baby’s life. I think that guilt was probably most intense after the postmortem and the funeral but for me, it was when we started the counselling that I acknowledged it and we only really started processing what had happened then.”

If anything, the taboo around termination for medical reasons has got more, rather than less intense, with views particularly polarised around Down’s syndrome, which accounts for 20% of TFMRs. Most of the people who get a Down’s diagnosis do still terminate, and many feel boxed into silence afterwards. “This raises a challenge for all of us,” Kelly says, “to try and help families break the taboo. It has to come from the profession as much as from the women who are brave enough to speak openly about their own experiences.”

A grief that is unspeakable is very isolating, never more than when parents go into a subsequent, successful pregnancy. “The number of times they will have triggering events,” Kelly says, “whether it’s a scan, or a throwaway remark. They can’t speak about a previous pregnancy, nor do they feel that they even deserve to have a subsequent pregnancy. Often I’m the first and only person they can have that conversation with. So the complexity of their grief and trauma is enormous.”

More than that, the overriding fear shared by Silma and Binit and Samantha and Sam was that their healthy baby would make them and others forget the baby they lost. Samantha is 33 weeks pregnant, and says: “When people lose babies, people may think they don’t want to talk about it. But actually if someone asks me about my baby, I do want to talk about her. I’m coming up to almost a year after losing her, and now I’ve got another baby on the way. You worry that people are going to forget about your first baby.”

“My main concern,” Silma says, “was that if we did get pregnant again after Mia, would we stop thinking about her? Would we be able to keep her memory alive?” Silma and Binit had a beautiful baby girl in June. “I think that she has a lot of Mia’s traits,” Silma says.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Which sport gives you the best all-round skill set/fitness regime? James Bunwell, Droitwich Spa

Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com.

Readers reply

No sport demands as much endurance and athleticism as Ultimate Frisbee. Richard Wallace

I want to give my vote to modern pentathlon. It requires good all-around fitness in the legs and the arms because of the swimming and running. And it requires great skill and accuracy in the pistol shooting. It is also the sport that tests most for emotional intelligence, in that you have to convince a horse not to throw you into a fence after a 20-minute “getting to know you session”. Gregory Butler, Canada

Snooker! Top-class snooker requires not only strategic intelligence (and control), but also the ability to adopt an almost yoga-like meditative state of pure concentration, a very high level of hand-eye coordination and posture control necessitating a degree of general physical fitness. Tom McMaster, Ayamonte, Spain

Gymnastics must be in with a shout: strength, speed, agility, coordination, technical skills and explosive power are all right up there. I think the only question is stamina, so rugby (league, obviously) would be high on the list; decathlon, too. littlepump

Cycling is good and accessible, but for a full-body workout I’d say rowing. Sculling, rather than sweep, if you want to work both sides equally. Develops the back, core, legs, arms and balance, too. AramintaFlapdoodle

Cricket. It has the world’s best all-rounders. ThereisnoOwl

It would have to be darts. Balancing a pint in one hand, cigarette in the other, not to mention the requisite aim, accuracy and precision to hit 180. Takes nerves of steel. Waterdam

Surfing. Being in nature, water fitness, agility, balance, microsecond decision-making, spatial awareness, stamina, flexibility, strength, fairly low risk of injury, patience, social rules (unless taking on big-wave surfing, which is almost an expert subgenre), excitement, serotonin boost, adrenaline boost, camaraderie. And, of course, on an existential level, you are riding natural energy waves that arise through natural action and fade into nothing once you have ridden them, without harming or displacing anything. wisedum

Rugby. Athletic fitness aside, you learn teamwork, sportsmanship and respect: you treat players and supporters of other teams as friends – at least, that has been my experience at rugby sevens competitions around the world. Naturally, there are exceptions, but not many, and I don’t apologise for being an idealist. clogexpat

If you are looking for something a little less strenuous, try archery. It’s good for upper-body muscle strength and improves posture and breathing. It’s also good fun and gets you out in the summer. There is an indoor winter season, so it keeps you going all-year round. Ages range from nine to 90 and you don’t have to be in competition to enjoy it. Many who feel too old for other sports can take up archery just to maintain fitness and enjoy themselves. FirbobLondon

I seem to be on an island with this one, but definitely squash. The higher the level, the better, as watching the ball go by does one little good. As an avid cyclist, doing 30-40km excursions regularly, I appreciate the benefits derived, but in no way does that prepare one for the likes of a tough squash match, or even tennis or running. And it’s not at all elitist; there are accessible courts everywhere. Love the game, best shape ever. 44N79W

I played roller derby for a number of years and think that was excellent for developing strength, agility, balance, coordination. And, as you are playing offence and defence concurrently, it is an excellent mental challenge. Plus, you are part of a team, so have to work together. It is a bit of a niche sport, but I can highly recommend trying it out. SassySparkles

I’d suggest some form of martial art such as judo, taekwondo or aikido. dfic1999

Rowing: provides opportunities for the development of speed, strength, balance, agility; it’s a good cardio workout; and you have to be good in the water. Good for social skills, cooperation and teamwork – and you get to do it sitting down. QuakerBetty

Australian climber Amy Dunlop on the Dentist 5.12b, Yangshuo, near Guilin in China. Photograph: Adam Pretty/Getty Images for LUMIX

Rock climbing works every part of the body, takes you into nature and requires enormous self-control. It does everything. Sithrak

I heard about a study done years ago and I believe it was Aussie rules football that came out on top. Anaerobic and aerobic fitness, strength, stamina, coordination, communication, etc. They are brilliant athletes. crosby99

Swimming is the top sports in terms of health, fitness, wellbeing. The best strokes are the front and back crawl. Swimming is therapeutic and provides excellent benefits for all ages. If you’re into more tough stuff, try other strokes. Finian2U

Swimming is for life. Take up water polo and triathlons if you want more action and excitement when you are younger, but maintain your health and fitness for life with swimming in a pool or outdoors when you are older. responsiblefuftysix

Cross-country skiing is all at once: cardio, strength, flexibility and balance. No impact, you only need snow. Swimming is second, all the above and no impact on the skeleton. LakeMacdonald

I’d suggest sport climbing. Once you move past the strength, balance and flexibility required, you also need logic/puzzle-solving to work out how best to “read” the wall, ie some holds only give you grip if your body is positioned in a certain way. Plus, all the walls I’ve been to have a great atmosphere, with people working together to solve harder climbs. Hofmax

Gardening – and you get to eat the fruits of your efforts. Geodiversity

Trampolining: you get out of breath and develop muscle strength, endurance and joint flexibility; it’s a soft landing surface, so less severe on joints. The only missing factor is skill in control of an external object. I suggest badminton/tennis while on a trampoline! nevill63

Ice hockey: power, strength, speed, hand-eye coordination. Plus, everything happens 50% faster on ice (assuming you know how to skate), so the need for quickness and sharp reflexes is higher than in other sports. Quaternion

I suspect professional boxers are the fittest and most skilful athletes that there are. IanRod65

Great question and one that I, a PE teacher, often think about. Almost every sport helps develop skills for performance and depends heavily on at least one skill set or fitness type. My opinion is that the sheer number of variables, the angle of degrees of action around you, and the fact that there are so many open situations that you have to prepare for and try to do your best in means that team invasion games probably create the best kind of all-round athletes. happytobealive

Mountain unicycling combined with archery. It is a thing. arthurducksworthy

Caber tossing: requires strength, hand-eye coordination, speed, rhythm, determination and patience. Markymarkmark

The 2021 Motocross world championship in Krasnodar, Russia. Photograph: Dmitry Feoktistov/Tass

There’s an interesting/unexpected quote by Jeff Spencer, a former Olympic cyclist involved in training motocross riders: “Motocross by far requires the highest level of combined fitness of any sport on the face of the Earth, bar none. I’ve spent five Tours de France with Lance Armstrong, and Lance is no slouch. But Lance’s overall fitness doesn’t even compare to the overall fitness of a motocross racer.” pentimenti

Wrestling: learning how to fight with skill and not emotion is the basis for adult life in a world of conflict. It prepares you to be level-headed with violence and cool in conflict. These life skills are invaluable. As there is no striking, it’s not a brain-injury sport, nor one that can leave you with life-changing injuries, like gymnastics. onticmendacium

There was a TV programme in the 70s where different sports people competed against each other. Seem to remember pole vaulters did well all round. Also remember cricketers were fairly useless. OldGreyWolf

You’re presumably thinking of Superstars. Golfers were really bad. I don’t recall any particular skill or physicality patterns emerging. Rather, the ones who did best were characterised most of all by their competitiveness. WheneverIFeelBlue62

Boxing: fitness, balance, speed, skills and physical courage/confidence. Table tennis: renowned as a rehab tool for brain injuries/diseases – there must be something to it. karlrgibson

No one seems to have suggested biathlon: cross-country skiing combined with target shooting. Top-level cross-country skiers are renown as having the highest aerobic capacities of any athlete, plus as an exercise it provides all-round body conditioning. It’s also a technical sport in that it requires balance, coordination and body awareness to develop an efficient technique. Combine that with the ability to take breaks in the strenuous endurance course to stand still and shoot accurately, which requires strength and control, and you have a sport that requires a host of different skills and types of fitness. Drspeedy

There was some research done a while ago that said mountain biking was the most effective cross-training activity. Rugby league – toughest sport in terms of running fitness and repetitive strength, outright strength, stamina, power and aerobic fitness – must be up there. Throw in spatial awareness and proprioception, too. rhinodan

I’d say capoeira. Cardio, agility, flexibility, acrobatics, plus you have to be able to play it in a clever manner to anticipate your opponent’s response. Add the cultural, sociable and musical side and you have it all. You also tend to pick up Portuguese as a byproduct. ClodLo

Motor racing. All the athletic stuff, plus pain management, fundraising, engineering, problem-solving, sponsorship management, team management, camping and tea-drinking under less than perfect conditions. Cheesyrider
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Name: Happy retirees.

Age: Well, as you know, people retire at different ages, typically from about 60 onwards.

And they are happier then? They can be.

Because they no longer work, presumably. That could be one reason.

But [looks down] they can’t be happy about what’s happening to them physically. Well, that’s where you’re wrong.

Really? Go on. A recently published study has found that body satisfaction increases with age.

Pah, what, a study of some incredibly fit 60-year-olds? No, it’s a survey of more than 15,000 men and women aged between 18 and 94 in New Zealand, over the course of six years, published in Body Image, an international, peer-reviewed journal that publishes scientific articles on, well, body image.

And what exactly are the findings of this one? That body satisfaction increases as you get older.

No way! Well, actually, men’s body image is relatively stable – and consistently higher than women’s. But for women, it fluctuates over a lifetime, eventually increasing the older they get.

Is that because by the time you get to 60, what you look like is the least of your worries? Well, yes, there are more important things than looks.

Is that what you tell your partner? Shh. And it’s not just about body image. We may actually get increasingly happier into our 80s.

Says who? The author Daniel Levitin. He says in his book The Changing Mind: A Neuroscientist’s Guide to Ageing Well, which highlights research carried out by eminent economists David Blanchflower and Andrew Oswald, that people reach their happiness peak at 82.

So we don’t just forget things and get depressed? Not according to Levitin. “We now have strong evidence in the last 10 years that a number of brain faculties actually get better, right on up till the end,” Levitin said on Radio 2.

By which token, Clint Eastwood, say, who’s 91, would be as happy as Larry. Dirty Larry maybe … Funny you should say that – Levitin consulted Eastwood for his book.

Go ahead, make my day: what did Clint say? “I just don’t let the old man in.”

Do say: “Life, it’s like a fine wine …” You know how the rest goes.

Don’t say: “It’s ’cos they’re Kiwis – with their lovely PM, and all the scenery – it’s not exactly surprising they’ve learned to love their own bodies.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Which sport gives you the best all-round skill set/fitness regime? James Bunwell, Droitwich Spa

Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@From 2002

Dear Mariella, I just wanted to let you know that not long after your column started I wrote to you. I was in utter despair as my husband had left and I think I was having a breakdown. I thought at the time your reply was quite harsh. However, you were right, I did need to get a grip and concentrate on my children.

Years later, everything worked out in the end, I became stronger, we sorted out our relationship properly and we have been happy. Yes there have been ups and downs and our son, who was not quite two when I wrote to you, was later diagnosed with a very rare and serious condition. There is nothing like having a sick child to put everything in perspective and we have totally focused on doing everything we can to get him the best help and support. He is now 10 and doing well at the moment.

After the past few years, despite the pain and heartbreak, I feel as strong as an ox and I have learned so much about myself. Thank you for helping me all those years ago. I needed to wake up – and I did.

2008

Dear Mariella, I wanted to get back in touch with regards to a letter of mine you responded to in 2008. I mentioned that I’d thought of killing myself. Obviously I’m not dead, but I wanted to say that I’m better, I’m happy, and nothing I feared has come to pass.

I wanted to say thanks. I took your advice to heart and I kept a diary of my progress, which I’m still updating after so many years. Looking back on it I can see how much I’ve grown up; how strange and irrational those times were. Looking forward I can see how much I’m growing, how much more I want to learn and explore. I want to live.

2014

Dear Mariella, your response to a 16-year-old girl experiencing depression moved me greatly. I am head of year at a secondary school and it seems that every week I am dealing with a teenager who is experiencing a mental health problem. I fear that recent cuts have caused havoc for many of our students and often I feel powerless that my advice is half-baked. (The training courses I have been on never capture the raw vulnerability that teenagers with mental health problems feel.) I often go home feeling angry and frustrated that I cannot do more to help. Your response was refreshing, thought-provoking and, more importantly, full of compassion. I hope you don’t mind, but I will be plagiarising your advice!

2014

Dear Mariella, I’m writing to say thank you very much for your thoughtful reply. I am normally very cynical about the internet and the false, too-easy sense of immediate connection that interactions over it can be imbued with – but it has been very important to me, reading not just your response, but the replies of other readers on the website. Something that didn’t even occur to me was that there might be men out there who might reply, and suggest what my boyfriend might think of me telling him my story – boyfriends and husbands who knew and loved other women who’d been raped.

Lots of answers seemed to come from women who had chosen to tell, and had regretted it, but I don’t think there was a single response from a male reader who said anything except that they were glad their partners had told them. I found that very comforting.

This has been truly meaningful for me.

2016

Dear Mariella, I had wanted to write to say thank you for your column for a number of years, but have never found the right moment. I was in an emotionally, and sometimes physically, abusive relationship for six years and never felt brave enough to leave. Your column helped a lot throughout this time, and your sensible, straightforward advice on many issues slowly spurred me on to make the changes that I found so difficult. It seemed like you were sitting in my living room with a glass of wine, giving some harsh but much needed advice.

Anyway, I left and I have never looked back. In this time I have completed my formal education, found a wonderful, kind man who makes me laugh and we have just found out we are expecting a baby. Whoop whoop!

2016

Dear Mariella, I’ve just read your response to the dilemma, “My ex-wife is angry…” I did so as another way to beat myself – I’m an ex-wife, and I’m sure as hell angry with my ex, who could easily be the man who wrote in. I thought perhaps it would be salutary to see things from the ex-husband’s point of view. I’m so pleased you pulled that man up on his constant self-referencing, and politely but firmly told him his attitude was plain wrong. Thank you. After a shitty weekend of narcissistic male behaviour and runaway preteens, and me constantly at home, on my own, waiting to put the children back together again, it has truly perked me up. I feel validated.

2020

Dear Mariella, I felt compelled to let you know how much I enjoy reading your column on dealing with life’s and love’s many challenges. You always write with such eloquence and thoughtfulness (and not little humour), to provide balanced and, if necessary, hard-hitting advice to those who seek it. Many of the responses you’ve written have resonated with me. I often read them, then return later.

Thank you, too, for reminding me that the daily challenges we each face in life are often mirrored in those encountered by so many others.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I had gender reassignment surgery in the late 2000s, and while I had been sexually active prior to this, I had always imagined what it would be like to have sex as a woman for the first time. I had pictured a whirlwind romance or a hotel room, or maybe even a seedy club. What actually happened was altogether more intriguing.

At the time I was a keen photographer, and was also beginning to explore the kink scene. These interests intersected when a couple asked if I wanted to photograph their new dungeon equipment for them. At this point no sexual high jinks were on my mind, just a two-hour train journey across a sodden Lancashire and a warm cup of tea at the end. But when I arrived, the man and woman were charming and interesting, and ended up asking if I’d be keen to try the equipment.

Things progressed and I lost my second virginity in the course of two hours of blissful hedonism. How did it compare with losing my “first” virginity? It was certainly more memorable. As a man, I found sex to be very urgent, almost like scratching an itch. Having sex as a woman felt more all-encompassing. Not really knowing my sexual self in my reconfigured body should have set me on edge, but the couple were kind, patient and very good at what they did. More than a decade later, I still look back on the memory with fondness.

Each week, a reader tells us about their sex life. Want to share yours? Email sex@theguardian.com. All submissions are published anonymously, and subject to our terms and conditions.

Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussions remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Through the palms and out to the ocean at historic manor house turned hotel Quinta da Bela Vista. Jet2holidays offers full holiday packages with hotel, free transfers, 22kg baggage and direct flights to Madeira from London Stansted, Newcastle, Manchester, Leeds Bradford, East Midlands, Birmingham, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Bristol. Its award-winning customer service has been recognised by Which? (best airline) and TripAdvisor (top 10 airlines of the world)
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@That Madeira airport’s runway sits on a purpose-built stilted platform above the ocean tells you a lot about the island. Scarcely an inch of it is flat; rather, it’s a place of plunging, vertiginous extremes. It is, says local-born Luís Fernandes, “a magic island”.

Hailing from the village of Jardim da Serra, north of Câmara de Lobos, Fernandes knows Madeira’s wild places better than most. He is Madeira’s most successful trail runner. “In my childhood, I lived close to the mountains,” he says. “Being in nature was always my best place. We’d go running up the trails in the spring for cherries and apples. And we’d run between the vines, grabbing grapes. It was fun – the best hobby.”

However, Fernandes only started running properly in his mid-20s. He placed second in his first race in 2012 and, in 2015, became the first local winner of the Madeira Island Ultra Trail (MIUT), a 70-mile island-crossing epic that is one of Portugal’s toughest races and which has grown, from humble beginnings, to become a notable fixture on the Ultra-Trail World Tour circuit.

The increased popularity of the MIUT reflects the changing identity of an island known for appealing to newlyweds and retirees. A different generation is discovering Madeira’s adventurous side, from its gnarly mountain bike tracks to, of course, its trail running potential. “We see a lot of younger people now,” says Fernandes. “They want to get into nature. And everyone is surprised by Madeira – almost every trail is astonishing.”

There are trails everywhere: amid the jagged mountains; along the network of centuries-old levadas (irrigation channels); through to the rare Unesco-listed laurel forests. “But I don’t have one favourite part of the island,” says Fernandes. “It’s the mix. When you’re running in the mountains and at the same time you see the ocean – it’s a feeling I can’t put into words.”

Fernandes’s top trails



For first-timers

Madeira has routes for everyone – from easy levadas to steep trails to make your heart pound. The Vereda do Larano, a path cut into the cliffs on the island’s east coast, is good for everyone. You get to experience everything Madeira has to offer: farming areas, water channels, mountain views, the ocean. The route from Porto da Cruz to Machico via the Larano is 9 miles and is the last stage of the MIUT.

The Vereda do Larano; view from the cliffs of the Ponta de São Lourenço

For two oceans

Ponta de São Lourenço is Madeira’s easternmost peninsula. The trail here is short (5 miles, out and back), but up and down. You can see both sides of the island at the same time: on the north, the ocean is very aggressive; the south is calm. There’s no large vegetation but lots of flowers, depending on the season, and rocks of many colours.

For island highs

I love running between some of the island’s highest points: Pico Ruivo (1,861 metres) and Pico do Arieiro (1,818 metres). The trail between them, crossing part of the central massif, is about 7.5 miles, with many stairs and steep drops, so not good for people with vertigo. I like to go at sunrise; the clouds often sit between 1,300 and 1,800 metres, so you run through fog, then find it clear at the top and see the sun above the clouds.

Pico Ruivo; hiking along the Pico do Arieiro trail; the Fanal forest and Risco waterfall

For atmospheric forest

Fanal is a high plateau area covered in laurel forest. It’s so green, so wild – especially when it’s foggy. It’s like being in Jurassic Park. There are lots of trails here. You can run up from the coast town of Porto Moniz or up the Chão da Ribeira, a valley above Seixal. Take care, though – it’s easy to get lost.

For fountains

Rabaçal is the starting point for the Levada das 25 Fontes (about 7.5 miles). It’s named this because there’s a lagoon at the end where you can count 25 springs coming out of the rock. It’s lovely, just listening to the water and the birds.

View of the pass at Boca da Encumeada

For tunnel running

There’s a beautiful circuit, about 11 miles, starting from the Boca da Encumeada, a 1,007-metre pass in the middle of the island. You have everything on this trail: water channels, volcanic parts, mossy forest, waterfalls. It’s similar to the Amazon. You also have old tunnels to pass through, so bring a head torch.

For training

Sometimes trails can be hard to navigate, but in Porto da Cruz it’s easy: from the village there are three circular trail running courses (5 miles, 11 miles, 21 miles), marked with signs. These are good training runs. I prepare for races here: I start by the ocean, run to the Ribeiro Frio, do a few kilometres by the water channels, go up to Poiso (1,400 metres), and then come back down to the ocean.

The spectacular point at Porto do Cruz

For the ultimate adventure

I love to run the course of the MIUT over three days. I start from Porto Moniz and do 46km with 3,700 metres uphill; I love this part, with its mix of forests and views. Day two, I run about 26 miles from Encumeada, passing Curral das Freiras (Valley of the Nuns) and other deep valleys, and go up to the highest points. On the third day, I run from Ribeiro Frio down to the sea at Machico. It’s very difficult but so beautiful.

The town of Machico – a perfect spot to enjoy regional cuisine and wine

And for refuelling

I like to eat at Bar e Restaurante Portela À Vista, in Machico. You feel at home here. The owner prepares typical food such as espetadas, chunks of meat cooked on skewers on the fire. It’s the best location: you’re in the middle of nature. Sometimes it can get quite foggy, but I love it because it reminds you that you’re in the mountains.

Jet2holidays offers full holiday packages with hotel, free transfers, 22kg baggage and direct flights to Madeira from London Stansted, Newcastle, Manchester, Leeds Bradford, East Midlands, Birmingham, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Bristol. Its award-winning customer service has been recognised by Which? (best airline) and TripAdvisor (top 10 airlines of the world).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I visited Madeira for the first time 25 years ago. I came here for my girlfriend, but also because it’s a beautiful island. It’s not too hot, not too cold, and the weather is always good. It rains very little in Funchal, where we live. It’s very easy to be happy here.

It’s a small island with approximately 250,000 inhabitants, but the gastronomic culture is very impressive, and it’s easy to understand why. Madeira was colonised by families from different parts of the world. In one area, you’ll find Moroccans; in another, people from the north of Portugal, so there are communities that eat couscous and others who love dried fish. It’s that huge plurality that makes Madeira so special.

Tourism is within Madeira’s DNA, and its gastronomy is developing as young chefs open restaurants and tourists are up for trying new things. Roughly 10 years ago, British tourists wanted to eat fish and chips because that’s what they were comfortable with, so it was difficult for chefs to do something different. Now we get young people who travel all over the world and want to try new things as well as the typical and traditional food.

What’s really cool right now is that local chefs are returning to Madeira. Typically, all the good cooks leave Portugal to train abroad for higher salaries, but because of Covid, people are coming back to the island. We just hired a Madeiran cook at one of my restaurants who worked for Heston Blumenthal at the Fat Duck. People are choosing a better quality of life.

Local produce

Madeira has extremely good seafood, and the fruit and vegetables are out of this world. While elsewhere in Europe you might get one potato harvest a year, in Madeira we have several production cycles.

Pitanga, tangerines and sweet potatoes are island specialities

Pitanga (surinam cherry) is a little red berry that’s very acidic but also very sweet. It makes a really interesting reaction in your mouth.

The local tangerines are the best and most fragrant you’ll find anywhere in the world. I would happily spritz tangerine perfume on my neck.

Our sweet potatoes are unbelievable. Madeira used to be a volcano, so it’s very volcanic. They pull the sweet potatoes out of the ground then leave them in the sun, which intensifies the sugars. They’re incredibly sweet and unique.

The leaves and flowers of vegetables, such as cabbage and turnip, are extremely tasty here. They grow fast, so the leaves are tender and flavoursome.

Limpets can be served with garlic butter, lemon juice, or on their own

Lapas (limpets) are cooked with their shells facing downwards. Some restaurants add garlic butter or lemon juice. I like to eat them on their own – a pure taste of the sea.

Pereira’s picks

The first thing you should do when you get off the plane is a guided tour at Blandy’s Wine Lodge to learn the history of Madeira and how difficult it is to work in agriculture here. There are no machines, no tractors. Everything is done by hand because the terrain is so steep.

Blandy’s Wine Lodge

One of the places I love to go is a restaurant called O Clássico. As the name suggests, it’s very classic and the waiters wear bow ties. You can get really good octopus rice here.

There’s a lot of competition for traditional espetadas (kebabs) but, for me, it has to be Restaurante Viola. The place is beautiful and the food, too. Order the beef kebabs with fried cornmeal.

Mediterranean and Asian food to share and an unbeatable view at Avista

Il Gallo d’Oro is a two-Michelin-star fine dining restaurant at The Cliff Bay hotel, run by chef Benoît Sinthon. They work with fresh, high-quality ingredients from the area. Also at The Cliff Bay under Sinthon is Avista restaurant, which specialises in Mediterranean and Asian food for sharing. The view of the ocean is incredible.

Madeira is blessed with excellent seafood

Finally, MaréAlta in Machico beach is a wonderful place – the fish and seafood are excellent.

Pereira’s restaurants – and what to order

I have three concepts: Kampo, for meat and vegetables; Ákua, for seafood and fish; and Kôdea, a bakery.

Kampo

The name comes from “campo” (“countryside” in Portuguese), because that’s the cuisine I’m most comfortable with. I was born into a farming family in Carvoeiro, a small village on the west coast of Portugal. We want people to try as many new flavours, textures and experiences as possible. Try the popular open oxtail ravioli with foie gras mousse and truffle, then finish with the yoghurt and white chocolate mousse with black olives. kampo.pt

Each of Pereira’s restaurants has a different theme, but they share bread from his bakery: ‘We put a lot of effort into our bread and desserts because the beginning and the end of a meal are so important’

Ákua

We opened Ákua six months after Kampo, specialising in seafood. One of our signature dishes is the tuna tartare cornet. Madeira has incredibly good tuna – among the best in the world. In Portugal, we also have a strong sardine tradition, so we serve them marinated in sea water and vinegar, with aubergine, passionfruit sauce and tomatoes – outside-the-box but interesting. akuafunchal.pt

Kôdea

Bread is a signature at both our restaurants, which is why we opened a bakery. We make a sourdough using flours that are very balanced in terms of acidity. It’s bread made by chefs, not by bakers, so it’s very light and different. We put a lot of effort into our bread and desserts because the beginning and the end of a meal are so important. People like to be welcomed with a hug and then leave with that “wow” feeling. instagram.com/kodeabakery

Jet2holidays offers full holiday packages with hotel, free transfers, 22kg baggage and direct flights to Madeira from London Stansted, Newcastle, Manchester, Leeds Bradford, East Midlands, Birmingham, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Bristol. Its award-winning customer service has been recognised by Which? (best airline) and TripAdvisor (top 10 airlines of the world).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hillsides covered in tropical fruit trees, pummelling waterfalls, rocky cliffsides plunging into the Atlantic: the Portuguese archipelago of Madeira is home to one of the world’s most breathtaking landscapes. Throw in some affable locals, an eternal spring-like temperature, hip surf spots, above-cloud hikes and idyllic wild swimming spots, and you’ve got yourself one of the coolest island destinations in Europe. Here’s why you should hit the “pearl of the Atlantic” – and what to do when you get there.

Uncover wild swimming hotspots

Those who prefer to do a bit of breaststroke surrounded by nature (and away from chlorinated pools) will want to explore Maderia’s natural bodies of water. The most famous being the photogenic lava pools in the north-west of the island at Porto Moniz and Seixal, where swimmers enjoy clear seawater pools formed by the Atlantic Ocean lapping into ancient volcanic rock. Poça do Gomes is a more organised place to take a dip near the capital city of Funchal: think sunbeds, lifeguards, staircases offering ocean access and cute natural rock pools. Another bathing area popular with locals is Poço dos Chefes – a rocky pool created by locals in the Valley of the Nuns.

Hike above the clouds

It would be unforgivable to visit Madeira and not hike one of its stunning levadas. Once used to transport water from the wet north to the drier south, these irrigation tunnels, that span 1,900 miles, are now used as hiking trails. There are more than 200 in total, with each offering something different – some take you under waterfalls, others cut into mountains via tunnels you’ll have to crouch through, while others tiptoe above the clouds along narrow peaks, skirting around hair-raising cliffs and descending into pretty villages.

Madeira’s ample hiking opportunities include the Levada do Paul, Levada do Rei and Pico do Arieiro

The Pico do Arieiro hike is the most well-known and, on a clear day, offers spellbinding views across the island. Although it’s only a little more than 4 miles long, it’s one of the more challenging as you’ll be hiking at an elevation of 1,500 metres at points. If you’d prefer something less calf-crunching, try the Levada das 25 Fontes, which takes you to a host of stunning waterfalls – a good option for families. You can hike the levadas alone, but it’s best to go with an experienced guide as the weather can change quickly and getting lost is a real possibility.

Discover magical beaches

Madeira has an abundance of superb beaches, one of the best being Prainha do Caniçal – a quaint, craggy cove with a wind-battered snack bar, sandy beach and calm waters. Seixal, in the north of the island, is another popular spot and is famous for its photogenic black sand and dramatic green Jurassic Park-esque cliffs. Pebbly beaches are common in Madeira, so if you’re comfortable with something harder underfoot, Ponta do Sol is a good option. The sunny cove, located on the south-west of the island, comes with an Italian riviera-like charm, a lively beach bar and tranquil waters prime for swimming. Recently it became the world’s first village for digital nomads, so don’t be surprised if you see bronzed millennials beachside stooped over their laptops while sipping ponchas (sugar cane syrup with sugar orange or lemon juice).

Ride big waves

Serious surfers have plenty of places to carve up big waves in Madeira, with Jardim do Mar the island’s best-known. Once named the best big-wave point break on the planet by Surfer magazine, it’s attracted many professional surfers over the years. Nearby Paul do Mar is another popular spot for advanced surfers, thanks to its reliable surf and glassy cylindrical waves. Porto da Cruz and Machico are more beginner-friendly, offering accessible waves, sand and rock-bottom reefs and affordable surf schools. Paddleboarding is a less adrenaline-filled option for those who prefer a calmer on-water experience. A host of companies operate guided tours, such as AroundFreedom and Madeira Experience.

Paddleboarding at Porto Moniz; surfing the break at Jardim do Mar

Catch rays year-round

The “island of eternal spring” has an annual average temperature of about 19.4C, though it teeters above and below depending on the season (summers are warmer; winters cooler). The weather also depends on where you are on the island, thanks to an abundance of microclimates. Funchal, Madeira’s capital, is pretty consistent – warm and bright with some showers. The south-west coast (Madalena do Mar, Ponta do Sol, Arco da Calheta and Calheta) is the sunniest area, while the north (Ponta do Pargo, Porto Moniz, São Vicente) is slightly cooler and wetter. Still, you can usually find sunshine somewhere on the island regardless of the season – and you can get from one side of the broadest part of the island to the next in just over an hour by car.

Stay in fairytale settings

Stay in a traditional quinta (country house) with breathtaking views and lush gardens, such as Quinta da Bela Vista, a 19th-century manor house set in eight acres of gardens, or hit the spa at Castanheiro Boutique Hotel – both overlooking capital city Funchal. Nature lovers can choose to sleep under the stars in one of the island’s camping or glamping spots, or stay at sustainable icon Sentido Galomar, a coastal hotel in Caniço that’s 100% energy self-sufficient. For a splurge, the Savoy Palace is one of the most esteemed hotels, known for its cruise ship-like structure, an array of restaurants, pools and opulent rooms designed by renowned Madeiran interior designer, Nini Andrade Silva.

The Old Town of Funchal and Quinta da Bela Vista hotel

Explore the Atlantic Ocean

One way to see a different side of Madeira is via the Atlantic Ocean that surrounds it. Take a kayak and snorkelling tour around the Garajau nature reserve – a protected marine reserve east of Funchal – to see the rays, barracuda and octopus. Scuba enthusiasts can also explore the wreckages of Madeirense (a cargo ship) and Corveta Pereira d’Eça (a former naval ship) off the coast of Porto Santo, diving to depths of about 30 metres. If you don’t fancy getting wet, boat tours offer an excellent opportunity to see whales and dolphins – tours run regularly from Funchal and Calheta.

Get high on adrenaline sports

You might not associate Madeira with adventure sports, but it’s one of the best places in Europe for an adrenaline rush. Get high on paragliding above banana plantations, cute hillside villages and the glistening Atlantic Ocean. Canyoning is another solid option for thrill-seekers wishing to experience the island’s topography: think rappelling down waterfalls, natural waterslides and leaping into natural pools.

Few locations offer the combination of stunning scenery and adventure sports thrills as Madeira

Visit neighbouring islands

Madeira is the biggest island of this volcanic archipelago, although there are others nearby that are worthy of a visit. Porto Santo, a two-and-a-half-hour boat ride from Madeira, is where you go to unwind. The golden island is home to a sandy beach more than 5 miles long – hence the nickname – and crystal-clear waters that rarely dip below 17C. Despite its size, it packs a lot in, from waterskiing, surfing and mountain biking to windsurfing and fishing. There’s also a golf course on the island designed by the late Spanish golfing great, Seve Ballesteros.

The volcanic grandeur of Madeira’s rock formations is on display across the island as well as on its neighbours such as Porto Santo and the Desertas

If you’d prefer to explore a less well-trodden island, head to the Desertas islands – a triplet of narrow islands about 30 miles away from Madeira. You’ll find one of the last refuges of monk seals, seabird colonies and a species of tarantula endemic to the island. Think of it, with its protected wildlife and stony terrain, as the Galápagos of Europe. Though you can’t stay overnight (it’s uninhabited), day trips are available from Madeira.

Sample the local cuisine

Fish with bananas is a novelty tourist dish, but you can skip that as Madeira has much more to offer. Pick up a bunch of anonas (custard apples), banana maracuja (passion fruit bananas) or tabaibo (prickly pears) from the grocers. Order an espetada (grilled steak skewer) at a local snack bar and fill yourself up on bolo do caco – a soft, doughy flatbread usually served with garlic butter. Indulge in the wealth of seafood available, from bife de atum (meaty tuna steaks), to polvo (octopus) and lapas (limpets). Finish off with some sweet treats, such as broas de mel (honey biscuits), tarte de maçã (apple pie) or cheesecake de cereja (cherry cheesecake).

Jet2holidays offers full holiday packages with hotel, free transfers, 22kg baggage and direct flights to Madeira from London Stansted, Newcastle, Manchester, Leeds Bradford, East Midlands, Birmingham, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Bristol. Its award-winning customer service has been recognised by Which? (best airline) and TripAdvisor (top 10 airlines of the world).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@They call the Soča the emerald river. To my eyes it’s turquoise, or sometimes a shocking shade of sapphire. Or like crushed crystal, coaxed into flow. Either way, it’s irresistible. Our trail runs by it and, step after step, our heads are made motionless by those blue-green waters.

I’m in Slovenia but I’m not anywhere easily found on a map. Here, at the far east of the Julian Alps, is a land of water and woods. Half the country is forested, but the part we’re walking through is especially remote. Triglav national park is one of Europe’s oldest. In the middle sits the eponymous Triglav, Slovenia’s tallest mountain, spiritual summit of the nation’s fables and myths.

However, this ancient woodland has had a contemporary twist. As tourists poured into Slovenia over the past decade, encouraged by word-of-mouth news about its uncommon beauty, it was to Triglav they flowed. So, in 2019, the Slovenians designed the Juliana Trail, a route covering 270km, split into 16 stages on a circuit around Triglav.

That was all pre-Covid. After the country won a series of awards – Hottest Destination in the World 2019, National Geographic’s gong for most sustainable tourism in 2017 – managing the tourists attracted by such publicity became paramount. The pandemic paused the tourism, but only temporarily. And given that Covid has only further roused the appetite for immersive experiences in unspoiled forests and pristine lakes, Slovenia’s plan to protect its natural riches is proving invaluable.

“We asked ourselves, ‘How can we host our guests sustainably?’’’ says Grega Šilc, my guide. “The Juliana Trail spreads tourists more evenly, showing them paths they never see. And it takes them to villages that rarely get visitors, which helps the locals.” Born and raised in the park, Grega has that unfailing cheerfulness you often see in people who spend their days immersed in nature.

Guide Grega (left) and the writer at Goreljek meadow. Photograph: Tiziano Summo

It’s 7am on our first day, and Goreljek meadow, the starting point of stage six, is submerged in mist. Ahead lies 22km through valley and woodland. Grega leads me and my photographer through pine-fresh forest, past fairytale-like chalets with gables as broad as summer hats and piles of firewood beneath their rims, each hut bearing a name and insignia like a boy scout. Mushroom hunters drift between the trees, backs stooped to gather them in.

My calves are tight, my bare arms sore from sunlight, but my mind is clear and bright and free

Soon we break free of the forest and into a valley. The mist lifts, and in the folds of the meadow we see cows chewing the glistening alpine grass.

“Only one has a cowbell,” Grega says, “and it’s the cow who knows the area best.”

Ancestral wisdom runs through Triglav like a river. As we descend into the Bohinj valley, we witness villagers engaged in autumnal rituals. An old man pours apples into a barrel, ready for homemade schnapps. A woman drapes hay on to a traditional hayrack barn called a kozolek. “Dober dan,” they call, good day.

After we break for lunch. Grega takes us atop a steep promontory where we feast like eagles in a nest, gulping spring water until it trickles down our chins. Then we take our fill of the view: mountains look like houses and houses like pebbles.

“That’s Stara Fužina,” Grega says, pointing. “It has 400 inhabitants. And tonight, it will have 402.”

Triglav national park, near Stara Fužina. Photograph: Wojtkowski Cezary/Alamy

Now we’re descending, tumbling down steep slopes with the uncertain tread of foals, following Grega’s chestnut locks through sunshine and shadow. The talk stops and starts, then stops for what must be two hours. They say that to walk is to heal. One foot goes in front of the other, and the motion carries you out of the ceaseless, self-centred thoughts and into your body. Your only mission is to keep walking until you reach your bed. As the afternoon light grows dense and syrupy, sleepy Stara Fužina rises before us. My calves are tight, my bare arms sore from sunlight, but my mind is clear and bright and free.

Great rows of pine and spruce shield us from the sun, and we make light work of the mountainside

We stay at Majerca, a family-run hotel in the hamlet with an alpine-facing terrace. My phone says I’ve walked 30,000 steps, which is corroborated by my appetite at dinner. Our meal is an edible simile of the valley we’ve spent the day walking: truffles, mushrooms, juice from neighbouring farms, pork in cider sauce, and wines from vineyards within walking distance (well, for hikers at least). Our waitress pours us Bovec schnapps, reciting the recipe: gather armfuls of pine needles that are not quite green, not yet dead, and stick them in a jar for 40 days and 40 nights. I tumble into bed, my body, mind and soul sated.

“First stop, the village of Ribčev Laz,” Grega announces in the morning, bright-eyed and loose-limbed, “on the shores of Lake Bohinj.”

At either side of the lake, two peaks shed their garlands of mist revealing rugged shoulders and perilous contours, ribbons of vapour trailing around them. Within minutes, the valley lights up, and whatever breath I have left from the early-morning trot is taken from me. A bone-white medieval church overlooks a statue of the Four Brave Men, dedicated to the team who first summited Triglav. The lawns of the hamlet are bursting with the crimson and tangerine of late-summer blooms.

Saint John the Baptist’s church, near the village of Ribčev Laz, on the shores of Lake Bohinj. Photograph: Alamy

A coffee in the square, then we’re climbing more than 1,000 vertical metres, out of the Bohinj valley. My legs soon shake off their hiking hangover. Great rows of pine and spruce shield us from the sun, and we make light work of the mountainside.

Halfway up, we pause on a ridgeback to gaze on the valley, our achievement laid bare.

“All the water on this side of the mountain,” Grega says, pointing below, “flows into the Danube, and eventually the Black Sea. All the water on this side” – he gestures to where we’re heading – “flows into the Adriatic.”

There’s another frontier, too. We pass a rock demarcating the boundary between Italy and Yugoslavia. The year 1920 is carved in stone which has outlasted both kingdoms and now sits unobserved and forgotten. We’re travelling westward to the Soča valley, by the cusp of the Italian border. Kobarid – better known as Caporetto – is our home for the night. I peer into the windows of the town’s award-winning war museum, vowing to return.

And then, on our final morning, there it is: the Soča River, a clear and singular epiphany. Grega sneaks us off the beaten track to Kozjak waterfall, whose roar fills the silence with awesome noise. The rest of the morning is spent clambering up and down the wooded slopes bracketing the Soča. Here it’s emerald, there it’s sapphire, and everywhere it glistens.

Kozjak waterfall. Photograph: Alamy

We’re greeted by other hikers with a friendly dober dan – only the third group we’ve seen. So is the Juliana Trail working? “Two hundred and sixty kilometres,” Grega puffs out his cheeks. “It’s a lot. So yes, our tourists are now deeper within the landscape, and less likely to get stuck in masses.”

Tomorrow we’re leaving, and the walking now feels somber and vital. As we enter the final village, exhausted into silence, we pass a sign for motorists. I ask Grega what Nasvidenje means.

“We use it to mean goodbye, but it translates as ‘until we meet again’.” I look back at the path, the patchwork of old routes now known as the Juliana Trail, at the beautifully preserved heirlooms of yesterday nestled in the valley, and I say it aloud: “Nasvidenje. Until we meet again.”

Grega laughs. “You see, that’s why we needed the Juliana Trail. People visit, and then they always want to come back!”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A rocky island emerges from thick mist. Around it, cormorants are diving into grey-green waves, which are flowering with multicoloured jellyfish. The boat pitches wildly; the skipper warns us that tope, powerful sharks, are common in these waters and not to lose our rods. He throws most of our too-small early catches overboard, including a sunrise-pink gurnard.

I am mackerel fishing (£20pp, emmakate2.com) off the craggy Cornish coast with my husband’s family and we are hoping to barbecue fish this evening. My husband surprises the skipper by catching a sardine and suddenly, in flurries as we pass through deep shoals, we have landed enough mackerel for supper and are heading to shore with a bag of indigo-striped iridescent fish. After two hours at sea, stepping off the swaying boat into the crowds around Padstow harbour is like entering another universe.

Twenty minutes away on hourly bus 11A from Padstow’s hectic waterfront, Wadebridge is cheaper, less busy, and makes a good hub for car-free visitors. Our extended family is spending a week, as we have every summer for decades, in a holiday cottage walking distance from a bus stop. Eating barbecued fresh-caught mackerel together in the garden is a good start to this reunion after lonely months of lockdown.

Bedruthan Steps. Photograph: Joana Kruse/Alamy

We’re back in Padstow next day for an open-top bus ride past Bedruthan Steps. Devon and Cornwall have new or expanded holiday bus routes for 2021, including the tourist-friendly Daytripper (£10 a day) and this leisurely Atlantic Coaster service, which now goes all the way, via Newquay, to St Ives (£15 a day). It’s ideal for linear hikes along the coast path, over headlands patched gold and purple with gorse and summer heather, past towers and lighthouses, or above the long sands of Watergate Bay. Sitting by a drift of late sea pinks, we eat our sandwiches at the far end of Trevelgue Head, an ancient fort with bronze-age burial mounds, before catching the bus back from Porth beach.

This open-topper has been elusive. Sometimes it is replaced by a regular bus, and sometimes it’s caught in Cornwall’s nightmarish weekend traffic. But it is worth the wait. Up here on the top deck, we are high as the frondy tops of the tamarisk hedges and the swallows swooping over the barley. We can smell the wet hayfields and honeysuckle, feel the rain and roadside trees on our faces and see out of narrow sunken lanes to the endless sea.

Atlantic Coaster open-top buses. Photograph: John Husband/Alamy

If you walk the whole knee-wrecking 630 miles of the South West Coast Path, it is said to be equivalent (in terms of distance climbed) to four ascents of Everest. Slightly gentler, much shorter and less well-known is the 30-mile coast-to-coast Saints’ Way from Padstow to Fowey over wild St Breock Downs and the boggy slopes of stone-age Helman Tor.

We can smell the wet hayfields and honeysuckle, feel the rain and roadside trees on our faces …

We’ve walked the Saints’ Way in short stages over a few summers; my favourite sections include the opening four miles from Padstow’s grey-stoned church (peaceful even when the town is heaving) along marshy creeks and through the woods to flowery Little Petherick. Bus 11A stops on request, 15 minutes from Wadebridge, by Petherick’s stream-side Old Mill House bistro, which makes a great end to the walk. A changing menu, featuring, say, roast Cornish plaice with crispy capers and samphire (£16.95), holds its own against the area’s more famous foodie destinations.

The best way out of Wadebridge is by bike. The popular six-mile northward stretch of the Camel Trail is the UK’s most-cycled off-road route, a disused railway with unmatchable views across the blue-and-gold estuary. Summer morning bike hire here gets booked up weeks ahead, but several places now offer quieter afternoon rentals from 3pm and open at 8.30am for pre-booked early risers (Camel Trail Cycle Hire from £16/£8 adult/child a day, evenings £3 off).

Rows of vines at Camel Valley vineyard. Photograph: Simon Burt/Alamy

Cycling towards Bodmin is less crowded. A canopy of oak and beech softens the showers or blazing sun and the Camel Valley vineyard, next to the trail, has a slate terrace above sloping vines, where you can sip a sparkling rosé (weekdays only, book ahead). In the lichened orchard of the Camel Trail tea gardens nearby, we sample more Camel Valley wines (from £5.25 a glass) and pricey Cornish crab sandwiches (£13.25) before crossing the river high on an old railway bridge. Soon afterwards, the granite walls of revamped Bodmin Jail (entry £15/£12.50) tower over the end of the trail.

From Bodmin Parkway station one afternoon, we stroll through a mossy arch and a fern-filled valley. Three generations of us follow the fast-rippling River Fowey and wander a couple of miles under redwoods and copper beeches for a cream tea at the National Trust’s Lanhydrock, where visitors arriving by train get 10% off in the Stables tearoom or shop (show your train ticket at the gatehouse for a voucher, £16/£8).

The formal gardens have views and banks of hydrangeas and, inside the house, there’s a 17th-century barrel-vaulted ceiling covered in plaster beasts and bible stories. Deep in Lanhydrock’s woods, the only sounds are birds and flowing water, and an occasional whistle from the nearby Bodmin and Wenford steam railway (all-day tickets £17/£9).

Path through a wood at Lanhydrock. Photograph: Phoebe Taplin

Back in Wadebridge, we explore the time-warped shops: butchers, bakers and Granny Wobbly’s Pantry, selling crumbly slabs of fudge cooked in a stove-top saucepan so the smell of melting sugar drifts into the bunting-strung streets (giftboxes £12.99). Central self-catering stays include Edwardian Brookdale House, four minutes’ walk from the bus stop, with three bedrooms and lavender by the path (from £500 a week, short breaks from £100 a night).

Among the advantages of car-free holidays in Cornwall are the journeys there and back … we have ringside views of spectacular landscapes

Volunteer-run Wadebridge Museum (free) is one room, packed with intriguing things like a creepy collection of death masks from a local hardware store. Steward Andrew Keen can remember the poet John Betjeman strolling around town, and the last 1950s coasters sailing up the silty River Camel to what was then an inland port. The old railway station features in Betjeman’s blank verse memoir Summoned by Bells: “On Wadebridge station what a breath of sea / scented the Camel Valley! Cornish air, soft Cornish rains, and silence after steam.”

There are no trains now to Wadebridge, but regular buses from Bodmin Parkway run through town. Bus 10 goes on to Rock, where we have booked (back in February) a celebratory lunch at fancy pub The Mariners. The kids have gourmet fish and chips (£19), I have passion fruit pavlova (£7) for pudding, sharp and vanilla-y, and we stroll out afterwards, over the sandy golf course, to see Betjeman’s grave by wonky-spired, dune-sunk Saint Enodoc’s church in Trebetherick. Heading around the seaward side of Brea Hill on to huge Daymer Bay, we catch the ferry (£3), straight off the beach at low tide, over to Padstow for a bus home.

Saint Enodoc’s church, Daymer Bay. Photograph: Travelib Prime/Alamy

Among the chief advantages of car-free holidays in Cornwall are the journeys there and back. Instead of traffic jams and miserable queues at Exeter motorway services, we have ringside views of spectacular landscapes: egret-haunted estuaries, the Tamar Bridge, soaring above boats and waterside houses, and the red cliffs of the Devon coast. Sit on the left heading west and the right heading east if you can. Herons are standing on an old wrecked boat, which rests by the mud-flanked River Plym like a whale skeleton; gold clouds are mirrored in the wet sands of the Teign estuary and the waves outside the train window near Dawlish shine in the setting sun.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It’s day three of 17 on the Cape Wrath Trail, and I’m descending to a ruined settlement with Nicky Easton from Ashtead in Surrey. “We wanted to get into the wilderness. For me it’s about the space, the remoteness, getting away from everything,” she says.

Experienced trekkers, like Nicky, who have hiked Grand Randonnée (GR) trails in the Alps or the Pyrenees, will be familiar with the pattern on the Cape Wrath Trail. Most days feature a big climb to a pass, or bealach, before a long descent into the next glen. The topography of Scotland’s west coast means a walk south to north runs cross grain to the lochs and mountain ridges, which cut in deeply from the western seaboard. The trail doesn’t summit once – just like its European counterparts, it is a journey through, not over the mountains.

‘We wanted to get into the wilderness … get away from everything’: Walker Nicky Easton, from Ashtead in Surrey (centre), with Duncan Parsons (left) and Kevin Pryor

But while the climbs aren’t nearly as high, the terrain can be far more challenging. A few days later, I meet seasoned hillgoer Liz Steel from Cumbernauld, who summarises the differences well. “What’s different about the walk to the Cape is the terrain underfoot. On other trails you don’t get the variety – bog, rock, peat hags, road walking – the trail throws everything at you.”

What’s different about the Cape walk is the terrain. Bog, rock, peat hags, road – it throws everything at you Liz Steel, pictured above

The name is also something of an oxymoron. The way to Cape Wrath is not an official national trail at all, more a loose collection of old stalkers’ tracks, drovers, and coffin roads. It starts in Fort William and ends at the lighthouse in Cape Wrath. The mileage varies between 230 and 260, because there are so many variations. We covered approximately 246 miles. There are no signs or flashes that point the way, and travellers must for the most part be self-sufficient.

Carrying camping gear and several days food gives some sense of just how hard it must have been to drive cattle over knotty cols, connecting glen with marshy glen, but perish the thought of shouldering a deceased relative over the moors to their final resting place. Nevertheless, herein lies the central insight and specific magic of this walk. These are Scotland’s hidden roads; ways that link vanished settlements, summer grazings and hunting grounds. From about 1750, those who built them were forcibly removed as the land was enclosed, first for sheep farming and later for deer stalking.

Old crofts line the trail. ‘A walk on the Cape Wrath Trail is like a walk through Scotland’s clearance past’

On our own way north, we pass dozens of ruins, evidence of crofted farmsteads, small gardens and lazy beds. By contrast, the occasional estate houses we pass seem perversely ostentatious. Precisely because it winds through the mountains from glen to glen, a walk on the Cape Wrath Trail is a walk through Scotland’s clearance past, and Britain’s colonial present. For those with migration and exodus in our family histories, it’s a landscape of ghosts.

It’s difficult to reconcile historical fact with the themes expressed again and again by modern visitors, coming up for air after lockdown and immersing themselves in the beauty and solitude of Scotland’s west coast. Back in Knoydart, three young men from the Wirral are cleaning fresh caught mussels outside a bothy. “It’s just nice to get out and not see anyone for a while,” says Aaron. Merlin adds: “There’s a bit of green space near home, but no mountains to climb. It’s not like here, so open and free.” For the dozens I meet over nearly three weeks on the trail itself, their passion and appreciation for peace, space and nature is completely sincere, whether they are aware of its wider context or not. As such, it’s hard to begrudge the connection.

Clockwise from top: Bothy visitors Amazon, Aaron and Merlin. Walkers Mick McGregor and David Blair who said it’s ‘the hardest thing I’ve ever done’

As for the walk itself, it’s both unrelenting and intensely beautiful. More or less stoically, we suffer muscle spasms, trench foot and various infections as well as blistering heat, snow, high winds and freezing rain. For my companion David Blair, a retired butcher based on Arran and veteran of many a long cycle tour, it’s “the hardest thing I’ve ever done”. For my friend Mick McGregor, a mountaineer and senior nurse from Glasgow, “it never stops. Just when you think you are making progress, something changes.” Over a dram or two at camp, we also touch on how, for these urban Scots, the trail is a way of connecting with their own country.

The trials of the trail will fade, but committed to memory forever are the wake-up calls of cuckoos and curlews

After a week or two, we become part of the furniture and the animals begin to ignore us. The trials of the trail will fade, but committed to memory forever are the wake-up calls of cuckoos and curlews, our close encounter with a golden eagle, the kestrel that quivers above a flowering meadow, a baby otter pottering at the edge of a burn, a black throated diver gliding on a mirror calm loch, and the gentle browsing of a yearling stag at camp. These silent, dusky moments after long, tiring days feel like spells cast, unique and unspoken. For these creatures, the landscape we and they move through is not wild or on the edge; it is their home, their centre.

Past meets present: an old ghillie’s house is now a bothy for walkers to shelter in

Long walks are immersive. You wake at first light, eat and sleep when you can. New habits form and one’s perspective is changed.

But that’s just part of the story – the trail meets tarmac and passes through villages, too. Early on, I speak to Hannah Gordon, who commutes from the family home in Arisaig to work for the National Trust for Scotland at Glenfinnan Monument. She’s keen to point out a newly built community car park and hopes for an expanded visitor centre. “The current one was built for 40,000 visitors a year, but even pre-pandemic we were seeing 10 times that number.” Scotland is changing and is not remote, by any measure. The winding tracks we take through settlements old and new confirm it never was. Remoteness was always relative.

Clockwise from top: Kinlochewe shopkeeper Yasmeen Hollenstein, originally from Austria; Hannah Gordon at the National Trust site Glenfinnan; Irwin Mackay, owner of The London Stores near Kinlochbervie

A week later, we rest at Kinlochewe, to let feet heal and bad weather pass, and I spend a rainy morning chatting with Yasmeen Hollenstein. Originally from Austria, she opened Painted Horse Antiques in April 2018. “I used to drive through thinking ‘who’d want to live here?’ I’m not even keen on mountains. What’s kept me here is the sense of community. Local people want you to do well. They have their own experience of trying to make a life here, and it’s more obvious in a small place how economics work, how things come around. It’s really supportive.”

What’s kept me here is the sense of community. Local people want you to do well Yasmeen Hollenstein

To those who are keen on mountains, Yasmeen’s account might sound a long way from the solitary “wilderness” we keen for. Yet I hear a similar story from Irwin Mackay, shy owner of The London Stores, a tiny shop stuffed full of snacks, fresh fruit and newspapers, near Kinlochbervie. The store, which belonged to his parents before him, is something of an institution for walkers topping up for the final days on the trail. “I’m here on my own. Sunday is my only day off, it’s hard work. Tesco comes in by van seven days a week, they’ve taken some of my business, but Cape Wrath walkers make a real difference. Sometimes I wonder if I could have moved away, done something different, but I’m still here. It’s a home. We have a community here.”

This is just a few of those I met and it’s only a snapshot. My sample was self-selecting, and equally instructive were the refusals. Those who declined may have preferred to be discreet about businesses run on land leased or owned by an estate. They may have had a mistrust of the media or just not wanted to talk about themselves. In Durness, one man I spoke to had simply had enough: “I don’t mean to be antisocial, but we’ve had a hell of a time dealing with visitors over the last year, and it’s going to be another long hot summer.”

The heavily promoted North Coast 500 route is fundamentally changing the character of the Highlands. Laybys and car parks are awash with mobile homes

For some I speak to, pandemic travel restrictions have only added to an already pressured situation. Whether or not the heavily promoted North Coast 500 route is a victim of its own success, it is fundamentally changing the character of the Highlands. Where our trail intersects with the road, laybys and car parks are awash with mobile homes, while boy racers in sports cars lean into corners attempting to best each other’s times. The extractive tourism of Victorian hunting estates seems to have been recast in steel and fibreglass for the new normal.

The disconnect between Highlander and Outsider continued as we neared the trail terminus. As the only place on the British mainland on which the navy and air force can practice live firing, access to the Cape is strictly controlled by the Ministry of Defence. Unexpectedly, we found our final approach to the lighthouse blocked by three days of target practice. The public information hotline rang through to an answer machine, and the locals knew no more than we did, strangers in their own land. Frustrated and unsure of how to proceed, we waited outside the exclusion zone until the firing ceased and snuck across the perimeter.

Despite what people might think, this isn’t a solitary place. In the summer it’s busy, and fun John Ure

As so often with these kinds of endeavours, the end was both underwhelming and reassuring. I had one last person to meet. John Ure has looked after the buildings surrounding the lighthouse for the last 15 years and is now their owner. What keeps him and his daughter there, on the most north westerly point of the mainland?

“It’s the lifestyle really, meeting all these mad people. You have to have something loose to get here. Despite what people might think, this isn’t a solitary place. In the summer it’s busy, and fun. We run a five-month season for visitors, which leaves seven months to renovate the building. And in February, when the big storms come in … you want to see that ocean when it gets wild. We sit by the fire and watch. Nobody else is seeing that.”

A long walk may deepen one’s understanding of a place and those it supports, but ultimately it wriggles free of reductive binaries. The Highlands is not simply an adventure playground, a racetrack, bombing site or a Shangri la. It is somewhere people call home, containing tensions, possibilities, contradictions and, yes, multitudes. For me, the relationships between centre and periphery, resident and visitor, present and past are a huge part of what make the Cape Wrath Trail such a captivating journey.

David Lintern is a photo journalist, guide and author of The Big Rounds
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@With the August bank holiday weekend round the corner, we’re after suggestions for great family days out in the UK. Maybe it’s following an art trail through woods, kite-flying on a windy hilltop, chilling on a city beach or visiting an open-air cinema. We want to hear about your plans – and free ideas are even better!

If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition.

Keep your tip to about 100 words

The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too.

We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition.

The competition closes on 17 August at 9am BST

Have a look at our past winners and other tips

Read the terms and conditions here

If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The silhouette of Gjirokastër began to emerge in the distance. This city is in the country’s mountainous south, overlooked by its ancient fort, with 17th- and 18th-century stone Ottoman houses cascading down the slopes like a medieval mirage.

We turned off the highway on to a road dominated by an eight-storey concrete building with pink balconies, beneath which locals sat in the sun sipping coffee on lime-coloured patio furniture.

“This is Gjirokastër,” Idar, my Albanian friend from England, announced with a degree of triumph.

“Yes, it is, but you know I have come to find Ergiri!” I joked.

Ergiri was the Ottoman name for Gjirokastër when the Muslim empire ruled this part of Albania between 1417 and 1913. It was in the middle of this period that my literary companion for this journey, the 17th-century Ottoman traveller Evliya Çelebi, came to Ergiri.

An Ottoman merchant’s house in Gjirokastër, Albania. Photograph: Tharik Hussain

Albania’s popular image today is built on the negative representations by early 20th-century white western travellers such as Edith Durham, who called Albanias “lawless”, and Rose Wilder Lane, who said Albanians were “living in the childhood of the Aryan race” – meaning they were behind her in the evolutionary process. These stereotypes have been reinforced by modern popular culture. In Hollywood’s Taken trilogy, Albania is reduced to the abode of ruthless, violent human traffickers, and the only reference to their faith that I can recall is when they are seen swearing by Allah to avenge their son’s death by killing the film’s white American hero. I remember no other representation of Islam in Albania in the entire movie.

I had read numerous works on the Balkans, but none acknowledged the region’s Muslim culture the way Evliya did. Without his translated works, Idar and I would never have known just how Muslim Gjirokastër had once been. It was clearly no longer a place where people were “addicted to prayer”, as Evliya had described it. Earlier we had heard the adhan from the town’s solitary mosque, but no one rushed to get to the prayers, nor was there any remainder of the numerous institutes of Islamic education Ergiri had once been famed for.

Evliya’s translated works offer one of the only Muslim perspectives on Muslim Europe – one that embraces the culture and heritage as its own and not something foreign, alien or inferior.

All other travel writing on the region in the English language had been authored by those from the same narrow demographic: white, western, privileged, Christian and, more worryingly, of the colonial classes. These were people travelling either for the purposes of colonising a place or part of the class of people doing so. They viewed the world from a lofty position where they felt themselves superior by default. Yet their writings were often presented as romantic wanderings and were heavily relied upon by many later travel writers for socio-historical context. This is the literary heritage of modern travel writing.

A cobbled street in the old bazaar district of Gjirokastër. Photograph: Alamy

I’d come to Gjirokastër as part of a family road trip to seek out Europe’s living indigenous Muslim presence and to follow in Evliya’s footsteps. I was hoping to see this part of the continent as he did, when it really was Muslim Europe – under Ottoman rule at the height of the empire’s powers.

The trip would become the premise for my new book. I’d travelled with my family from London to start the journey in Sarajevo, capital of Bosnia-Herzegovina. So far, we had visited Muslim communities in Serbia, Kosovo and North Macedonia, marvelling at their history and the wealth of their heritage. After Albania, we would head to Montenegro before making our way back to Sarajevo.

Today, while my wife and two daughters were lying on a beach in Vlore, Idar’s home town, he was helping me follow in the footsteps of Evliya.

In his great, 10-volume Book of Travels, or Seyâhatnâme, Evliya described Gjirokastër as a beautiful open town, spread across eight hills and valleys overlooked by the fortress, a place where slate-roofed stone houses had vineyards and gardens surrounded by white granite walls.

A decorated fireplace inside an Ottoman house in Gjirokastër. Photograph: Tharik Hussain

As our rented white Megane struggled up the steep cobbled roads of the “city of stone”, Idar was staring out of the window openmouthed, admiring the Ottoman houses scattered over the hillside. Gjirokastër still clearly had the charm of Evliya’s Ergiri, for this was the longest he had gone without taking a drag on a cigarette.

We were heading for the town’s original Ottoman bazaar area, rebuilt in the 19th century. This was the prettiest of all the neighbourhoods, overlooked by Ergiri’s only surviving mosque still in use, the Memi Bey or Bazaar Mosque.

In Evliya’s day, the town was a deeply religious place. Home to at least 15 mosques, Ergiri was where would-be Islamic scholars of Hadith (traditions of the Prophet) came to train at one of the three madrasas that specialised in this field. There were also tekkes (lodges) for three different Sufi orders and four shrines to Muslim saints. Sadly, all this was destroyed when Enver Hoxha, the locally born communist dictator, ruled Albania. The Memi Bey escaped this fate because it was listed as a cultural monument.

The wheels of the car were starting to slip and I was thankful when we turned a corner and the thick minaret of the mosque came into view, towering over us. After we parked in its shade, I looked up at the circular balcony that breaks up its pencil-like shape, noting its fractal, honeycomb-like muqarnas pattern. Two symmetrical sets of stairs led up to the main courtyard.

To the left is one of the bazaar’s original lanes. Once the bustling heart of a medieval market, today it is lined with shops selling fridge magnets, Gjirokastër T-shirts and miniature models of the town’s fort. A handful of tourists milled around inside, their silhouettes framed by the climbing bougainvillea the owners had trained over the tops of their stores-cum-houses.

The historic bazaar in Gjirokastër is now mainly tourist shops. Photograph: Tharik Hussain

Gjirokastër was easily the most beautiful place I had visited in Albania and I could see why even Hoxha declared it one of only two “museum towns”. The other was Berat, 100km to the north: it too is an ode to classical Ottoman architecture and the only other historic town not subjected fully to the communist version of modernisation that saw mosques, synagogues, churches, Sufi lodges and monasteries closed and torn down, along with many other monuments. These were replaced with the stark, functional buildings that are the hallmark of communist architecture. With such destruction of its overt Muslim identity, Gjirokastër today shows few signs of its former life as a Balkan centre of Islamic scholarship and Sufism, a place where students of theology and spirituality from across the Muslim world came to study – although thankfully both Gjirokastër and Berat’s old towns are now Unesco-protected.

We got a better feel for its history when we climbed up to the fort. Gjirokastër really is a very handsome town, and as Idar and I leaned on the stone walls, as much to catch our breath as anything else, we stared out in silence over a scene that still looked like it belonged in the pages of Evliya’s books. I could see the many gardens, vineyards and “magnificent townhouses” he had described, maybe even while standing on this very spot, framed by green hills and valleys. The only missing places were the numerous Muslim buildings and monuments he reels off in his Book of Travels: the Mosque of Hizir Aga with its stonework minaret; the Mosque of Hadji Murad, with its fountain of sweet-tasting water; the Halveti lodge, where Evliya had to bury one of the boys in his retinue; the many khans (guesthouses), fountains and madrasas, all gone.

Tharik Hussain’s friend and guide Idar gazes across Gjirokastër from the fort overlooking the town. Photograph: Tharik Hussain

“I didn’t know there is a place like this in Albania, Tharik,” Idar said after a while. I could see he was quite emotional.

Idar had been born in Albania during Hoxha’s rule, a time when observing any faith could get you killed. This was the reason he had never been privy to the country’s Muslim heritage. Standing on that fort looking out over Evliya’s Ergiri, he clearly felt a loss. I did too.

Albania was not a place where I expected to discover stunning historic Ottoman towns that were once centres of Islamic knowledge. Nor, it seemed, had Idar.

Albania is one of three European countries, along with Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo, with Muslim-majority populations, and these countries were central to my road trip in search of the continent’s living indigenous Muslim heritage – our Muslim heritage. Having Evliya by my side helped me better appreciate Albania’s rich Islamic past, and reading his description of its people made me realise something else: the continued demonising of this beautiful nation and its inhabitants is the result of a white, non-Muslim European literary phenomenon, one Evliya helped me avoid repeating.

Minarets in the Mountains: A Journey into Muslim Europe by Tharik Hussain (Bradt Guides £9.99) is out now, also available at guardianbookshop.com
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Market Street Hotel, Edinburgh

Scotland’s first member of the Design Hotels group, Market Street won new hotel of the year at the 2020 Scottish Hotel Awards. It was rewarded for its innovative architecture, and slick locals-meet-visitors vibe. Its X-factor is the top-floor lounge and reception – ensuring that your check-in experience comes with panoramic views of the city – along with the Nor’ Loft champagne bar, where breakfast and afternoon tea are also served. Rooms are comfortably unfussy and have a complimentary minibar and luxury vegan bathroom treats. Edinburgh’s picturesque old town is on your doorstep.

Doubles from £141 B&B, marketstreethotel.co.uk

Cow Hollow Hotel, Manchester

Palm d’or: Cow Hollow Hotel’s palm-dotted cocktail lounge

This turn-of-the-century former textile mill has undergone a hugely imaginative reinvention, emerging as a slick 16-room boutique hotel, combining the original Victorian architecture with contemporary fittings and design. Rooms marry exposed brickwork with modern art, Hypnos beds and rainfall showers, while the palm-dotted cocktail lounge has one of the best booze lists in the city. There’s no restaurant (a breakfast bag is delivered to your room), but staff are ready with a comprehensive list of the best eateries in the neighbourhood.

Doubles from £99 B&B, cowhollow.co.uk

Judges Lodging, York

Cafe culture: York’s main attractions are minutes from Judges Lodging. Photograph: Ian Dagnall/Alamy

An impressive Georgian-Victorian building, which housed visiting judges until the mid-1970s, the hotel has recently been given a sleek facelift, with the 21 bedrooms now featuring bold wallpapers, button-back armchairs and polished-wood furniture. The cellar bar has an appealing, pubby feel, while the award-winning restaurant is housed in a grand Georgian dining room with double-height windows and leather-backed banquettes. The hotel is a stone’s throw from all of York’s main attractions, with the river Ouse just a minute’s walk away.

Doubles from £125 B&B, judgeslodgingyork.co.uk

Artist Residence, Brighton

Retro elegance: get a feel for Brighton life at the Artist Residence

If arty, youthful Brighton was a hotel it would be the Artist Residence, an eclectic, bohemian bolthole on one of the city’s most elegant Regency squares. The rooms – many of which have shimmering sea views – fuse retro styling with a diverse collection of contemporary art, which continues in the downstairs cafe and cocktail bar. This is one of Brighton’s hippest addresses with G-plan armchairs, scrubbed wood floors and maxi-bearded mixologists – but it’s also unpretentious, friendly and a great place to really get a feel for Brighton life.

Doubles from £154 B&B, artistresidence.co.uk

Number 38 Clifton, Bristol

Quiet time: retire to Number 38’s library after exploring Bristol’s hippest suburb

Leafy, affluent Clifton has long been Bristol’s hippest suburb, and No 38 – a 12-room boutique hotel in a Georgian townhouse – makes a great base for exploring the area, including the iconic Clifton Suspension Bridge. Rooms are light and airy, with pale-stone décor and sumptuous beds, and charming communal areas include an outdoor terrace with rooftop views and a peaceful library.

Doubles from £126 B&B, number38clifton.com

Titanic Hotel, Liverpool

Waterfront history: the dining room at Titanic Hotel, a converted Victorian warehouse at Stanley Docks

Set within the historic Stanley Dock, the Titanic is housed in a former Victorian warehouse, with exposed brickwork and original windows in many of the 153 rooms. On warmer evenings, the waterfront terrace at Stanley’s Bar & Grill is a great place for dinner, while the Rum Bar’s mixologists deliver a bewildering array of cocktails. The city centre and Albert Dock are 20 minutes’ walk.

Doubles from £109 B&B, titanichotelliverpool.com

Frederick Street Townhouse, Birmingham

Central spot: the smart front of Frederick Street Townhouse. Photograph: Nick Maslen/Alamy

A new addition to bustling Frederick Street in the Jewellery Quarter, the hotel is a sister property to the adjacent Button Factory, one of the city’s hippest drinking and dining spots. It operates as the hotel’s breakfast room, bar and restaurant, while the Townhouse has 15 fun, colour-filled bedrooms, ranging from compact to spacious suites. The city centre is a mile away.

Doubles from £107 B&B, frederickstreettownhouse.co.uk

Grey Street Hotel, Newcastle

Northern light: the impressive Tyne Bridge into Newcastle. Photograph: Bailey-Cooper Photography/Alamy

With contemporary interiors set against an elegant Georgian backdrop, Grey Street is a classy, understated hotel in the heart of the city. The City Retreat spa adds to the feeling of being cocooned from the hectic streets outside, while the flower-bedecked bar at Leila Lily’s restaurant softens the industrial-chic design. The menu is modern British with carefully sourced ingredients, such as Wye Valley asparagus and Lindisfarne oysters and steaks from local farms.

Doubles from £84 B&B, greystreethotel.co.uk

Brocco on the Park, Sheffield

Scandi touches: relax amid the pared-down style of Sheffield’s Brocco on the Park

The owner and designer of Brocco, Tiina Carr, is half Finnish and her Scandi touch runs through this under-the-radar gem. The eight rooms ooze pared-down style, with a palette of stone, grey and white across the furniture and fabrics. The restaurant, which modestly bills itself as a “local neighbourhood kitchen” is Michelin-listed, serving vegan and veggie-friendly small plates, along with hearty roasts on Sundays and the city’s best afternoon tea. The city centre is 10 minutes away by car.

Doubles from £125, brocco.co.uk

The Hoxton, Southwark, London

River views: enjoy London’s South Bank, a stone’s throw from The Hoxton, Southwark. Photograph: Amer Ghazzal/Rex/Shutterstock
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Can you please ask the people at the Co-operative Bank what is going on at their call centres as it is currently impossible to get through to anyone on the phone?

I have been using telephone banking with this bank for years but I have been holding on for up to an hour at a time over the last fortnight, in an attempt to pay someone £40. I am aware the bank has cut back its hours and now closes at 6pm but they just don’t answer. I am an extremely vulnerable person who, despite vaccination, is still shielding out of caution. By contrast, Sainsbury’s answers within a minute or so. If it can do so, why not the Co-op Bank? MR, Chelmsford

I have had a number of complaints along these lines from people trying to contact the bank, and the company has admitted that its call times are too long at the moment. It has blamed the “pingdemic” that has resulted in a number of staff in its call centres in the north-west of England being told to self-isolate.

“We’re doing all we can to mitigate this and improve the experience. Where possible, we are encouraging customers to use online banking or the mobile app to check balances and make transactions or alternatively visit their nearest branch,” it says, somewhat missing the point.

Someone from the bank has now called you and enabled you to make the £40 payment. It has also sent you a bunch of flowers to apologise for your experience. If you are not used to computers or confident banking online, now is probably not the time to start as it will be difficult to get support if you have problems.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Q I am a 56-year-old man with nine years left on my £70,000 mortgage. The mortgage is split so that £20,000 is on a repayment basis and the remaining £50,000 is interest only. I reckon I could sell my house for £225,000 so I have £155,000 equity.

I have no savings whatsoever and all of my cash is tied up in the house. I want to live a little before I retire at 60 and have a bit of spending money while I’m still young enough to enjoy myself.

I’m thinking of moving to a less affluent area with cheaper housing but lower house price rises. In the area I’m considering, three-bedroomed houses the same size as mine are typically £75,000 cheaper.

I’m trying to work out what the best course of action is. Should I:

downsize and pay off all of the interest-only part of the mortgage now and just leave the £9,000 repayment with lower mortgage payments and a larger bank balance;

wait until both mortgages come to end in nine years’ time and pay it all off then and buy something smaller at that time or;

buy a cheaper house not so far away and remortgage and have not so much cash savings in the bank account? GG



A I’m totally flummoxed as to where your £9,000 figure came from but that’s my problem, not yours. If you managed to find a property costing £150,000 (ie £75,000 less than the one you are selling), you would be able to clear both the repayment and interest-only parts of your mortgage and have £5,000 in cash left over. That’s assuming there are no early redemption charges to pay on the mortgage – if there are, you need to factor them into your calculation.

If you were able to do that now and you could find a house of an acceptable size and price and in an acceptable location, it would give you four years in which to divert the money you are currently spending on your mortgage into a savings pot ready for your retirement. Even if you couldn’t find a property sufficiently cheap to be able to clear the mortgage in full, aiming to clear as much of the interest-only part of your mortgage makes a lot of sense. What doesn’t make sense is waiting until your mortgage comes to an end in nine years’ time if you are happy to downsize now and/or move to a different area.

From the last option you gave, I get the impression that you’re not that convinced that you genuinely want to move away from the area where you currently live. If that’s the case, then I would be tempted to go with your third option, with as small a mortgage as possible.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Can you please advise me what to do with a new electric car that has been sitting unused in my garage for almost 12 weeks now?

In May I took delivery of a brand new VW ID.3 electric car that I had leased though a firm called LeasePlan. On arrival it immediately became clear that the car had a number of serious defects, including a faulty engine management system, complete with a “do not drive warning”, dysfunctional indicators, a broken satnav and other problems. VW assist came to look at the car but could not fix it on site, so I formally rejected the car to the lease company in writing. I did so within the 14-day period allowed by the Consumer Rights Act.

Since then the car has been to a VW dealer, which improved matters but did not cure all of its problems, and the car remains rejected by me. After an initial letter chasing payment, LeasePlan has not been in contact. No money has changed hands as I blocked the scheduled payments. LeasePlan has not responded to anything from me since 2 July. Ever since, the car has been sitting in my garage, and I am wondering what to do next. What do I do with the car? RW, by email

Leaving aside the question of how you were delivered a brand new electric car that had so many faults, I think you did exactly the right thing in rejecting it. I would have done the same – too few new car buyers exercise their rights when presented with a problem vehicle. It’s a normal human reaction when you have invested so much in an item to hope that it will be resolved. The problem is that once the 14 days are up it can be much harder to get dealers to resolve problems that persist.

In this case, LeasePlan’s apparent denial of the problem was all the more bizarre since you had not paid it anything. After much to-ing and fro-ing and drawing a similar blank from the company’s head office in the Netherlands, I eventually found someone to come and take the car away. The company has now cancelled the contract and sent you a £250 voucher to apologise.

In terms of the car, it seems VW had to launch a software upgrade to its ID models, which has led to customers complaining of similar problems – although they appear to like them when they are working as they should.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I ordered a Flymo mower online from Homebase. It was available and would be delivered to my local store in four days for a £6 payment. Nine days later, having heard nothing, I emailed customer services and received an automated response saying my query was in a queue. Three days on, I emailed again and, this time, got no response at all. I found a link on the Homebase website that claimed it would offer refunds for undelivered goods but got the message “page not found”. I went into my local store but it was unable to help as it had been an online order.

In the meantime, on Flymo’s own site, it stated that the mower was unavailable, with no date given for when it might be in stock. After waiting in a queue for 40 minutes trying to talk to somebody on the Homebase helpline, I was finally promised a refund within seven days. That was 15 days ago. My Homebase account still tells me the product has been dispatched and will be delivered by the originally promised date. The company has basically stolen £105, and I can see no way of getting it back.

TM, Lancaster

Homebase was criticised last year for continuing to accept online orders while proving unable to fulfil a backlog. Judging by online reviews, its service has much improved since then, but your experience is pretty shaming. The company promises that customers will be notified of any delays, but you received no communication whatsoever. It tells me: “We’re sorry the delivery was delayed, and for not updating him sooner. We’ve spoken with him, and provided a full refund.”

Which sounded promising, except the refund didn’t arrive. It took another month, and more chasing from me, before the money was back in your account, by which time you’d spent two months without a lawnmower.

Why we’re such big fans of Dimplex …

I want to sing the praises of Dimplex customer services. I bought a tower fan in 2019 and forgot to register it for the extended two-year warranty. It started making grinding noises this month, so I contacted Dimplex. It replied the next day, stating that even though the two-year period had expired the day before I complained, it would send me a new fan. I’m amazed. Most companies seem to want to wriggle out of their responsibilities.

JS, London

Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After my sister died in February, Legal & General wrote to me, stating I was entitled to £14,000 from her pension plan. This was followed by documents I was required to submit, all of which were clearly intended for my son who has the same name, but a different address. I advised them of their mistake and they sent updated papers which, again, related to my son, and this time disclosed the amount. I called again, and was told I wasn’t a beneficiary after all.

Meanwhile, my bereaved 89-year-old father, who also shares my name, was notified that he was due to receive £19,000 from his daughter’s pension fund. Again, the letter was intended for my son, but L&G had sent it to the wrong address.

It transpired that L&G had lost my sister’s letter of instruction for the allocation of her pension and refused to discuss it with her executors. The family has been assured, by the ironically named “sensitive claims manager”, that we will receive an explanation and apology. But we have heard nothing. Irrespective of the money, this has been extremely distressing.

JM, La Vienne, France

Where to start with a bungling of this scale. Having discovered the errors, it’s beyond belief that L&G did not then hasten to explain and apologise. They only did so when they saw a headline looming, whereupon they agreed that “the level of service experienced is not to the standard that he should expect from Legal & General”.

They admit the sensitive claims department did not check your sister’s paperwork properly, and divided the fund among the beneficiaries of her will, rather than those she had specified as recipients. They were then confused by the fact that you and your son share the same name, and admit that their helpline lacked empathy and failed to take your complaints seriously. It turns out that you are not, after all, a beneficiary of the pension fund.

The head of customer and client operations has requested a detailed report of your experience so the many failings can be addressed, and you have received a call from a senior manager and a letter offering £500 in goodwill.

L&G adds: “We should have handled the case more sympathetically when the mistake was brought to our attention, and this has clearly compounded the matter.”

Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Can you please help me as BT is chasing me for £348 in early termination fees despite previously telling me that it would forgo these charges. The broadband service provided to my house had always been poor but after I had open-heart surgery four years ago, I needed a service that worked. After repeated attempts by BT to improve matters, I eventually switched to Sky, which improved matters somewhat.

At the time, BT said I could leave penalty-free, and staff told me to ignore any bills that were sent. However, the company’s most recent letter said it will pass the matter to debt collectors if the bill is not paid with seven days.

AB, Penzance

It won’t be much consolation to you but I think BT’s customer services are much improved in recent years – most likely due to the decision to bring its call centre operations back to the UK.

After I got on to BT, it quickly resolved the matter. It says: “We’re very sorry for the time it has taken to remove AB’s early termination fees. This was due to human error when processing the final bill and closing the account.”

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@We live in an era in which, for the most part, the generations do not mix frequently. Grandparents are visited occasionally; young people seek the freedom of independent living as early as possible. On social media, intergenerational warfare is commonplace, as members of gen Z (those born between the mid-90s and the early 10s) criticise older people for hoarding wealth, while baby boomers bemoan the perceived sensitivity of the younger generation.

But what would happen if baby boomers gave the TikToking young adults of today an insight into their thinking – and threw some life advice into the bargain? To that end, we assembled a panel of baby boomers – Tayo Idowu, 64, a marketing director from London; Liz Richards, 68, a retired nurse from Derby; Paul Gibson, 63, an accountant from Arundel, West Sussex; and Maggie Tata, 65, a carer from London – to answer gen Z’s questions (even the tongue-in-cheek ones).

What do you admire in younger people today?

Caitlin, 22, Norwich

Idowu: I admire them for their tenacity.

Tata: And also for their adaptability. I don’t know how they do it. They can suck everything in and still manage to cope. And they’re willing to take risks. Their courage is just amazing.

Gibson: I admire them for their confidence in IT. They’re probably the first digital natives, aren’t they? They’ve embraced all the possibilities of technology.

Richards: For me, it’s how they’ve coped with the pandemic. I think they’ve had the worst time of any group, really. Obviously, not from the sickness and death point of view, but the fact that when you’re young your life is going out, meeting other people, doing all of that. They’ve had to do without a lot of it.

‘Their courage is just amazing’ ... Maggie Tata. Photograph: David Levene/The Guardian

Do you think young people are overly sensitive and privileged?

JD, 21, south Wales

Idowu: It depends how you define sensitive or privileged. I know some young people and for them the thought of going out to work in the summer holiday is like: maybe after I’ve rested for a long time. In our day, the idea of getting a paper round was the norm. So, definitely in terms of privilege, for some of them I can feel that.

Gibson: I think they’re much more aware and have a greater empathy and understanding of people’s journeys. So I use words like sensitive in a positive way, not in a Piers Morgan snowflake way, because they’re not snowflakes. They’re resilient and adaptable and more aware of their world’s issues.

Why do you hate selfies?

Bethany, 22, London

Richards: I don’t hate selfies! I love them. Some of the best pictures I’ve got are selfies. But sometimes it’s constant selfies – and then it gets a bit tedious.

Idowu: We don’t hate selfies per se. It’s the volume of them.

Would you have chosen to live your life differently if you were born in our generation?

Diana, 19, Aberdeen

Gibson: If I were starting over, I would take more risks. My early life was fairly risk-free. I wanted to go to Cambridge, which I did. My father was an accountant and it was expected that I would become an accountant, so I did. I would take more risks with my life and with my career, seek out more diversity. I think I lacked that in the earlier years. And perhaps I wouldn’t have one linear career, which is what I’ve done, but several different careers. Because inside I feel like a writer, but on the outside I look like an accountant. If I were starting over, I’d give that writer a little bit more space and that accountant a little less space. I think I’d be a richer person for that.

‘If I were starting over, I would take more risks’ ... (clockwise from top left) Tayo Idowu, Paul Gibson, Maggie Tata and Liz Richards. Photograph: Supplied image

What is your best advice for how to achieve financial security?

Judith, 23, Barcelona

Tata: Oh God, that’s a good one. Invest, invest, invest! Multiple streams of income. That’s it. You can’t just have a nine-to-five job any more. You have to do lots and lots of different things.

Idowu: As early as you can, get a life insurance policy. Make sure it’s a whole-life insurance policy, because that way, if something happens to you, you have something substantial to leave to your offspring. Also, look outside your main career for income. I think it’s called a “side hustle” now, right? I used to go to police auctions – this was way before eBay – and buy things, then advertise them in the classified ads. If you can, get on the property ladder as soon as possible.

Gibson: For me, saving has always been very important, but I went to university at a time when there was no student debt and housing was affordable. But – and it’s a huge “but” – if you can, start a pension early. It’s called compounding. If you start a pension at 21 and retire at 65, that pension has been going for 45 years, and a very small sum can become a substantial sum. The state pension isn’t enough to live on, sadly. But I recognise how that advice is just not practical for so many people who are paying eye-watering amounts of rent.

Why do you always get to the airport so early?

Jamie, 20, Southport

Idowu: Because the tyres might burst. What I mean by that is that we have to think ahead and plan for possible eventualities. A lot of generation Z, they leave everything to literally the last minute and don’t think about the possibility of anything going wrong. But we were brought up in a generation where things could go wrong. Technology wasn’t reliable. Cars weren’t as reliable. Electrical stuff wasn’t reliable. So we had to leave plenty of time in case things didn’t go right. That’s carried over in our attitude.

How do you even use a paper map?

Nic, 23, London

Tata: I don’t even have a clue, because I just go on Google and type what I have to find. That’s one advantage with technology for me, because I can’t see properly anyway.

Idowu: We had A-Zs and they were very simple. Say for instance you’re going to Grange Road in Croydon, you would look up Grange Road at the back … [Idowu patiently explains how to use an A-Z.] It’s not that difficult.

‘Look outside your main career for income. I think it’s called a “side hustle” now, right?’ ... Tayo Idowu. Photograph: David Levene/The Guardian

What mistakes did your generation make – and what can gen Z learn from them?

Hayley, 23, Northampton

Richards: When I was younger, the attitudes towards women who got pregnant out of marriage were awful. The world sort of fell in on them. It was also hypocritical, because there would often be illegitimate children in families, but everyone pretended that wasn’t the case. Another big mistake I lived through was how we treated gay people. People had to pretend and it caused such pain and distress.

Idowu: Another mistake we made was listening to everything our teachers and parents told us and believing it. Because half the time they were saying things knowing full well they weren’t going to happen. I think today’s children are a lot more challenging of what adults tell them, which is a good thing.

Tata: Yes. We didn’t have a choice, really. But they can find information out for themselves. I’m grateful for their free spirit, because we were just told that we had to do as we were told.

Gibson: For me, it’s our generation’s failure to act on climate change. We know what we need to do, but we lack the individual and political leadership to change the way we live and protect the environment. Our failure will be felt for generations to come.

Why do all boomers find windfarms so ugly?

Louis, 23, Glasgow

Idowu: Well, I wouldn’t want to live next to one, put it like that. I wouldn’t say I find them ugly. I think I find them intriguing. I actually prefer windfarms to solar panels. They look a bit more elegant, if I may say. Having these massive solar panels looks strange in the beautiful countryside.

What is the difference between pennies, shillings and pounds?

Jonathan, 24, London

Gibson: I think the question might be getting at the fact we hold on to old ways of doing things. When I’m in the car, I can’t do litres of fuel per 100km, because I don’t know what those numbers mean. I still use miles per gallon.

Have you changed opinion politically since you were a young adult?

Atila, 17, London

Richards: I have definitely got more conservative, with a small C, as I’ve got older. [She laughs.] I had some fairly radical thoughts as a young person. You try not to, but you do harden your opinions on certain things – and sometimes that’s a good thing, because you won’t be swayed by other people. But some people think whatever they think is absolutely right and they sort of keep on at you, until you agree with them.

Idowu: I’ve softened. I’ve gone from more of a Marxist-Leninist stance to a soft-left stance.

Gibson: I’ve not changed. I was a great supporter of Jeremy Corbyn and I think I would have been as a young person. Obviously, it didn’t go well, but a lot of the ideas he came up with were ahead of their time and, in the next five years, we might begin to follow them.

‘I have definitely got more conservative, with a small C’ ... Liz Richards.

Do you believe that gen Z aren’t able to buy homes because we are lazy and don’t work hard enough?

Rebecca, 21, Lincoln

Richards: Absolutely not! [She looks horrified.] My sons aren’t gen Z, they’re in their 30s, but they can’t buy homes. House prices have been crazy over the past 20 years.

Idowu: I bought my first house for £23,000. Nowadays, that would probably be £300,000 – and instead of finding a £3,000 deposit, you’d need £30,000.

What is your generation’s obsession with Facebook?

Hannah, 23, Cambridge

Tata: I am on Facebook, but I’m not obsessed with it. I just use it to connect with my family and friends worldwide. I don’t really go and post things in it, unless there’s an occasion like a family wedding and some people couldn’t come.

Much divides us, but one trend unites our youth cultures: can we agree on platform shoes?

Caroline, 22, Washington DC

Idowu: I love my platform shoes. I had beautiful patent leather and suede ones that I bought from a shop called Ravel. I don’t know where they are now, but platforms are definitely a big thumbs up from me.

What is your view on TikTok?

Shriya, 24, India

Idowu: I think it’s a massive and amazing tool for creativity, because you have to encapsulate so much in such a short space of time.

What do you think of the rising awareness of mental health – and do you wish you had the same awareness when you were younger?

Grace, 20, Exeter

Tata: Definitely! Definitely. It was taboo for us growing up. We couldn’t even talk about mental health. People would be locked up in what we used to term “mental homes” and that was it. It’s so good that mental health is being addressed now and it’s not a taboo.

Do you still like boiled sweets?

MJ, 23, London

Idowu: I’m still partial to cola cubes. There’s a sweet shop in Greenwich that sells old-fashioned sweets. Whenever I pass it, I go in to buy some cola cubes.

What is the one thing you wish you had known before you were 30?

Abbie, 22, Bristol

Idowu: If I’d known before 30 that as you get older you have less energy, I would have had my children much earlier. Because what you don’t want is when you take your son to school and people say: “Is that your grandad?”

Richards: Getting your foot on the property ladder if you possibly can is a good idea. Paying into a pension. It’s awfully boring and, of course, when you’re at that age, you never think you will need it, because you never think you will be old, but age does come. And travel. Meet new people, educate yourself about different cultures. That will set you up for being a decent, balanced person.

Gibson: I think I would say to an under-30, or myself at that age, to be bold. When you look back, failure isn’t a terrible thing. It’s actually quite often a positive thing. You can learn from it, you can grow from it. When I was under 30, I was very anxious about failing and I think I missed out on some of the things we’ve been talking about – travelling and meeting new people and getting new experiences. I wouldn’t worry about failing. I would be bold.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I’m sure you will have received many letters about Ryanair during the pandemic but I’d like your views on our experience.

We decided to take our extended family on holiday to Marseille in July 2020, so we booked flights – more than half with Ryanair and the rest with easyJet. Due to Covid we were unable to travel last July. EasyJet gave us vouchers for their flights; however, our Ryanair flights weren’t cancelled, so our only option was to change flights to this July, and to pay the extra charges of £1,000.

As this July approached it became clear we couldn’t travel as most of the party were not fully immunised. EasyJet cancelled its flights and issued new vouchers. The Ryanair flights were not cancelled, so once again we tried to rebook.

To avoid paying any more, I looked for flights that were well within the price we had already paid, leaving enough credit to pay the flight change fees. I found four to Lisbon but when I phoned Ryanair to make the changes, I was asked for another £470 payment.

At this point I decided I had had enough and refused. Had I gone ahead, it would have meant I would have paid £1,800 for four return flights to Lisbon – flights that I had just seen on the Ryanair website on sale at £800.

The company said rebooked flights are priced differently to new bookings. I cannot understand how this is legal – it certainly isn’t ethical. As a family we have collectively lost £2,500 to Ryanair, and only wanted £800 worth of flights, but the company wouldn’t do it. We feel very badly treated.

ST, by email

I can well understand why you are so cross. Ryanair told me that as you booked the original flights before it introduced its “zero change fee” policy, a flight change fee and the difference in fare would apply – hence the extra charges. However, it should be said that only last week, the consumer body Which? reported that passengers who had tried to test out the airline’s zero change fee were still reporting being overcharged.

As we found last year, Ryanair offers two-tier pricing – the online price for new customers, and the much higher price for those moving flights via its online portal. No explanation of this has been offered. The question as to whether it is legal remains unchallenged, as far as I know. It has certainly upset a great many passengers but, as we know, this is a company that appears to care less than others about such matters.

The simple answer is to always look at Ryanair flights as non-changeable, and accept that it will almost certainly be cheaper just to buy new ones if the worst happens. Meanwhile, if you still want to fly somewhere this summer, Ryanair has said that if you contact its customer services, “the change fee will be waived this time”.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Q Our house is now owned outright after 25 years of us both paying the mortgage but only my husband’s name is on the deeds. As we are getting older (he is 62 and I am 58), we are wondering whether it would be prudent to put both our names on the deeds in case one of us needs full-time care services. I don’t understand how much of the house the council may be able to take if he was to go into care or if I would have to sell the house to pay for it. Is there any way of protecting my half or should it be the other way round?

I have worked with a few people who have come across this dilemma as their partners have had dementia and eventually required a full-time care home, and have had to take measures to protect themselves from having to sell their home. I think they had to use the equity in their property but could not save their half even though it was willed to their children.

We have a will with our solicitors, and our daughter is the main beneficiary. I am looking into making her lasting power of attorney for us both, so should her name go on the mortgage, too?

CA

A At the risk of sounding flippant, you haven’t got a mortgage to add your daughter’s name to – even if you wanted to – as your husband owns the house outright. But even if you were still paying a mortgage, there would still be no need to add your daughter to it once the power of attorney was in place because it would give her the power to deal with the mortgage on your behalf.

But back to the question of what would have to happen to your house if one of you went into a full-time care home. The answer is absolutely nothing. The council will not take any of it, nor will you be forced to sell it. When a local authority conducts a means test to see how much someone should contribute to their care costs, the means test does not include the value of a home that will continue to be occupied by the spouse or partner of the person going into care. You do not need to put the property into joint names, nor do you need to protect your potential half of the property. It might be an idea to put other savings and investments into joint names, however, as only the share of the person being means tested is included. So, if, for example, your husband had £30,000 in a sole savings account, the whole £30,000 would be included in the means test. If it was a joint savings account, only £15,000 would be included in his means test.

Finally, bequeathing a property to children – or anyone else for that matter – makes no difference whatsoever to whether its value is included in the means test or not.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners’ series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better.

The news in clues

A crosswording first, I think, from Vlad for one of the phrases which have entered the common consciousness in the last 17 months:

8d ‘Following ladies sleep around’ sounds like a witty comment? (4,5,6)

[ wordplay: synonym for ‘following’ + anagram of LADIESSLEEP ]

It’s a rare double-wordplay reference to Chris Whitty’s NEXT SLIDE PLEASE. Over at the Telegraph, until recently, I would have dissected this clue differently:

8a Round fired by every gun in wood – screech heard, exposing game (5,10)

[ wordplay: synonym for ‘round fired by every gun’ inside (‘in’) synonyms for soundalikes of (‘heard’) a wood and a screech ]

[ VOLLEY inside soundalikes of BEECH and BAWL ]

[ definition: exposing game ]

I would have presumed the setter – who I take to be the great Allan Scott – was using “exposing” as a link between the two routes to BEACH VOLLEYBALL, but given the recent skeeviness over the clothing of female athletes, I suspect it is better as part of the definition.

Latter patter

If you solve American-style puzzles, you’ll expect to encounter a certain Great Lake and a certain word for nest at least once a week each. They’re less common in British crosswords, which don’t require every square to be part of an across as well as a down entry: but here they both are in a clue from Pasquale in the quiptic, the Guardian’s “puzzle for beginners and those in a hurry”:

9a Nests, as seen across one of the Great Lakes (6)

[ wordplay: AS (‘as’), containing (‘seen across’) name of a Great Lake ]

[ AS containing ERIE ]

The plural, then, of AERIE. Or, as it’s also spelled, EYRIE. Or indeed, AERY. And you’re spoiled for choice when it comes to pronunciation.

Pursuing the question of how it used to be pronounced, lexicographers have spent days on end in dead ends. You might look for clues in Samuel Johnson’s take:

‘eyry’ in Samuel Johnson’s Dictionary

The problem here is that it’s not clear how to pronounce “ey, an egg”, especially as “ey” is not an egg and the word EYRIE doesn’t come from a word for egg. Dr Johnson seems both to have made this up and to have forgotten that he’d earlier given AERIE as being from “[aire, Fr]”, which is also suspect. Sorry, Samuel: no disrespect.

So we’re left with that rare bird: a word for which the OED gives three accepted pronunciations, rhyming with “weary”, “wiry” and “wary”. It’s fun to visit and click on them in turn if you’ve got nothing better to do. Does anyone know of any normal words with four accepted pronunciations?

In the meantime, the subject of our next challenge also has three. Again, if you’re at a loose end, you can amuse yourself by combining one of the first two at Oxford Learner’s Dictionaries with “house” or “rock”, or by trying to popularise a fourth pronunciation: the third version but with the stress on the second syllable. Reader, how would you clue GARAGE?

Puzzling elsewhere

The crossword setter Emu also makes radio. The latest series of John Finnemore’s Souvenir Programme is unlike the others in many ways: as well as there being no audience, it’s more like a single three-hour family saga imparted in fragments that your mind reassembles later.

I must have been doing too many puzzles of the non-crossword variety, because I realised that in between episodes, the back of my mind was trying to “solve” this – but it’s a very human tale, not a mystery with a solution. At least, I think that’s the case.

In any event, reader GappyTooth suggests that it would be rewarding to listen to the uplifting 60th birthday speech that the apparently aphasic Jerry gives in episode six and try to work out what he was intending to say, starting with “Gently, ladybird, here we come”. Like everything else in the series, the scene has a different meaning once you’ve heard the other episodes.

Cluing challenge

Many thanks for your clues for BACKSTROKE. The audacity award goes to Croquem for “Going swimmingly (OK)?” and I enjoyed the discussion following Nestingmachine’s bald-faced “Ekorts”.

Incidentally, there was some earlier discussion about a different clue altogether. At the beginning of Ladies’ Month in the weekend i paper, the editor asked Chalicea for a favourite clue; it was “Whence camping equipment transported to faraway places? (3,3,6,5)”. Now that Ladies’ Month has ended, it has been confirmed that it breaks down as follows …

IQ crossword number 1710 by Ifor (extract)

… and I can only assume that this airline is the BEA in question!

Back to business: the runners-up are GappyTooth’s intriguing “Rear pet to swim with nose in the air” and PeterMooreFuller’s all-too-plausible “Outdated hit performed as part of medley”; the winner is Rakali’s sneaky “Champion shot in pool competition”.

Kludos to Rakali; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. And the latest in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-21 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen To is from Deco.

Wonderwall x Smalltown Boy by Deco

Clue of the fortnight

“I don’t think anything is going to beat Phi’s 4/5 across in the i’s Five Clue Cryptic” says Schroduck. And here it is:

Unusually, I won’t give the answer as it’s so much more satisfying when you see it yourself.

The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.

Here is a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Fill the grid so that every row, every column and every 3x3 box contains the numbers 1 to 9.

Buy the next issue of the Guardian or subscribe to our Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines.

Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The questions

1 What was first published in Dutch as Het Achterhuis in 1947?

2 Which town is named after a martyred king of the East Angles?

3 Why is bacterium ideonella sakaiensis a hope for the environment?

4 Which band has had No 1 albums across six decades?

5 What is London’s only registered battlefield site?

6 An epithalamium is written in honour of what?

7 Who claims to be “the greatest player ever to throw a dart”?

8 What has been memorised by a hafiz(a)?

What links:

9 Forefinger; backbone; tube attached to the large intestine?

10 Marguerite Yourcenar; Robert Graves; Robert Harris?

11 1772; 1793; 1795; 1939?

12 Naomi Watts; Jessica Lange; Fay Wray?

13 Ipswich Witches; Belle Vue Aces; King’s Lynn Stars?

14 Mingrelian; Avar; Bats; Chechen; Ingush?

15 Water (1); sun (2); stone (3); beryl (4)?

Bat out of India. Photograph: Getty Images

The answers

1 Anne Frank’s diary (The Secret Annexe).

2 Bury St Edmunds.

3 It “eats” PET plastics.

4 Rolling Stones.

5 Barnet (1471).

6 Wedding (song or poem).

7 Phil Taylor (on his official website).

8 Qur’an.

9 Parts of the body in books: index (finger); spine; appendix.

10 Wrote fictionalised Roman memoirs: Memoirs of Hadrian; I, Claudius; Cicero trilogy (narrated by Tiro).

11 Poland disappearing from the map: three 18th-century partitions and German-Soviet division.

12 Played “love interest” of Kong.

13 Speedway teams.

14 Caucasian languages.

15 Name origins of first four elements: hydrogen; helium; lithium; beryllium.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If you’ve been reading a lot of these recipe roundups, you’ll know how often limes feature. If you’re cooking with avocado, you’ll often need a lime. If you’re cooking with tequila – either because your life has gone terribly wrong or because the recipe calls for it – you will almost always need a lime. But you know what? Maybe it’s time we made limes the star of the show.

Lime creme fraiche cookies

We’re going to start with Dan Lepard, because he makes an incredibly prescient point about cooking with limes; compared with other citrus, you need a lot of them to extract a decent amount of flavour. Take his lime creme fraiche cookies, for example. A single lime only has enough zest to power five of them. If you’re prepared to put in the zesting effort, though, you’ll be rewarded in spades. These are lovely, delicate things that, as Lepard says, work brilliantly with ice-cream.

Key lime pie

Felicity Cloake’s perfect key lime pie from last year uses just as many limes – five in total, for a full-sized pie – but the tanginess is much more pronounced here, because you don’t actually cook the filling. Unlike its cousin, the lemon meringue pie, the lime juice acts as the agent that “cooks” the egg yolks contained within. Every day’s a school day.

Lime marshmallows

Tamal Ray’s lime marshmallows. Photograph: Louise Hagger/The Guardian. Food styling: Emily Kydd, Prop styling: Jennifer Kay, Food Assistant: Katy Gilhooly

The acidity of lime is used to equally great effect in Tamal Ray’s lime marshmallows. If you have made marshmallows at home before, you will know that – barring any mishaps – they are substantially nicer than the shop bought variety, softer and richer and more delicate. But Ray’s decision to add lime juice makes them better still; they’re light and tangy and almost refreshing.

Lime bars

We can round out the sweet section of this list with the easiest recipe: Rock Recipes’ five ingredient lime bars. If you have butter, sugar, flour, eggs and limes in your house (which I do), then you can throw these gorgeous little cookie bars together in 40 minutes (which I will).

Watermelon and cucumber mint tzatziki

Let’s move on to the savoury ideas. Andrea Albin’s recipe for watermelon and cucumber mint tzatziki salad doesn’t put lime at the centrepiece as much as other recipes, but its inclusion is nonetheless vital. This dish is a blast of undiluted summer, and ready in seconds. Refreshing cucumber, refreshing watermelon and refreshing mint, doused in refreshing lime juice; beautiful, quenching simplicity.

Four-lime green bean salad

Yotam Ottolenghi’s four-lime green bean salad. Photograph: Louise Hagger/Louise Hagger for the Guardian

Only Yotam Ottolenghi would have the temerity to use multiple types of lime in a recipe, but his four-lime green bean salad just about warrants the faff. On the plus side, he counts lime juice and lime zest as two different ingredients, but then again, he also asks you to locate makrut lime leaves and half a tablespoon of ground Iranian lime. It comes together beautifully – a din of peas and beans and chilli and mint – but don’t make it until you’ve done your shopping.

Lime and coconut dal

So far, none of these recipes are designed to be eaten hot. Let’s remedy that with Rukmini Iyer’s lime and coconut dal from her book Roasting Tin Around the World. Like all her recipes, this is simplicity itself, but the result here is creamy and lively and gloriously yellow.

Brothy tomato and fish soup with lime

Tomato and fish soup with lime. Photograph: Sergii Koval/Alamy

Similarly, Andy Baraghani’s recipe for brothy tomato and fish soup with lime is a veritable party in your mouth. The ingredients – cod, tomato, lemongrass, chilli, fish sauce, coriander – make for a complex, delicious slurp, but the last-minute addition of lime juice launches the whole thing into the stratosphere. If you’re making this, it pays to be a little bolder with seasoning than you would normally be.

Barbecued sweetcorn with burnt lime

Sweetcorn with grilled limes. Photograph: bhofack2/Getty Images/iStockphoto

We’ll end with a couple of family favourites. Corn on the cob is one of the best ways to get vegetables into a child, because they can hold them in their hands and pretend to be a beaver or a squirrel. I’ve started to cook them according to Riverford’s recipe for barbecued sweetcorn with burnt lime: rub some lime halves with brown sugar, pop them cut side down in a hot cast iron pan, wait for them to caramelise and then squeeze over the corn. Delicious.

Mango con chile y limon

Finally, my wife refuses to eat mango unless it’s prepared the way she ate them as a child, doused in lime juice. I can’t just write “put lime juice on a mango”, because that’s too easy. Instead, here’s Par Taste’s recipe for mango con chile y limon; it’s mango with lime juice on it, but also chilli powder. You’re welcome.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Name: Marriage.

Age: The first recorded evidence of a wedding ceremony dates to 2350BC, in Mesopotamia.

Appearance: Increasingly rare.

You mean there’s less of it about than in 2350BC? Well, certainly less than in the 1960s, at least in England and Wales.

How much less? In 1961, 68% of people over the age of 16 were married, according to figures released by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and recently digitised.

And now? In 2011 – the most recent census for which we have figures – it was just 49%, including same-sex civil partnerships.

I guess marriage isn’t as popular as it used to be. That’s true overall, but not uniformly. In six local authorities, marriage percentages have increased. In Clitheroe, the proportion of married people went up eight points over the same 50 years.

How do you explain such an isolated outbreak of marital persistence? Hard to say, but the outliers were mostly rural districts where communities tend to be older.

All the same, I think the people of Clitheroe should stop drinking their tap water as a precaution. Perhaps they should be bottling it.

Is there any aspect of matrimony for which the people of England and Wales have shown an increased enthusiasm? Yes! But it’s divorce. In 1961, fewer than 1% of people over 16 were divorced. In 2011, the number was 9%, including dissolved same-sex civil partnerships.

Why the huge increase? The main reason is that it became a lot easier to get divorced over that 50-year period.

Have the people of Clitheroe heard about this? Maybe someone should put up posters.

You would think, with fewer couples getting married, divorces would also be falling. That has been happening, but only since 2003, when divorces reached a peak of 153,065 for the year. By 2011, they had dropped to 117,558 and have fallen further since.

What else do we know? People are getting married and divorced later in life than they were in 1961.

How come we’re only just finding this out? It’s all thanks to the work of 2,800 volunteers who have helped digitise scans of a 1961 regional ONS study, making detailed local comparisons possible.

Fascinating. Did you know, for example, that in the area of Mitford and Launditch in Norfolk, 59% of homes had no inside or attached toilet in 1961?

What does that have to do with marriage? I don’t know, but it can’t help matters.

Do say: “I do … think we should wait another year.”

Don’t say: “Don’t blame me – I’m a bigamist.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@How does your brain know that you know something without being able to remember it at the time? For example, knowing a word that could be used perfectly in context but not being able to remember the word. Felix Buda

Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@‘Darwin’s really rallied behind us,’ Claire Summers, executive director of Darwin Aboriginal art fair, says of the thousand-plus audience who attended From Country to Couture. Now in its fifth year, the runway show celebrates interdisciplinary collaborations between art centres, fashion designers and other creative practitioners. This year’s show featured 12 fashion collections and, for the first time, accessories from artists of Numbulwar Numburindi Arts.

For some participants, From Country to Couture is a launching pad, while others view the event as a goal in itself. ‘It is incredibly inclusive,’ says Summers. ‘Not everyone is commercial, it’s mostly bespoke and one-off pieces, it’s more about the art.’
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@At just 16 years old, Casey Donovan found herself propelled to overnight fame when she won the second season of Australian Idol.

That was 2004 and in the 17 years since, Donovan has enjoyed a career across song, stage and screen. This month she returns to Australian TV to host What Does Australia Really Think About … a new SBS program premiering 18 August at 8.30pm. Donovan’s episode of the docu-series, which explores how stigma and prejudice affect the lives of Australians, focuses on obesity. It’s a topic of personal importance to the performer, who has had to contend with comments about her weight ever since she appeared on Idol.

Music is still an important part of Donovan’s life, which is why she rates an acoustic guitar as her most prized possession. Here, she tells us about that beloved instrument, as well as the story of two other important items.

What I’d save from my house in a fire

Casey Donovan’s beloved Australian-made guitar, which she would save from her house in a fire. Photograph: Casey Donovan

I think I’d have to save my guitar. It’s a Cole Clark guitar called a ‘Fat Lady’. I got it from a guitar shop up in Sydney about four or five years ago, when I was living there. It was a great investment – they’re not cheap. But they’re an Australian-made guitar company, which is pretty bloody awesome.

She’s a great guitar; she’s got me through many a tough time and helped me through lockdown. And life’s pretty boring without music.

My most useful object

I think my most useful object would be, good god, my frypan. It scrambles my eggs, it cooks my mince, it keeps me well fed. I think there’s not a day that goes by that I haven’t used it. I do cook a fair bit, so it’s nice to have a good frypan.

This one isn’t anything fancy, but nothing is more exciting than a new nonstick pan. It feels great. And you make promises to yourself – like this time I’m only going to use wooden utensils, I’m not gonna flick my eggs with my fork.

I probably should have spent a bit more than what I did on this little thing – I think I got it from Coles, if I’m being honest – but that comes at a later age.

I’m thinking once I hit maybe 36 it’s time to really settle down with a good frypan. I’m 33 now, so I’ve got a good few years up my sleeve yet.

The item I most regret losing

I don’t know if I’ve lost anything, but I did have to part ways with my favourite pair of slippers. I got them in a shop in Melbourne when I was travelling, doing We Will Rock You, many years ago. They were great.

They hadn’t been worn out to their full potential, but my cat peed on them, I put them in the wash and they shrunk. So I had to chuck them out. The loss is still pretty raw so I haven’t got a replacement pair yet.

We’ll be changing seasons soon so I feel like I’ve missed out on the chance to get a full-leg ugg boot this winter. Maybe next year, we’ll see how we go. My lockdown life is pretty sad right now!
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Rebekah Campbell remembers the moment she knew things had to change. “I got to age 34 and woke up one Christmas morning on a fold-out bed in the garage of some friends of my parents and was like, ‘I don’t want to live the rest of my life like this,’” she says. “I could see that I was potentially going to miss out on having a family unless I did something drastic.”

Campbell was single and had not been on a date since the death of her boyfriend a decade prior. In those 10 years, she focused her energy on building a successful business career, including founding the order-ahead app Hey You. So she resolved to begin dating the same way she launched brands: by sketching out a plan that resembled the “sales funnel” she used in her work.

“I thought about it the same way for dating: at the top of the funnel I needed to have as many candidates as possible,” she says.

138 Dates author Rebekah Campbell. To vet dating candidates she matched with online, Campbell screened them on the phone before meeting in person. Photograph: Allen and Unwin

To bring in “leads”, Campbell signed up for online dating platforms such as eHarmony and Tinder, and tasked friends with matchmaking duties. She created a list of the traits she wanted in a partner. To vet candidates, she had screening calls with potential dates before meeting them. And to ensure a “controlled experiment”, she met her suitors at one of the same two venues every week. Campbell documented her strategy in the book 138 Dates, out now through Allen & Unwin. (The approach paid off – after three years of dating, Campbell met her now-husband.)

138 Dates is one woman’s personal dating strategy, but Campbell is not alone in applying a set of rules to her love life. On Reddit, a community of 179,000 mostly heterosexual women discuss their courtship tactics in the subreddit r/FemaleDatingStrategy. The board began in 2019, but the Female Dating Strategy universe expanded this year to include a website and podcast.

Female Dating Strategy (FDS) offers a range of (often brutal, expletive-laden) advice to single women, designed to “[optimise] the female dating experience”. Among the six-point FDS mantras are “ruthlessly evaluate men”, “make him invest before sex” and “don’t split the bill”.

Its list of no-nos includes asking a man out (FDS believes women should not make the first move) and drink dates (they’re “low effort”; going out for a meal is preferred). FDS advocates dating multiple men simultaneously, cutting suitors off at the first red flag and, as Campbell did, conducting pre-date interviews over the phone. The goal is to filter out anyone who is not, in FDS parlance, a “high-value man”.

If you want a favourable outcome in any arena ... you normally need a strategy Savannah, host of the Female Dating Strategy podcast

Deploying some form of strategy around dating is nothing new. Since the 1800s women have parsed Jane Austen novels for wisdom on selecting suitors. More recently, 1990s hit book The Rules explicitly doled out such dating instructions to women as “Don’t call him and rarely return his calls” and “Don’t accept a Saturday night date after Wednesday”. For men, 2005 bestseller The Game explored the world of pick-up artistry, encouraging techniques such as “negging” – making comments that undermine a woman’s self-confidence so they’re more vulnerable to male advances.

Sometimes FDS echoes the social conservatism of The Rules: having sex in the first six weeks is discouraged and FDS comes down hard against pornography, kink and the sex-positive politics of “liberal feminism” – all of which the group’s moderators believe are harmful to women.

<strong><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/newsletters/2019/oct/18/saved-for-later-sign-up-for-guardian-australias-culture-and-lifestyle-email">Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning</a></strong>

While The Rules prescribed what women can do to snare men, FDS focuses more on asking its disciples to ensure men are actually worth their time. For the female dating strategist, adherents say, being single is not a failure but an opportunity to work on yourself.

“FDS is very big on establishing your own life, keeping busy and having your own interests, because then it makes it a lot easier to see if a man is adding value to your life,” explains Savannah, age 24, who happened upon r/FemaleDatingStategy in 2019 and today co-hosts The Female Dating Strategy podcast. To avoid being harassed by Reddit’s many Female Dating Strategy critics, Savannah and her co-hosts do not use their last names.

“It’s not an exclusively FDS thing to have boundaries and standards, but FDS really drove the point home in a way that made the most sense to me,” Savannah says.

Two years on, Savannah is in a relationship with a man she courted using FDS principles. Her experience has been positive, “Maybe because I’m more coming from a place of confidence, whereas perhaps before in my dating life I really wasn’t confident at all.”

Inventing rules and regulations for dating is a way to feel like we are counteracting that messiness Grace Sharkey, University of Sydney

Savannah believes having a dating strategy is important because “if you want a favourable outcome in any arena, whether that’s education or finance or career, you normally need a strategy. So it makes sense to have a dating strategy because your choice of partner is arguably one of the biggest decisions you’ll make in your lifetime.”

Grace Sharkey, an academic at the University of Sydney whose work examines feminism and queer theory, believes FDS is a way of taking back some control in an area of life that can feel overwhelming – for both women and men.

“Of course there are gendered dynamics that influence our dating lives, but I think it’s unlikely anyone feels like they have all the power all the time when it comes to dating,” she says.

“Opening ourselves up to romantic attachment is destabilising and makes us vulnerable. Dating is messy and complicated, and we all bring our own histories to romantic entanglements. Inventing rules and regulations for dating is a way to feel like we are counteracting that messiness.”

Rebekah Campbell with her husband Rod and children Eve and Bobby. Photograph: Allen & Unwin

In the age of dating apps, where many seek hook-ups not love, Savannah thinks it’s especially important to carefully screen dates. “If you’re looking for a serious relationship, online dating is basically full of atomic bombs that you can step on.”

While female dating strategy has been compared to pick-up artistry for the way it “gamifies” dating, Savannah believes FDS “isn’t about trying to manipulate men into trying to behave a certain way … it’s more about finding a man who is comfortable with you having boundaries and standards, and who understands how to treat a woman.”

Rebekah Campbell is not a subscriber of Female Dating Strategy, but like FDS believers, she aimed to date multiple men at the same time, mostly because she found dating to be a “numbers game” as much as anything else. But she did eventually break that self-imposed rule.

“When I did meet my husband I cancelled every other date that I had lined up,” she says. “I just knew straight away that he was the one.

“I think there is still something magic that happens when two people connect that you can’t necessarily turn into a formula. But putting yourself in luck’s way is definitely a good strategy.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Would you ever want your friends to see how many taxi rides you share on a wild weekend out? Who you had Thai noodles with on any given day? With whom you split rent and living expenses?

If the answer is yes, you are part of a cohort of Venmo users who use public transactions, which according to a 2018 study accounted for about 18 million people.

I am, willingly, one of them. Ever since I joined the payment service app, I’ve voluntarily displayed my financial transactions in my public feed. Between office lunches and happy hours, I’ve welcomed the ease of digitally settling a tab while attempting to garner a few laughs with my try-hard descriptions, like “adult diaper” (I don’t remember what this was for); “My fat ass” (probably food) and “Boulder holster” (yes, I paid a friend back for a bra).

I hoped my transactions would capture the attention of voyeuristic Venmo users who would be forced to think about whom I was paying and for what purpose. However cringey in hindsight, a part of me wants my friends to see a Venmo transaction for “So some improv comedians walk into a bar” and believe I might actually be a funny person, instead of a writer who took an improv class.

Before you ask, yes, every digital tool poses personal security risks – and yet it is not enough to make my transactions and friend list private. This is a bet Venmo co-founder Iqram Magdon-Ismail made early on: in 2012, he said “one of the reasons people prefer us and will prefer us in the future is just the fact that we are social. You get more value out of sharing with friends.” In short, openly and ostentatiously swapping funds is fun.

When Scottie Irvin, a 30-year-old bartender in Buffalo, New York first joined the app, he decided to lean into the feature, drafting outlandish descriptions he hoped would garner attention. On one occasion, he paid a friend on Venmo, writing “Sorry that I returned your butt plug late”, Irvin said. The next day, when his mom opened the app to Venmo him money for dog food, she saw the transaction and asked him about it. “My mom was very uncomfortable when she saw me the next day,” Irvin said. “I find it hilarious. That’s at my expense, I’m not making fun of anyone but me.”

For others, public transactions are a way to remind friends of your interests. Michelle Palmer, an orchestra manager from Pineville, Louisiana, most frequently pays independent artisans for jewelry and skin products on Venmo. She hopes her public transactions inspire friends to seek out those makers, too, acting as a de facto grassroots influencer on Venmo. The 35-year-old also enjoys reading through her friends’ public transactions, which motivates her to write cute descriptions herself.

It gives people the option to surreptitiously show off Harris Stratyner

Humans are by nature voyeuristic, said Harris Stratyner, a psychologist and clinical associate professor at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. This theoretically explains why others would find perusing public Venmo payments amusing. But for those who purposely keep their payments exposed, there is an element of exhibitionism, Stratyner said: “It gives people the option to surreptitiously show off.”

Critics are quick to call those with non-private Venmos psychopaths and exhibitionists, but public payers said they have nothing important to hide. Tyler Mulvey, a 29-year-old senior account executive from West Milford, New Jersey, said he regularly uses Venmo, from splitting groceries with his fiancee to divvying up a bar tab. He used to put lyrics to entire songs or recipes for banana bread in the transaction description until the app limited their character limit to 280.

After his fiancee’s colleague mentioned she saw one of Mulvey’s Venmos to his fiancee, she went private. He not only remained public, but began writing “raunchy” descriptions to catch the colleague’s attention. “I don’t think it’s psycho to keep your Venmo public,” Mulvey said. “I think it’s psycho to look – which I know makes me hypocritical – because if you think it’s psycho if somebody looks, then make it private. I don’t think the onus is on me to make it private, I think the onus is on you to not be a weirdo.”

Private citizens aren’t the only ones guilty of public Venmoing – but some public figures live to regret it. This spring, Representative Matt Gaetz’s 2018 public Venmo transactions to an accused sex trafficker were unearthed. Shortly after, BuzzFeed News purportedly discovered Joe Biden’s Venmo account via public friend lists on the app, sparking a debate surrounding Venmo’s public-by-default transactions and perpetually visible friend lists. As a result, Venmo announced users could make their friend lists private.

Although Venmo couldn’t be considered a social platform, some users don’t see the harm in keeping their transactions visible since they already divulge so much of their lives on other social networks. Caitlin Elliott, 31, a Lynchburg, Virginia-based student, is one of those people. “The privacy ship has sailed a long time ago,” she said. “I wear a watch with a GPS on it when I go running every single day. That’s got me down to the step on the sidewalk. Clearly I’ve made some concessions in my life.”

When Lauren Calise, who lives in Havertown, Pennsylvania, thinks about the fact that all of her social media profiles are private except for Venmo, she questions herself. The 21-year-old therapist frequently uses Venmo for paying rent, splitting groceries and meals with friends; regardless of the transaction, she’ll use a smiley face emoji as the description. But because she personally doesn’t use the app as a social platform, she assumes others won’t scrutinize her transactions, though she knows it isn’t out of the realm of possibility: her clients frequently discuss their Venmo behaviors, like monitoring the transactions of exes.

Still, she remains public. For now. “You’ve really got me thinking. If the other ones are private, maybe this one should be.”

Soon that choice will be taken away from her. Late last month, the company said it would go one step further: it would soon eliminate the global feed – a running collection of complete strangers’ transactions – in the new redesign.

While users will still be able to see their friends’ transactions (if their profiles are public), the days of snooping on strangers are over.

In a press release, Venmo said the change “allows customers to connect and share meaningful moments and experiences with the people who matter most”. Which, I’d argue, are the people who know me least.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Freecycling”, or unofficial swap shops, have been widely used in communities across the UK during the pandemic. In these groups, locals swap, share and sell items they no longer need via Whatsapp or postings on The Freecycle Network. We would like to hear your experiences of freecycling. Have you done it more during lockdown? Or has your community launched a sharing network after making connections during the pandemic?

Share your experiences

You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions.

One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details.

If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I face being unable to secure a mortgage and losing the property I want to buy because of an anomaly with address formats in Edinburgh. The flat I rent appears in two ways: Royal Mail lists it as 5/7, while on the electoral roll it is 5 3F1 (building no 5, third-floor, flat 1). My bank has it as 5 3F1. This has affected my credit report because Equifax has no record of me under the the Royal Mail format. It told me to ask Royal Mail to change its listing, but it insists its format is correct.

LW, Edinburgh

The same issue affects many Scottish residents who live in older tenement buildings, and the consequences, should they apply for any kind of credit, can be serious. Historically, flats in tenements were registered according to the street number of the building, which storey they were on, and how far they were from the top of each staircase. This has been retained for old blocks. When Royal Mail computerised its database, it counted the number of flats in a block and allocated consecutive numbers.

This matters because it’s the Royal Mail database, the postcode address file (PAF), which companies tend to rely on by default. If you apply for a mortgage online using the lender’s dropdown menu to find your address, it is likely to be the Royal Mail version. Therefore, if your bank and other companies have you registered according to the electoral roll, the lender will receive an incomplete report, or draw a blank.

The same problem can occur if a property is interchangeably known by a house name and a street number, or if “apartment” is substituted for “flat”. It’s therefore vital the same address appears on the electoral roll, the PAF and all payment accounts. Royal Mail says: “We always work closely with local authority street-naming teams to ensure our data is accurate. In this instance, there was a discrepancy between the historic address and the latter-day address.

“Royal Mail has agreed to change this on our postcode address finder database.”

Everyone thinking of applying for credit should check the details registered with the three main credit reference agencies well beforehand, and flag up any discrepancies, since a failed credit check leaves a footprint that can deter other lenders.

Lisa Hardstaff, head of customer experience at Equifax, says if there are different formats for the same address a reference agency will need to manually make a link between the PAF address, and an individual’s electoral register address. “This situation shows the importance of checking your credit report, before you make an application, to ensure that all the information is correct and up to date,” she adds.

Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@It is early morning in Charkint, in the northern Balkh province of Afghanistan, but a meeting with the governor is already well under way to urgently assess the safety of the 30,000 people she represents. Salima Mazari has been in the job for just over three years, and for her, fighting the Taliban is nothing new, but since July she has been meeting with the commanders of her security forces every day as the Islamist militants’ attacks across the country increase.

As one of only three female district governors in Afghanistan, Mazari has attracted attention simply by being a woman in charge. What sets the 40-year-old apart, particularly amid the recent wave of Taliban violence, is her hands-on military leadership. “Sometimes I’m in the office in Charkint, and other times I have to pick up a gun and join the battle,” she says.

Her job means not only managing the day-to-day bureaucracy, but also organising military operations. “If we don’t fight now against the extremist ideologies and the groups that force them on us, we will lose our chance to defeat them. They will succeed. They will brainwash society into accepting their agenda,” she warns.

Q&A What is the Women report Afghanistan series? Show As provinces and cities fall under Taliban control across Afghanistan, women’s voices are already being silenced. For this special series, the Guardian’s Rights and freedom project has partnered with Rukhshana Media, a collective of female journalists across Afghanistan, to bring their stories of how the escalating crisis is affecting the lives of women and girls to a global audience. Afghan journalists, especially women, face a dire situation. Dozens have been injured and killed. As the Taliban have advanced, many have lost their jobs or been forced into hiding. Female journalists face a double peril: attacked for their work and persecuted for their gender. All of the reporting in this series will be carried out by Afghan women, with support from the editors on the Rights and freedom project. These are the stories that Afghan women want to tell about what is happening to their country at this critical moment. Was this helpful? Thank you for your feedback.

Mazari was born in Iran in 1980, after her family fled the Soviet war in Afghanistan. After graduating from university in Tehran, she held different roles at universities and the International Organization for Migration, before deciding to head to the country her parents left decades ago. “The most painful thing about being a refugee is the lack of sense of your country,” she says. “No place is your country.”

We’ve faced Taliban attacks longer than the recent surge in violence and we’ve managed to keep them out of Charkint Salima Mazari

In 2018, she learned there was an opening for the position of district governor of Charkint, “my ancestral homeland”, as Mazari describes it. Encouraged by colleagues and family members, she applied for the post.

With her experience and qualifications, she was among the leading candidates. Her determination to work for the people of her district ensured that she was soon appointed. “Initially, I was worried that as a female governor I might be discriminated against, but the people surprised me,” she says. “The day I was officially received in Charkint as the district governor, I was overwhelmed by the support.”

Few women step out of their house here without a full hijab or a burqa, or a male guardian. To assume the role of district governor was no simple feat, and she soon found herself leading battles she had not expected.

Salima Mazari with her security detail near the frontline. Repeated requests to Kabul for military supplies have gone unanswered, she says. Photograph: Farshad Usyan/AFP/Getty

“We lack basic facilities such as access to healthcare. To manage security, we should have at least seven police ranger cars, two Humvees equipped with light and heavy weaponry. However, we have far fewer resources, even though we’ve requested them from the central government many times. My pleas have gone unheard,” she says.

Based on data provided by the Afghan district governance office, Charkint once had a population of more than 200,000 people, but war and the resulting poverty have displaced huge numbers of people. Mazari feels it is considered a second-grade district, and her task is made harder as she fights corruption within the Afghan bureaucracy.

Two years ago, Mazari established a security commission that recruits Afghans into local militias to defend the district. “I invite people from all parts of the district to my office and seek their opinion on improving the situation of Charkint. This has made residents of Charkint more invested and involved, and restores their faith in the government authority,” she says.

Her leadership style has served her well so far as renewed Taliban violence sweeps the country. “We’ve faced Taliban attacks longer than the recent surge in violence and we’ve managed to keep them out of Charkint,” she says, with evident pride. Mazari has stationed her troops on the outskirts of Charkint in the hope that militants will be unable to breach their defences.

Charkint is the only district in Afghanistan under the security management of a woman that no terrorist group has managed to occupy before. But Mazari is aware that the situation is worsening rapidly and is worried for her people. In the last week, the Taliban have taken a series of northern provinces and capitals, and fighting has raged across Balkh province.

Last year, Mazari successfully negotiated the surrender of more than 100 Taliban fighters in her region. But such negotiations are not always a success, she says.

Salima Mazari watches the fighting in Charkint. The Taliban have made sweeping gains across the northern provinces in recent weeks. Photograph: Farshad Usyan/AFP/Getty

“On multiple occasions, we sent a committee on behalf of our people to negotiate with the Taliban. We’ve had over 10 meetings to ask them to protect the lives, harvest and properties of the people. Our people are farmers and they depend on their harvest for sustenance in the winter months. But they rejected the request of people for an agreement every time,” she says.

Mazari’s growing reputation as a strong woman standing against Taliban brutality has put her life at risk. She has survived several ambushes by the Taliban, as well as mines planted by the militants to target her. “But I am not afraid,” she says. “I believe in the rule of law in Afghanistan.”

Editing and translation by Ruchi Kumar
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@In 1976, the year that Dr Joan Ullyot published her key book Women’s Running, the longest distance that female athletes were allowed to run in the Olympic Games was 1500m. Men, meanwhile, were free to run the 5,000m, 10,000m and the marathon. Ullyot, who has died aged 80 from cardiac arrest, played a crucial role in the movement that eventually led to profound change.

Ullyot, who graduated from Harvard Medical School in 1966 and became an expert in exercise physiology, systematically destroyed many of the myths surrounding women’s running.

Even in the 1970s, women were solemnly told by respected medical experts that distance running would make them unappealingly masculine, could be downright dangerous and perhaps might even cause irreparable damage to their reproductive organs. Ullyot was determined to debunk such nonsense, both in words and deeds. “The purpose of the book was to tell women what they could do in running, not what they couldn’t do,” she recalled.

Joan Ullyot running in 1974. Photograph: Bettmann Archive

Change, though, was slow in coming. Despite repeatedly being shown evidence that women were physiologically capable of exactly the same distances as men, the International Olympic Committee held out. In 1977, they refused to add even a 3,000m race for women in the 1980 Moscow games.

Alongside the women’s marathon world record holder, Jacqueline Hansen, Ullyot became a member of the International Runners’ Committee, lobbying for inclusion in distance competition. Her research was used in presentations to the IOC, and eventually the weight of evidence won out. Finally, for the 1984 games in Los Angeles, the IOC added the women’s marathon.

Less well known is another piece of pioneering work Ullyot was involved in. In 1984, she collaborated with a British company to create a “personal robot athletics coach” designed to run on Apple computers. Decades before apps and the Couch-to-5k programme, her experience provided the coaching for a “programme to guide the novice from the jogger stage to the racing stage”, according to a Guardian report from the time.

Although she was instrumental in the evolution of women’s sport, Ullyot was not a lifelong athlete.

The daughter of Theodore Lamb, an architect, and Deborah (nee Bent), she was born in Chicago and raised in Manhattan, then California, and running was never a part of her childhood.

As she recalled in a 2017 interview: ““Girls didn’t run. I don’t know why, but they just didn’t.” Even attending Wellesley College in Massachusetts – which is on the actual course of the Boston marathon – sparked no interest. As an undergraduate, she studied German and dreamed of a career in the foreign service, only to discover, to her chagrin, that female staff were not allowed to be married. Instead she turned to medicine, and joined the faculty of the University of California, San Francisco, later moving to the city’s Institute of Health Research.

It was not until her 30s that Ullyot discovered running. In 1965 she married Daniel Ullyot, a heart surgeon, and they went on to have two sons, Theodore and John. In 1971 she felt, in her own words, that she was “getting a little bit plump around the middle” and, clad in jeans, started jogging around a local park with a friend. Soon after, she entered a local 12km race, did well, and never looked back.

Joan Ullyot running on the beach near her home in San Francisco, California, in 1985. Photograph: David Madison/Getty Images

Her research and her running career followed twin trajectories. From 1972, women were finally allowed to compete officially in the Boston marathon, and in 1973 the first all-women’s marathon was held in Waldniel, West Germany. Ullyot was not only on the start line as part of the US team but also acted as interpreter.

She went on to run more than 75 marathons, as well as coaching countless other runners. That included her own sons, much to their mortification. She would run with them for the three miles to their school, both carrying backpacks of schoolbooks. “It was extremely embarrassing for a couple of teenagers,” Theodore recalled. Both, however, went on to become runners.

In fact when Theodore ran a marathon quicker than his mother’s own personal best, she resolved to outdo him, and did so by two minutes, running 2 hr 47 min when she was 48. In an interview with the New York Times the following year, she said “I’ve had a motto since turning 40. Age, experience and cunning can overcome youth and ability.”

It was her abilities as both physician and runner that afforded her such respect in the field, and such influence as part of the vanguard of women’s distance running. Kathrine Switzer – another pioneer and the first woman to officially finish the Boston marathon – described her as “an unstoppable personality, bigger than life, opinionated at the top of her mighty lungs, and with an unstinting appetite for fun and capacity for wine”.

With participation in mass marathons such as London reaching parity only now, female runners owe her much. Without the stubbornness, patience and determination of women like Ullyot, distance running for women might have stalled at the start line.

Ullyot’s first marriage ended in divorce. She is survived by her second husband, Charles Becker, whom she married in 1990, her sons and three grandchildren.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The American burger chain Wendy’s is to open a string of “dark kitchens” in the UK to serve growing demand from the home delivery market.

The company, which is returning to the UK more than 20 years after beating a retreat, said it would open up to 10 of the delivery-only kitchens by the end of this year, some of which could be run from trucks.

Abigail Pringle, the president of Wendy’s international business, said the dark kitchen sites, run via a franchise with specialist operator Reef, would form part of a plan to eventually have up to 400 outlets in the UK.

Wendy’s opened its first new UK restaurant in Reading in June and plans to have five more restaurants by the end of the year. Outlets are due to open in Stratford in east London as well as Oxford and Croydon. The company is also talking to 30 potential restaurant franchise partners to help with expansion.

Pringle said the first store was trading well, with customers tending to order the products Wendy’s was best known for, including the Frosty, a frozen dessert first launched in 1969.

She said the dark kitchens, which would initially all be in London, would form a “meaningful contribution” to the company’s UK growth plans as part of a “accessing consumers through multiple channels”.

“The UK’s delivery [market] has continued to grow year after year. Humans like convenience and that’s always going to be a part of what they are looking for.”

She said food from the dark kitchens, the first of which will open “within weeks”, would be delivered via Reef’s partnerships with major specialists, which include Uber Eats and Deliveroo.

Wendy’s UK use of the delivery-only kitchens comes after it tested the concept in the US and Canada. In Canada it also partners with Reef, which runs the kitchens from what it calls “vessels”, which can be trucks, shipping containers or repurposed warehouses or shops.

In the UK, Pringle said Wendy’s would consider a variety of locations, potentially including trucks, railway arches and industrial estate units.

Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk

Pringle said Wendy’s return to the UK would be more successful than its previous attempt in the 1980s because the company was “fully committed to long-term growth in the UK” including significant investment in company-owned restaurants.

Wendy’s is one of the first major brands to try out dark kitchens at scale in the UK, where they have proved controversial because of concerns about working conditions.

However, McDonald’s trialled a site in Hounslow in 2019 and Wagamama has about five sites with plans to open more.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@My partner and I have been together for five years; we have a son. My partner wasn’t supportive during my pregnancy and showed no interest in antenatal appointments or scans. However, as our son has got older, my partner has delighted in being a dad. The problem is, he isn’t very nice to me; he doesn’t care for or respect me.

We live in his house; I pay for everything for our son and food bills; my partner pays his mortgage and house bills. He won’t have a joint account.

Things got very bad two years ago when he told me that I’d brought nothing but misery to his life and he wanted me to leave. We made up the next day. A few months later, things deteriorated again; it coincided with a visit from the health visitor, who told me my partner was emotionally abusive and gave me numbers of organisations that could help. I went to visit my family abroad for a few weeks and on our return things improved.

We went away for a weekend before the pandemic, just the two of us. We had a good time, had sex and enjoyed it. I felt as if we had turned a corner. But then lockdown happened. I felt as if I’d stepped back into the 1950s – doing the childcare, cooking, housework, and having sex when my partner wanted it. I’m at a point where the thought of any physical relationship does not appeal.

My partner has moved into the spare bedroom. In many arguments, he says he wants a relationship – what he means is just the physical parts.

Do I try counselling, even if it’s just me? Can a relationship this dysfunctional be salvaged?



It can, but it’s really hard, especially if only one person is prepared to work on it. First, I cannot state strongly enough that you don’t have to have sex with anyone you don’t want to – and that includes the father of your child.

You say your partner has “delighted in being a dad”, but gave me no evidence of him being good at it. Because part of being a good dad is supporting the child’s mother – you. Imagine your son, grown up, and being treated by a partner in this way. What would you say? Sometimes we can’t see what is right in front of us. I think you know that this relationship is substandard, but doubt yourself.

I showed your letter to psychotherapist Chris Mills. It was long – which is fine – but it was as if, as Mills pointed out, “you were trying to give evidence”. We do this “laying out of evidence” when we lack the courage of our own convictions, because we want others to tell us what to do. Of course relationships go through rough patches and need work, but I wonder what there is to work with here?

“Nowhere,” Mills said, “do you really open up and give an opinion on your partner. Most of it is framed around wondering what he thinks of you and why he’s treating you so badly. You talk of not liking what he does, but haven’t been able to frame that as, ‘I don’t deserve this.’” You don’t want your child to grow up and see women treated that way. “But you also don’t want him to grow up and see a woman who puts up with it and doesn’t do anything about it [if they can do so safely],” Mills said.

You mentioned your health visitor telling you that you were in an emotionally abusive relationship, and you certainly seem to be, from what you’ve said. You gave me no indication that you were at risk, but I need to point out that sometimes women in abusive relationships are most at risk when they try to leave. So do please keep you and your child safe and refer to the links below. I’ve also included one to help you find out more about your rights if you do decide to separate.

I think you know in your heart that this relationship isn’t likely to improve – imagine a year; 10 years from now? It’s time to ask yourself some tough questions: what do you get out of this relationship? What do you want? And how closely do the two match? Is this what you envisaged for yourself when you were younger? I ask because sometimes calling our younger selves as witnesses to our present can be a wake-up call.

Therapy on your own would be beneficial, for you to “hear yourself back” and to give you confidence to decide what to do next.

Single parent support: gingerbread.org.uk. Advice on recognising abuse, and staying safe can be found at refuge.org.uk

Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms.

Conversations with Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here.

Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Fashion’s latest “it” accessory doesn’t come with a three-figure price tag, and it isn’t sold at exclusive boutiques. In fact, the claw clip can be found in most pharmacies nationwide and costs about £3.

The springed hair grip, with teeth to hold hair in place, is familiar to most women as a way to pin long hair up out of their face. But it isn’t usually perceived as glamorous or as part of a fashion trend. That changed when models including Kendall Jenner, Bella Hadid and Hailey Bieber started wearing the clip, and after it became the subject of hair tutorials on TikTok.

Videos with the hashtag #clawclip have been viewed 242.6m times on the app. Asos reports that in the past five months they have sold 240,000 claw clips, with sales up 57% since the autumn of 2020.

The website Refinery29 featured an article this week about ways to wear the claw clip, partly based on tips found on social media.

The site’s beauty editor, Jacqueline Kilikita, says the popularity of the clip comes from various factors. Because claw clips were popular in the early 2000s, they are part of the wider Y2K trend – which also saw scrunchies make a comeback – but more people working from home was also a factor. “The majority of us were – and still are – looking for easy, low-maintenance hairstyles that look chic, and take mere seconds to achieve at home without the need for heat styling or various hair products.”

David Schwimmer as Ross Geller and Jennifer Aniston as Rachel Green in Friends. Photograph: NBC/NBCUniversal/Getty Images

While Kilikita acknowledges the impact of celebrities wearing the claw clip, she says the fact it is so “everyday” means it will be adopted by many more women. “You don’t need to be an expert to achieve the accidentally perfect look,” she says.

This easiness of the claw clip may be why it’s so popular on TikTok, where videos frequently go viral without a famous name attached to them. “It’s equally as wearable for us mere mortals, as TikTok’s beauty content creators have demonstrated,” says Kilikita.

She points to the variety of videos on the app, from French twists to low buns, and the tutorials across demographics: “There’s a claw clip for all styles, whether the twist or bun, as well as all hair types and textures.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@For a good decade or so back there, it seemed like jeans had killed off trousers. First, the dark skinny jean replaced the black trouser as the goes‑with‑anything mainstay of getting dressed. Then white jeans became a summer daytime staple and chinos and palazzo pants went out of the window. Different denim silhouettes – low‑rise or high-waisted, mom or dad jeans, balloon-leg or carrot-shape – came to define the shape of our outfits. Somewhere along the line, trousers lost their mojo. They became what you wore to work when you didn’t feel like wearing something jazzier, like a dress.

But after a year of sweatpants, trousers are back. With their stiff denim, metal buttons and rigid waistbands, jeans are frankly too much of a shock to the system, when you have acclimatised to jersey and drawstring. Changing from a tracksuit to jeans feels like stepping out of jimjams into a suit of armour. And then there’s the fact that dressing for the office is an unfamiliar, almost exotic look for many of us, at this point. Work trousers? Exciting.

The point is, I find myself wanting to wear trousers for the first time in years, but I’m not quite sure how to do it. I have a tangle of leather belts that have been ignored in a drawer for years, and now on many mornings you will find me in front of the mirror debating which to wear – black or tan? Narrow or wide? And what to wear with a pair of trousers on a summer day – is a shirt too preppy? A T-shirt too basic?

So, in case any of it is useful, here is the sum of wisdom gleaned in my recent experiments. First, trousers in cream or tan or tobacco or light blue feel more summery than black or navy. Second, prairie or pie-crust collars do not work with tailored trousers. They are just too fussy; keep it minimal. Third, you need to wear a top that ends at your waist, or tuck it into your trousers, rather than having a long top pulled down to hip height – but a loose white shirt worn open, as a summer version of a blazer, is definitely a thing if you prefer to cover up. Finally, the belt is key, and should be as un-fancy as possible. Should it be black or tan, though? Narrow, or wide? If you figure that out, I’d love to know.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Going up

Hair as underwear See Cardi B and Normani in the video for Wild Side for the multitasking trend.

Cover story... Photograph: Collier Schorr. Styled by: Ludivine Poiblanc

Gigi Hadid in drag Her new Harper’s Bazaar shoot is very “third least important member of a 90s boy band”.

Backwards cap Matteo Berrettini in the Wimbledon final. Carolyn Bessette‑Kennedy, always and for ever.

Oakley Overthetops The extreme sunglasses are now a cult item – with Ato Boldon at the Olympics in 2000 the reference.

The smell of sunscreen Now bottled, thanks to Comme des Garçons’ new fragrance.

Going down

Popped... Photograph: Alamy

Classic french manis Only acceptable with coloured tips, please.

Alcopops Hard seltzer is the Insta-worthy drink of the summer. White Claw and Whisp are the brands to know.

Discreet tweakments It’s all about full disclosure. See Faye on Love Island, and Marc Jacobs’ post‑facelift Instagram post.

Endless Basquiat fashion collaborations We all love a bit of Jean-Michel, but it’s getting a bit overkill now.

TikTok beauty hacks From using salt water to wash your face, to sunscreen contouring, be careful out there.


@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@If the recent Olympics have triggered a desire to plunge into all things Japanese, don’t overlook the drinks. You’re probably already familiar with the country’s big lager brands such as Asahi, Kirin and Sapporo, and may well have tried sake (taken warm, as many people do, rather than cold, which is what the finer sakes deserve), but Japanese whisky? Gin? Shochu? There’s a lot to get your head around.

Whisky is a good place to start even, and perhaps especially, if you don’t think of yourself as a whisky drinker. It’s typically subtler, sweeter and less peaty than Scotch (although it often contains Scotch whisky) and less butch than bourbon, though some brands, such as Mars Maltage “Cosmo” and Tougouchi Premium, are made in a more American style. Like bourbon, they’re commonly drunk on the rocks or diluted with soda or ginger ale as a highball. Contemporary brands such as Nikka Days (see today’s picks) and Tenjaku blended whisky (£28 Sainsbury’s, 40%) are designed to be diluted and drink well as cocktails. Then there are the likes of Nikka’s Miyagikyo (£68.94 Master of Malt, £74.95 The Whisky Exchange, 45%), with its lovely overtones of red apple peel, that are better suited to contemplative sipping. Or, for a low-alcohol alternative to whisky, try shochu, which is like a slightly more alcoholic sake.

Japanese gins, too, have something quite distinctive to offer, with indigenous botanicals such as yuzu peel, sansho pepper and sencha tea, and often extraordinarily beautiful packaging: Etsu Gin (£44.05 Master of Malt, £47.99 Selfridges, 43%), for example, is one of the most stunning spirits bottles I’ve ever seen, though you might find, as I do, that the spiciness of its contents are a little too intrusive. I’m not unaware that these are expensive, but if you’re eager to explore the world of Japanese spirits, you could also buy a selection of 30ml samples from specialists Masters of Malt and The Whisky Exchange.

Sake is a whole subject in itself, and well worth a standalone column, but clever Aldi’s new listing (see today’s picks), cashing in on post-Olympics fever, is well worth a try next time you order in sushi. I also love the elegant, savoury Akashi-Tai Honjozo Tokubetsu (£26.99, or £15.99 for a 30cl bottle, Selfridges, 15%), which is a drink that would go with just about anything (and proof of the old Japanese saying that sake doesn’t get into fights with food).

And if you don’t drink alcohol, it’s worth thinking about getting into Japanese tea. If you’ve never had matcha, try it as a flat green or latte, both of which are perfect for this summery time of year.

Five cool ways to drink Japanese

Shirayuki Sake £4.99 (for 30cl) Aldi (in-store only), 14.5%. Sweet, creamy with a touch of ripe pear and macadamia nuts. A good foray into sake from the Itami area of Hyogo Prefecture, at a brewery that was founded in 1550.

Nikka Days Blended Whisky £32 Waitrose, £39.95 Jeroboams, 40%. Smartly bottled, light, sweet, floral and honeyed: whisky for people who think they don’t like whisky.

Roku Gin £25 Waitrose, 43%. Deliciously fragrant, citrussy gin including six Japanese botanicals that represent the different seasons. Great looking bottle, too.

Toyonaga Honkaku Shochu £40.25 The Whisky Exchange, 24%. Soft, sweet, creamy, almost coconutty, like a cross between a sake and a light Speyside malt. You can also serve it long with cold-infused sencha tea (Farrar’s do a good one at £7.95 for 125g).

Jenki Matcha from £27.99 a 40g tin jenki.co.uk. Milder, slightly westernised matcha to make ‘“flat greens”’ and refreshing matcha lattes (with almond milk, I suggest).
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The first time I cried while eating an ice-cream was nearly 30 years ago on Sidmouth beach. My mint choc chip had fallen to the ground and mum had argued with the server until I got another one. It was too much emotion for the little boy. Grief for the green blob melting on the concrete, fright at the temper mum had shown, relief for the soft flavours sliding down my throat.

That makes this the second time. With one hand I’m holding my scoop from Flavours, the best of the John o’Groats ice-cream shops. With the other, I am knitting a mixture of tears and vanilla residue into the ragged beard formed over the 78 days it has taken me to walk from Land’s End. I am shoeless, as I am always when my feet are resting, and stinking in the way one does after five days without a shower.

The queue snaking from the back of the shop becomes awkward. These people had come here to take a photo in front of the famous sign, not to console a craggy stranger. I sit down on a bench, issue a few defiant licks, and try a gesture to assure the haze of fleeces and leggings and cagoules that everything is OK. I am aware that I look and smell a long way short of that.

The trail had made life simpler, then, and part of that was being free of structure

The tears are not purely sadness, though there’s a lot of that, too. In his book, A Walk in the Woods, Bill Bryson describes the daily dose of low-level ecstasy that he felt while walking the Appalachian Trail. I’ve had the same and, after two and half months, I can feel the comedown coming.

I’m hungover, too, thanks to the locals at the Village Inn in Keiss. Arriving about 6pm the night before, I bought one beer to plan the final day. I didn’t buy another all night, but they arrived with regularity. Pints, mint flips, wee drams. I was their entertainment, this tired tanned man from the wild amid the electricians and pipefitters, and here were my rewards. I woke at 5.30am with poisoned blood to find I had slept on the grassy top of a pillbox on the coast. Out to sea, gulls were calling through the haar and a foghorn was blaring, boats on their way out for the morning catch.

The author on the summit of Windy Gyle, in the Cheviots

The mist is thick and disorienting here, too. It casts a veil of deadness, a sense that things have already happened. Perhaps time feels weird because for so long there has been nothing beyond my finishing date. By setting out on the walk, I had made the world a bubble of self-absorbed certainty. The divisions of responsibility were obvious: bag, route and provisions were my domain, weather not. Now, lines were blurring. The plans and branching futures, the conflicts and compromises of relationships, of existing in the world with other souls – it all lay vague and shapeless, whispering beyond that mist.

The trail had made life simpler, then, and part of that was being free of structure. For two and a half months I had shat in woods, poured dried muesli into my mouth in town centres, slept on steepling cliffs and under crashing waterfalls, lanced blisters in dank cafes, drunk from the Camel, the Tyne and the Tees. I felt slack, gaseous and floating above and away from the basic gravity of normal life. Now, though, the end was here, bringing with it the bondage of society.

Over the next few days, I would be cooled and poured slowly through a funnel into the mould of a man I used to look like. It’s necessary work; I can’t live like this for ever. But it’s a painful process. And as the elation and relief of finishing mixes with the sadness of the sea haar and the return of uncertainty and future and convention I am utterly overwhelmed, and yield. It’s too much emotion for the little boy.

Wild camping on the banks of Loch Lochy on the Great Glen Way

As a tear drops to my sock, I realise that my feet are sodden from the morning’s walk. I’m transported back to May, when cows mad with hormones had chased me and a friend down a steep bank into the River Severn. As we looked up to the wall of hooves and horns, and turned to contemplate swimming to the other side, I collapsed into the mud, soaking my bag and, worse, my feet. Chuckling farmers with huge hands came to our rescue, but everything stayed damp for a month as I trudged through England’s wettest May since 1967.

I saw that sometimes it’s the most exhilarating thing to forget mindfulness, to saddle instinct and urge and hold on tight

For a long time I wondered if the moment would come. Nothing about the entrance to the slate-topped village of Ilam in Staffordshire suggested it was imminent. Through another deluge, I pulled my hood low, and could see teens in steamy windows laughing at me. Then, as I climbed Bunster Hill on the western edge of Dovedale, the rain stopped, the greys gave way to greens and the low evening sun lifted moisture from the soil in dazzling swirls. At the top of the valley, rabbits raced down the sharp slope, flicking sparkles behind. As I sucked the sweet air, I looked into a hedgerow and felt my nerves invert, my stomach drop. There it was – the moment – the reason I had come out here. I was high.

As Laurie Lee wrote in As I Walked Out One Midsummer Morning: it was the thrill of looking “out on a world for which I had no words, to start at the beginning, speechless and without plan, in a place that still had no memories for me”. I had the same feeling at Malham Cove with the sky as blue as a wizard’s hat; in the Eden of upper Teesdale where curlews cried and zipped along the river; on an eyrie at dawn above Loch Ness where mist licked the feet of towering pines and the sun peered down bemused.

Joined by friend Jean for a spell near Glencoe Photograph: Samir Lecheheb

I knew before that Britain was beautiful. What I didn’t know was that its nature could have this effect. Or perhaps I had just forgotten. Over years of managing self-loathing, I’ve learned that becoming detached from emotions can lead to a sort of safety. But, I realised there in Dovedale, that the separation brings a risk of sterility. Of dousing all fires in the heart. As I sat on wet bluebells and looked out to the black hills on the horizon, I saw that sometimes it’s the most exhilarating thing to forget mindfulness, to saddle instinct and urge and hold on tight. Perhaps wild nature is the safest place to try.

A lady in a mac motions a tissue towards me. I wave her away with a smile. I had seen a lot on my way here. As I entered Glastonbury at 9am on a Wednesday morning, a middle-aged man in a top hat brought his palms together in namaste, then dropped to his belly and mimed shooting me with a rifle. At a campsite outside Marsden in the Pennines, a half-naked geordie suckled an infant bulldog while showing me round the shower block. In Hebden Bridge in West Yorkshire, a woman in a mobility scooter with psychedelic leggings and a wide-brimmed leather hat shouted at me about kicking a disobedient stallion in the balls.

A peaceful day by Loch Leven

I had better opening conversations, but none that started friendship. The nomadic life is inimical to anything lasting. Yet when old pals joined me for days at a time, our ties grew stronger – and through confession as much as comedy. It helps that my generation is one with the language and permission to discuss feelings. It helps, too, that we are no longer children, that the hierarchies of youth are less inhibiting. But there’s something special about being out on the trail. Small talk and catchup is soon exhausted and for the hours that follow, as the gaze is drawn to the horizon, there is minimal eye contact to intimidate, nor risk of meaningless facial expressions being interpreted as judgment or mirth.

By walking, threading myself through the world like a slow needle through silk, I found my body and mind could connect

With two school friends, we spoke of the stresses of parenting, of frets over being a bad son. With another, I learned of the weird things long Covid can do to a brain, like mixing up the word lamb for window. Another friend told me, over a bottle of beer in a Co-op car park, how it felt to lose his job to Covid, to be forced to move into a one-bedroom flat with his wife and two daughters, to be on a waiting list of 40,000 people to get back to see his sick dad in Australia.

For the most part I had no company and loved it. But while solitude has always been solace for me, its extent here was a challenge for a man with a brain not always on his side.

Still, something might have clicked. I have often been urged to meditate, and struggled. If the art of meditation might best be described as carving out time to do nothing, those who need it most – with restless magpie minds – surely find it hardest to begin. Walking may be part of the answer. As Rebecca Solnit points out in her book Wanderlust, it’s an act so simple that doing it is almost doing nothing in disguise (at least for those with the privilege of health). By walking, threading myself through the world like a slow needle through silk, I found my body and mind could connect. Without the distractions of conversation or calls or podcasts, the physical senses could take over: twinges in the back, cooes from the branches, wafts from the undergrowth. Productive thoughts had space to relax, stretch out, find new friends. Bad ones could float away with the clouds over the hills.

After half an hour, my girlfriend arrives and I simply dissolve. She props me up with a hug, smears away the tears and we go down to the little sign and take a photo. You’ve done it, she says, you’ve done it.

Journey’s end at John o’Groats

More than one person has said that the walk was a brave thing to do. People are nice. But beyond setting off, the walk didn’t demand much bravery. The greater challenge is working out which parts of the walk to bring back to normal life, and how.

I know a little of what not to do. After returning home, I caught myself counting things that didn’t need counting: books, hangers, masks. On the trail, absolute knowledge of inventory is essential, and becomes a comfort. I realised quickly that it’s too much to expect the same from the jumble of normal life.

But perhaps there are three important souvenirs. First, knowing that peace comes with understanding what is in my control and what is not. Second, that I need more of the naked thrill of the wild, a regular pinch of hemlock in my tea. Third, and I think most of all, that some of the things I thought possible as a child really are. That if I can walk 26 miles across the Cheviot hills into Scotland with a 15kg pack, perhaps there are other feats within my grasp. That I have agency in the world, the resources to resist convention, some command and power over my one life. Now it’s time to use it.

See James’s walk on Twitter and Instagram
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Glute abduction Like the crab walk, this works your hips hard by driving your knees outward (known as abduction), but, because the hips are more flexed, you will activate the gluteus maximus in your bottom (the largest muscle in the body) much more. This exercise will support your back, and is great for hip and knee stability, which is especially helpful if you are a runner.

a) Place the band above your knees and come to sit at the edge of a chair. Place your feet on the ground, directly underneath your knees and lean forward (hingeing at the hips). Place your hands on your hips for stability and to hold your pelvis in place.

b) Drive your knees outwards against the band, performing this movement for 25 repetitions, without stopping.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@‘I saw him in a different light and realised I really fancied him’

He was the first person I met at university, the day we moved into halls, and he tried to kiss me that night but I turned him down. I knew we’d be really good friends though, and I even joked that he would be godfather to my children one day. We stayed friends for a number of years as I careered from boyfriend to boyfriend, none of them suitable. Dave remained eternally single, focused on an army career. We stayed in touch and, not long after he returned from Afghanistan, we met up. He was different: he had grown up and looked hot! I saw him in a different light and realised I really fancied him. I was newly single and determined to remain so, but we went on a night out, snogged lots, and the rest is history. I’m so glad we had seven years of friendship – he’s still my best friend, we always make each other laugh and he’s such a wonderful husband and amazing father to our two children. Laura, insurance underwriter, Yorkshire

Suze (left) and Brigid.

‘People thought we were mad, but I couldn’t ignore what we felt’

We are two female friends who met working together in a school. We were both married to men and sometimes socialised as a foursome, but mainly did stuff just us: gym, bookclub, theatre, cycling. We started spending ever-increasing amounts of time together and I developed a giant crush on her. I was extremely reluctant to act on it, but when we went away together on a book-club trip, we shared a bed. I was head over heels for her by then, but she said: “No, we’re not having an affair.” I went home that day and told my husband I was leaving him. I phoned her the next day and said: “I’ve left him. What are you going to do?” Within the week she had done the same, and we’ve been together ever since. People thought we were mad, but I just couldn’t bear the idea of ignoring what we felt. When you know, you know. The best thing we ever did was take that leap together, 29 years ago. Suze, retired, Cheshire

Charlotte and Tom.

‘I am so pleased that I married my best friend’

My wife, Charlotte, and I met in September 2005 as freshers at the University of Reading. We had some English modules together and formed an instant friendship, fanned by late-night movies, MSN Messenger chats and doing crosswords in the communal corridors. Unfortunately, we were both seeing other people and neither of us wanted to ruin a great friendship. It took us seven years and several relationships with the wrong people to finally get things together. I proposed in Ireland and we were married in 2017. I am so pleased that I married my best friend. Tom, teacher, Aylesbury

Lowis and Paul. Photograph: Handout

‘After our first kiss, we knew we wouldn’t go back to being just friends’

I met my husband when he became flatmates with one of my best friends – we were about 20 years old at the time. We instantly got on really well as mates and over the next 10 years I classed him as one of my best friends. Then, out of the blue, he asked me out on a date. I thought he was joking at first and made him wait two days for an answer. I didn’t want to ruin our friendship if things didn’t work out. We had an honest conversation about what we would do to protect our friendship if “going out together” felt too weird and both agreed that staying mates was the most important thing. After our first kiss, we both knew we wouldn’t be going back to being just friends. The secret? Being able to talk about what might feel strange, and confident that if it hadn’t worked out we would have kept our friendship. Lowis, senior lecturer, Yorkshire

Emma and Varujan.

‘I had a dream about my wedding – but the bride was my workmate’

Twenty-six years ago, I got a job as a youth worker at the same time as a woman called Emma. Professionally, we got on well and became good friends. At the time, I was engaged to someone else, which took pressure off – being friends seemed to be the only option, and this created space for agenda-free fun and creativity. But in a dream I had about my impending wedding, the bride entered the church and it was the wrong bride. It was my workmate Emma! I shook that image from my mind but, the closer I got to the wedding, the more strained my relationship with my fiancee became. Eventually, the wedding was called off. Emma and I carried on working together, still as friends, until one day while I was talking seriously about something, she kicked the lever on my chair and I dropped to chin-height at my desk. Looking up, I saw her mischievous smile and realised something else was going on – we were falling in love. A year later we were married. Next month, we will be celebrating our 25th anniversary. Varujan, producer and director, Bristol

Paul and Jazmine.

‘Everyone kept asking: “When’s it going to happen with you two?”’

Paul and I met via Twitter in 2017, through a mutual follower. We attempted dating but it just wasn’t the right time for either of us. After several months of no contact, he got back in touch. We caught up on life and agreed we had been fantastic as friends – we got on so well, it felt like a shame to let it go. Over the next year, the friendship strengthened and we spent time going for dinner and coffee, telling each other about the (good/awful) dates we had been on, and giving each other advice. Friends and family kept asking: “When’s it going to happen with you two?’ and we’d just laugh it off. Cut to July 2021, and we own a house – and a cat – together. I wouldn’t have it any other way. Jazmine, social media manager, Essex

Patrick and Inès.

‘Everyone else knew something was up weeks before we did’

I met my girlfriend in 2018 when I was studying abroad and she was an undergrad. Our halls had a cafeteria where we ate nightly and, over the course of the year, I gravitated towards a particular group. I liked spending time with her in particular, and started scheduling study sessions in which we spent much of our time just talking or sharing music. Our friends told us later that they knew something was up weeks before either of us did. We’ve now been together for two and a half years. Patrick, student, London

Rachel and Ben.

‘There are things you can overlook in a friendship that you can’t in a relationship’

My boyfriend and I were friends for more than 10 years before we started dating. We met at school and became really close friends in sixth form. We happened to go to the same university and ended up both working in London, so we were consistently meeting up for regular catchups during the different stages of our lives, but had always just been really good friends. It wasn’t until we were both single in our mid-to-late 20s that we started to think about each other differently. I knew that being friends with someone doesn’t guarantee they’ll treat you well as a partner – there are some things you can overlook in a friendship that you just can’t in a relationship – but my boyfriend has always been a caring, trustworthy person, and us getting together has led to the best relationship of my life. Rachel, SEO specialist, Bedford

Nick and Alice. Photograph: The Nook/Kate Disher Quill

‘We were such good friends that I didn’t want to make a move’

Nick and I first crossed paths in preschool, in the early 90s, but our friendship began in earnest in high school, where we shared the ups and downs of adolescence: drinking too much at parties, gossiping about who was dating who, struggling through the stress of exams and growing up together. When we left school, I started to realise I had feelings for Nick, but we were such good friends that I didn’t want to make a move and risk losing him. Time passed and our friendship deepened. We kissed after a party one night and it didn’t take me long to fall in love. Nick was initially nervous about the risk of losing his best friend, but once that line was crossed, we couldn’t seem to stop crossing it. We got married in February this year and are expecting our first daughter in November. Being friends first has given us so much shared history and the luxury of knowing each other deeply before we fell in love. Getting together with my bestie was the best decision I’ve ever made. Alice, government adviser, Sydney

‘We thought about what might happen if it all went wrong’

I met my husband at university. We were friends and I was in a relationship, but when that ended abruptly after five years, another friend told me there was someone who had been waiting for me to be single for a long time. I joked: “Well, you can tell Tom Cruise, I’m not ready!” I genuinely did not know who she meant, and when I found out I was incredulous, then horrified. I never saw him that way at all. After a night out, I told him I knew how he felt about me, but that I didn’t feel that way about him and he cried. But six months later, we became a couple and a year later, we were married! We both thought about what might happen if it all went wrong, but in truth, it was remarkably easy. We already liked and cared about each other, had shared interests, a fantastic group of friends in common, and we already knew each other’s past – there were no nasty surprises, and no need to pretend to be anything other than ourselves. We will celebrate our 27th wedding anniversary this year. People often look a long way for love, but sometimes it is right under your nose. Anonymous, British Columbia
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When I was seven, there was something on television about a gay politician. My mum, with great vitriol, said: “That’s disgusting.” I thought, I had better not tell her about my views on the matter because she might reject me. I was too frightened.

I knew I was gay then, but I didn’t come out until I was 30. While I kept my sexuality a secret, music meant a lot to me: it had an allure that I felt certain men also had – but in both cases I couldn’t quite express it.

I made a new year resolution at the beginning of 1992 to come out to my mum that year. But I didn’t have the courage to do it until the New Year’s Eve just before 1993. That was a very exciting period of my life – making new friends, going to gay discos.

Then in 2002, I fell into a deep depression. I had worked hard all my life and tried to make smart investments, but the company I invested in went bankrupt. Overnight, I went from being well-off to comparatively penniless.

After about four years, in a state of misery and spending a lot of time alone, I started assisting older people with their technology problems for a bit of pocket money. This was more pleasant than I’d envisioned. It unlocked something in me. I remember thinking, I do still want to get something out of life.

After an afternoon spent helping someone with their computer, I decided to go to Soho in London. That’s how I discovered the G-A-Y nightclub. It was fantastic. I was very shy at the time, so waited until there were lots of people on the dancefloor and then, trepidatiously, I started dancing, too. It was an incredible feeling. So I went back again the next day, and danced again. Then the day after that.

I kept a diary, and realised I’d been to G-A-Y for 31 nights in a row. The club is open every day, so I thought: why not see how long I could carry on doing that? I reckoned 100 nights would be quite an achievement.

My dance style is unique. My favourite move is spinning on the spot, like a pirouette. It’s a nice sensation. I was once called Wonder Woman because I would spin so much.

I like to dance to Abba, Kylie Minogue and Madonna. A really good song gives me a surge of adrenaline and I can feel the endorphins kick in. I only drink tap water – I get a high from the music and dancing alone.

I’m happy now to be the only person on the dancefloor. Underneath, I’m still quite a shy, private person, but when I’m dancing, I become a character. It’s an alter ego and I put my all into it.

I clocked up 200 nights at the club – I even went on my mum’s birthday. It got to 300 nights, 400, 500. The only time I didn’t go was on Christmas Day, when G-A-Y is closed. Then, on what would have been my 998th night, the club closed because of Covid. I was devastated. I tried dancing at home, but it meant nothing without other people; the connection to others is what gave it meaning. So I found the early days of lockdown quite difficult.

G-A-Y reopened on 4 July 2020, with table service. I went and tried to dance, but was told off by security. I still count it as my 999th possible consecutive dance at G-A-Y, but I was desperate for more.

Last month, the clubs finally reopened again and I got to attend my 1,000th night at G-A-Y. As I approached the entrance, the security guard beamed at me, then one of the managers almost gave me a hug. As soon as I got in, I was right back into the swing of it – jumping and spinning as if nothing had changed.

I’ve realised that if there is something you want to do, it’s very important to not just think about it or talk about it but to actually go and do it. Otherwise, you could be thinking about what you love for years, without actually trying it.

I still tend to go out six out of seven nights now – dancing is something I will never give up. It has transformed my life. I want to encourage people who are too shy or frightened or afraid to consider spinning on the dancefloor. You never know, you might enjoy it.

As told to Amelia Ellis

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@What term do you want to search? Search with google
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@To celebrate a superb sporting summer, sports-inspired threads are the order of the day. Look for timeless country club classics updated with a modern twist
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@On the factory floor at Pittards in Yeovil, Marta, Gabbie and Gabriella are working together on a new product. They fasten strengthening layers to the leather base of a cylindrical handbag, attach a shiny brass zip, and handpaint seams so that the raw edges of the hide match the lipstick-red surface.

Pittards employs more than 150 people and does brisk business in baseball gloves, dog leads and walking boots, but the bag being made today comes with a waiting list and a £350 price tag. The Somerset Love bag, designed by Alice Temperley and named for the county where it is made, represents a new movement in the British fashion industry. Designers and models are beginning to share the spotlight with the people who actually make the clothes, bags and shoes.

Alice Temperley bags. ‘Working with Alice gives us visibility,’ says Pittards’ chief executive, Reg Hankey. Photograph: Alice Temperley

As consumer awareness grows around the environmental impact of fashion and the welfare of the world’s garment workers – the awareness that clothes do not appear in a puff of smoke, direct from a sketchpad and on to Kate Moss – scrutiny is shifting away from the designing of clothes and on to the making of them. Meanwhile, the benefits of shorter supply chains are challenging the centrifugal forces of globalisation, encouraging more fashion designers to switch to local manufacturing. The catwalk is so last season; the new era of British fashion is all about the factory.

Pittards, which began as a glove factory in 1826, is a solidly traditional establishment where desks with computers are outnumbered by those with ledgers and calculators. Diana on the front desk has worked for the company for 54 years.

“Working with Alice gives us visibility,” says Pittards’ chief executive, Reg Hankey. “There is a very real sense of ownership of what we make, and it’s nice for our staff to go home to their families and be able to show them the handbag they are making on Instagram.”

After 18 years of living and designing in London and outsourcing manufacturing to Italy, Temperley has moved manufacture of accessories and outerwear to Somerset with the aim of establishing “a more sustainable way of working, partnering with local factories and building a more efficient and more transparent supply chain.” Accessories, outerwear and wedding dress embroidery are now being produced at factories within a few miles of Temperley’s Ilminster headquarters, which houses her studio, a shop and a cocktail bar whose signature drinks are made with local cider brandy.

For decades the fashion industry chased the cheapest needle around the world, abandoning British manufacturing in the process. Supply chains see garments crisscross the globe. Linen grown in Europe is shipped to Asia to be dyed before returning to Europe to be made into shirts. Plastic buttons manufactured in China are transported to Italy to be wrapped in fabric before being sent to Portugal to be attached to clothes. The high carbon cost of such journeys is exacerbated by wastefulness when, due to a lengthy lead time, the finished product is out of date by the time the label is sewn on.

It’s important to me that I can turn up unannounced and have a chat and a relationship with the people making my clothes Deborah Bee, Bee & Sons

Complex and opaque supply chains have enabled abuse of the basic human rights of many of the world’s 85 million garment workers, by allowing the industry to evade responsibility. Brands outsource production to workplaces where they have little oversight, while consumers know little of where their clothes are made beyond a country name printed in a label. Last year, revelations of conditions in Leicester’s garment district, where employees were denied the minimum wage and faced unsafe working conditions during the pandemic, exposed the global scale of the scandal.

But consumer pressure, and increasing political heat in the wake of Keir Starmer’s pledge that a Labour government would “buy British”, are firing interest in responsible and transparent local manufacture. John Lewis, the high street giant and a bellwether of British public opinion, has recently begun selling menswear by Community Clothing, a social enterprise brand founded by the designer Patrick Grant. Community Clothing pieces are entirely made in the UK, providing employment in 31 factories around the country.

“Fifteen years ago I visited a fashion factory in Nicaragua which was guarded by a man with a machine gun,” recalls Deborah Bee, an ex-fashion editor and founder of the knitwear company Bee & Sons. “The women worked from 8am until 6pm and were only allowed a short lunch break and one toilet break.” When Bee launched her label, making cardigans in natural yarn designed to be fully recyclable, she partnered with Mansfield’s Corah Textiles factory, which employs about 20 people. “It is manufacturing, but on a craftsmanship scale. It’s important to me that I can turn up unannounced and have a chat and a relationship with the people making my clothes.”

Inside Pittards. ‘There is a very real sense of ownership of what we make,’ says Hankey. Photograph: Jim Wileman/The Guardian

Corah Textiles’ employees at work on their knitting machines are the stars of a video on the Bee & Sons website, while Temperley dreams of putting the Swiss Tulle factory in Chard, which she employs for wedding dress production, in the spotlight as a catwalk venue. “It feels like a magical place – like a fairytale. Wouldn’t this be an incredible location for a show?” Temperley asks, gesturing across a cavernous building where 180-year-old machines with the size and majesty of steam engines crank and whir.

The designer Lauren Grant’s S.A.R.K. silk shirts featuring ring pulls, fake nails and pill capsules in place of conventional buttons are all made in small London factories. “When I’ve got a new pattern I take pastries in to the team and we problem-solve together, working out how to minimise waste. Then once production has started I can try a shirt on to check the fit and make any adjustments. I like the practicality of that, and my customers appreciate the sustainability,” says Grant.

O Pioneers , a slow fashion label whose prairie-style dresses made from “deadstock” (fabric that has been unused, or unsold, from previous seasons) have been worn by Carrie Johnson, partners with small factories and individual seamstresses. “When we go to the factory to pick up our finished dresses, we take all the bits and pieces of fabric offcuts home and then we use them to make our patchwork dresses,” says the co-founder Clara Francis.

But not everyone agrees that local manufacturing is an automatic win for sustainability. Amy Powney, designer of the upmarket British brand Mother of Pearl and a prominent advocate for sustainable fashion, chooses to manufacture abroad, close to where her fabric is sourced. “My primary concern is the environment, and that is a global issue. Manufacturing in the UK has obvious benefits for jobs and industry and community, but not necessarily for the environment.”

The British climate is not warm enough to grow cotton, and the majority of British wool is destined for the carpet trade, being too coarse for consumer tastes. “In food there is a field-to-table supply chain that consumers can understand. If you buy a potato that has been grown in Britain, it hasn’t been abroad before it appeared in that shop. But the fashion supply chain is so much more complicated. You could buy a jumper that says “made in Scotland”, but the wool may have come from Australia and been sent to China to be woven into yarn before it got to Scotland.”

Most upscale “Scottish cashmere” companies import yarn from goats in Mongolia, which is then milled in Scotland. Merino sheep originated in Spain but in the 19th century, as meat production overtook the wool trade in importance and larger sheep became more profitable, the petite merino breed fell out of favour in Europe and was exported to Australia and New Zealand. These two countries now produce 80% of the world’s merino wool, prized for its softness.

Patrick Grant, a fashion designer and co-presenter of BBC’s The Great British Sewing Bee, took over Blackburn’s Cookson & Clegg factory when it was at risk of closure five years ago. He is “a huge believer in factories as a force for good. My first job was in a factory, and I’ve loved them ever since. They provide jobs, but also purpose and support and friendship to people of all ages and backgrounds, irrespective of academic achievement levels.”

Grant believes that amplifying the status and visibility of fashion manufacture could also have a positive impact on consumer behaviour. “If we reconnect the customer with what manufacturing looks like, that could help make people value clothes again – a mindset that fast fashion has very successfully destroyed for its own gain.”

A simple crew-neck cotton T-shirt by Community Clothing – knitted in Leicester, cut and sewn in Blackburn – costs £22. But the high production costs and limited scale of British fashion manufacturing put off most affordable fashion brands from domestic manufacture. Decades of high-street price wars have left consumers expecting eye-catchingly low prices that are difficult to achieve using British factories.

At Albion Knitting, a knitting factory in London’s Haringey warehouse district, a skilled workforce of 50 produces about 7,000 garments a month for brands including Chanel, Alexander McQueen, Givenchy and Chloe. On the factory floor, Sissy is wielding a latch needle with surgical precision, correcting minuscule errors in a semi-sheer pointelle knit panel whose tiny stitches make up an all-over pattern of Givenchy’s “G” logo. Ellie is linking a sleeve to the body of a sweater, hooking individual loops over tiny needles at speed to create a flat, seamless join.

Albion Knitting factory in London. ‘I think some people imagine a dark satanic mill, but we’ve got a great workforce who are proud to work here,’ says co-founder Chris Murphy. Photograph: Martin Godwin/The Guardian

“In a cheaply produced garment, that seam would be overlocked, and much more bulky,” explains Chris Murphy, who co-founded the factory in 2014 in response to demand from luxury brands looking to move production from Asia to the UK. The building, which had one power point when Murphy moved in, now houses more than £1m worth of knitting machinery. “LONDON” is spelled out in metal vintage fairground letters on one high wall, next to an openwork spiral staircase designed to resemble a ball of wool, with stair treads made from needle beds reclaimed from old knitting machines.

“We want this to be a nice place to work. I think some people imagine a dark satanic mill, but we’ve got a great workforce who are proud to work here,” says Murphy. A classic knitted Chanel cardigan jacket in navy with pale pink trim, an Alexander McQueen cream cashmere sweater with hand-embroidered metallic beading at the neckline and a Chloe sweater dress in recycled cashmere are among the samples hanging on rails, and business is “definitely on the uptick”, says Murphy.

One of the smaller brands on Albion’s client list is the boutique cashmere label Aethel, which was started last year by Tim Ewington, a co-founder of Stylist magazine. “I wanted to see if it was possible build a small, ethical, British luxury brand,” says Ewington. “Our customers care about their clothes, and caring about how they were made is part of that.” Aethel’s knits are produced at Albion using Italian cashmere yarn; orders within London are delivered by bicycle.

At Fortis Clothing near Axminster, where production ranges from leopard-print Alice Temperley jackets to outerwear for the Devon and Cornwall police, demand from brands looking to place orders has increased. “British manufacturing has been tough for a long time, but things are changing,” says the company director Oliver Massy-Birch. “In the last 12 to 18 months we’ve been getting 10 emails a week from brands asking us to produce for them.”

Sustainable credentials are a draw: Fortis Clothing recently bought woodland to aid carbon offsetting, with the aim of becoming the first carbon-negative clothing brand in Europe. Insulation in own-brand jackets is made from recycled ocean plastics.

Mulberry, the largest manufacturer of luxury goods in the UK, is about to increase production in its two Somerset factories, the Rookery and the Willows, which between them employ 450 people. “The factories and the people who work there are the centre of who we are,” says the supply chain director, Rob Billington. “They are fantastic places. There is so much knowledge there.

“When we start producing a new bag, the person in the factory who’s been working with us for 20 years pretty much knows whether it will be a success of not.” Mulberry proves that responsible British fashion manufacturing is possible, says Billington. “At Mulberry we compete with Louis Vuitton and Chanel and Gucci and we hold our own. But it would be great to have a government incentivising UK manufacturing beyond the big boys of the car industry.”

Factories making handbags and cardigans lack the hard-hat optics to entice politicians for photo opportunities. “When the government talks about manufacturing they talk about Rolls-Royce and Jaguar,” says Patrick Grant. “And people get excited about Savile Row tailors or by someone who sits in a shed for eight hours making a knife by hand. But fashion is an area in which Britain has historically punched above its weight and factories could be part of that, as they once were.”

At its height in the 1950s, 1.5 million people were employed in the UK textile industry. “We’re not going to get back to those numbers, but there could be 500,000 jobs – and many would be jobs in towns like Blackburn, towns which were decimated by factory closures and which don’t have much of a service industry.”

The most recent data from the industry news and data network Fashion United suggests that 39,000 people are employed in the manufacture of clothes and shoes in the UK. Last year Cookson & Clegg was one of many British factories that pivoted to producing PPE for health workers during lockdown, highlighting that government spending on uniforms and utility wear has largely been outsourced overseas.

Georgiana Huddart, a co-founder of the cult swimwear brand Hunza G, employs two London factories to make her distinctive crinkle-fabric swimsuits and bikinis. “British factories do tend to be slightly old fashioned,” she says. “They like a phone call and a handshake and to eat lunch with you. It’s lovely to have that relationship. At the beginning of this summer we sent each of the 35 workers in one of the factories a scrunchie and some hand cream, because we had so many orders and we knew they would be really busy. But it’s hard when you come to scale up. Our business is growing and it’s getting tricky to find UK manufacturing that works.”

While UK manufacturing is a boost for domestic jobs, Temperley is one of many British designers who also feel a responsibility to workers abroad who may be losing out. “I’ve been back to London maybe six times in the last year, and I don’t miss it at all,” she says. “But I do worry about some of the Indian embroidery workshops that I’ve had long relationships with. I’ve been trying to place orders with them as well, because I know they are in need of work.”

Shorter supply chains can reduce carbon emissions, but manufacturing and sustainability will always present a conflict of interest. “Consumers are looking for a green light to purchase without guilt, and the reality is that there is no such thing as a zero-impact clothing brand,” says Chris Murphy. “What we believe in is making high-quality clothes which people value and buy less of.”

While British production does not guarantee a higher standard, Patrick Grant believes it tips the odds in favour. “If you are spending more in order to have your jacket made in the UK, it doesn’t make sense to save 50p on buying a cheaper fabric, so the overall quality does tend to be a better product.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@As much as I miss lipstick (and a hundred other things I will never again take for granted), I plan to keep my lower face covered until we’re further out of the woods. Simultaneously, patience is not exactly my defining characteristic, and so I decided to explore budge‑proof, long-lasting lipsticks, of which I’m traditionally no big fan. Well. Colour me converted.

Stila’s Stay All Day (£17) is, without question, the longest-lasting lipstick I’ve ever worn in my life. Last week I wore Portofino (a mid-tone pink) for a friend’s birthday. I ate two courses, drank two glasses of wine, one vodka and tonic, and chatted nonstop for four-and-a‑half hours. I then took the late train home and fell fast asleep in my specs and lipstick, and awoke, face-down, with the latter still present, correct and ready to party. My lips were as immaculate at 8am as they had been when the lipstick was applied (the brand boasts 12 hours of wear – I’d say double it).

In 35-odd years of excessive lipstick testing, I have truly never known the like. Most importantly, Stila Stay All Day waltzes across the pitfalls of long-wearing lipstick, which are routinely drying, uncomfortable, draggy to apply and often a bit flat‑looking on the face. It somehow combines staying power with silky, moist colour that glides on plushly (that’ll be the avocado oil) with a pleasingly sharp edge (I used a lipliner to prevent the liquid lipstick formula from bleeding into fine lines, but a younger woman could skip it) and sits congenially on the mouth all night.

The finish is described by the brand as matte, but I’ve worn matte-er. It still allows a little light to bounce.

My one and only grumble is that for such an outstanding formula, the 14-strong shade lineup is uninspiring and nowhere near sufficient. There are eight variations on the same pink, yet only one red, Beso, a blue‑based pillar-box tone that falls short if, like me, you favour an orangey, tomatoey hue.

I had fully intended this week to offer you a selection of long-lasting lipsticks, but I can’t in good conscience imply that anything else came close to this hardy, cheerful powerhouse. It laughs defiantly in the face of PPE.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Welcome basket”. It sounds so nice, doesn’t it? So … welcoming. Driving up the M1 to the holiday cottage you booked online, you picture the delights that await you, and smile inwardly even as the sign ahead says: “Queue after the next junction.” You know already there’ll be a lemon drizzle cake from “our local farm shop” (ie a factory in Derby). Also, a jar of marmalade, a bottle of apple juice and a loaf of bread. There always is. But everything else – ginger snaps? Black pudding? A Peking duck? – is still, at this point, subject to the kind of moderately wild imagining that has you pushing your foot down just a little harder on the accelerator.

What you’re forgetting, of course, is that welcome baskets are not, in fact, even remotely welcoming. They are passive-aggressive acts, timed to remind you of both your own desperation (“How much did we pay for this, again?”) and of the fact that a “self-catering holiday” is basically a contradiction in terms (true in any year, but never more brutally so than in 2021). The first rule of the welcome basket – congratulations, you’ve arrived! – is that it will not be a basket at all, but a cardboard box or a plastic bag. The second rule is that, though the house is for four people, it will invariably contain only two, or six, of everything: two yoghurts, two scones, six sausages. (You do the maths, as they say.) The welcome basket’s essential message is: please don’t imagine for a minute that you’re going to be able to get away without visiting Tesco tomorrow.

Soon it’ll be time to start packing up. To leave, or not to leave, the untouched jar of marmalade: that is the question

Needless to say, the nearest Tesco is 20 minutes’ drive from where you are, unless it’s raining or the market’s on, in which case you can double that, and by day four – how time flies when you’re running a boutique B&B! – the route is already drearily familiar. Naturally, you knew that all the fresh things you stowed in the boot of the car before you left would have to be replenished eventually. What you did not expect was that the cottage’s owner would provide no pepper, no salt, no oil for cooking, no vinegar, no spices or herbs of any description, and only two loo rolls. Yes, yes: two loo rolls should have been plenty. No one has gastroenteritis (yet). But half of one is currently wound around the finger you almost sliced off because the knives in the cottage were last sharpened around the time Hardwick Hall was built.

Still, it’s not all bad. After two days, you managed to work out how the hob works, and after three, the dishwasher. It is a bit tedious, the way that even now you still have to open each cupboard three times before you find the mugs, but on the plus side you can feel pretty smug about the fact that you brought your good frying pan with you. Everyone laughed when you hauled it out, from a box that also contained a microplane, a cafetiere and two bottles of gin. But they’re not laughing now, are they? (Except when they’ve been at the gin, another bottle of which you now add to your mental list.)

Looking ahead, you’re about to get a night off: trial-by-omelette will be on hold tomorrow, because you’re all going to the Indian that’s recommended in the folder. (There’s always a folder, though reading it lends no clarity to anything, whether you’re talking about local attractions, jigsaws or where to put the recycling.) No, it won’t be as good as the one at home. But at this moment – ah, the last mini roundabout is finally in sight – you’d give anything for a poppadom and a chicken korma.

And the day after that, it’ll be time to start packing up. To leave or not to leave the untouched jar of marmalade: that is the question. (You don’t want to be petty, but you’re still smarting about what they’re charging for the logs you never thought you’d need in mid-August.) It’ll be so nice to get home, almost like a holiday, and next year there’ll be – won’t there? Please tell us there will be – a hotel somewhere hot. You’ll have no need of a frying pan, then. The breakfast buffet will be almost as long as the Pennine Way, and just as beautiful.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The giant structures rose like enormous fingers from the moorland, silhouetted against the setting sun, dwarfing me and my nine-month-old son, secure in the rucksack-carrier on my back.

Home to 200 known neolithic sites, and with on average three sites of archaeological interest per square mile, Orkney has become something of a byword for Ancient Britain, with at least three-quarters of the 193,000 annual visitors (pre-pandemic) coming to see the collection of relics of our ancestors.

Photograph: Guardian Design

Yet we weren’t actually gazing up at the Standing Stones of Stenness (circa 3100BC) or the stone circle of the Ring of Brodgar. We were at the foot of a more modern structure – the wind turbine on the isle of South Ronaldsay – watching its giant blades whirr and whoosh in the half-light.

That’s because, despite the earthworks that have been (and continue to be) discovered on this remote archipelago, 10 miles across the Pentland Firth from Scotland’s north-east coast, people on these 70 islands are passionate not only about preserving and showcasing an old way of life, but about pioneering a new one.

Charging the Spoot at a campsite on Orkney. Photograph: Phoebe Smith

Harnessing the power of the wind and the waves, Orcadians now produce all the green energy they need and then some, supplying the population with renewable electricity via community-owned turbines, developing technology that can use the tides to power people’s homes, and – thanks to 40 charging points dotted across the islands – making the practicalities of owning and using electric vehicles easy.

This had led me to undertake my first trip with the baby, on a mission to set an example to him that holidays can be exciting and green. We would be touring the islands – exploring historic sites and rugged coast and spotting wildlife – in a fully electric campervan, charged from 100% renewable energy. But first we had to get there.

It handled with the ease of a go-kart. The lack of a ticking engine meant when the baby fell asleep, he stayed asleep

We embraced the minimal-carbon theme and travelled via Caledonian Sleeper from Euston, making the longest leg of the journey overnight. Travel cot wedged beside my bunk, my son slept well (to my relief), rocked gently by the motion of the train.

Twelve hours later, we arrived in Inverness to change to another train for the four-hour ride north to Thurso, and finally – after a taxi ride (the bus connection was impossible) to John o’Groats – took the passenger-only ferry to Burwick on the southern tip of Mainland. There we were greeted by hosts Jane and Paul and their converted Nissan Dalbury E campervan called Spoot (the world’s first all-electric model, and one of just two in theUK), our home and transport for the next few nights.

St. Magnus Cathedral, Kirkwall. Photograph: Vincent Lowe/Alamy

“We wanted as green an option as possible,” said Paul, who also runs island tours island in electric vehicles, as he showed me the quirks of the campervan – the swivelling front passenger seat, the plank behind the driver that forms a table, nifty coat hooks that double as device holders for watching TV, and hidden cupboards that contained a wealth of locally made jams, pickles, tablet (very sugary fudge) and beer.

“The limited range of electric vehicles can put people off,” said Paul. “But Orkney, with its proliferation of rapid-charge points that take a battery from empty to full in 40 minutes, coupled with the vehicle’s 120-mile range on an island that is only 26 miles across, is the perfect place to try them.”

He left me with a booklet of info, including where rapid-charge points were across the islands – though they are also all shown on the inbuilt GPS. I set off with a simple press on the accelerator and felt it smoothly pull away, virtually silent. It handled with the ease of a go-kart – electric cars are all automatic – and the lack of engine noise meant when the baby fell asleep, he stayed asleep.

The whole site is powered by two wind turbines. We make enough to power the business and give back to the grid Mike Roberts

My first stop was Wheems Farm Campsite on South Ronaldsay, one of four islands connected by road to Mainland via bridges and causeways. It’s a six-hectare smallholding owned by former landscape architect Mike Roberts who, with his late wife, oboist and artist Christina Sargent, brought organic farming to the island in the mid-1980s.

“The site is powered by those two wind turbines you’ve been looking at,” said Mike as he showed me the seasonal crops we were about to sample in the curry being cooked and sold to guests on site. “We make enough to power the business and give back to the grid.”

The author and her son enjoy seaside views from the van. Photograph: Phoebe Smith

That evening I sat at the back of the van with the doors flung open, overlooking the North Sea, feeding my boy fresh vegetables from the soil we’d trod on earlier, feeling like I’d simultaneously stepped into the past and into the future.

Over the next couple of days we explored the island’s landmarks, continuing our oscillation between time periods. We strolled along the beach at the Churchill Barriers – causeways created in the second world war to stop U-boats from entering Scapa Flow. Snorkellers were exploring the rusting wrecks that poked out from the waves.

While the campervan was plugged into a handy rapid-charge station in the island’s capital, Kirkwall, (I only charged it once in three days, and that was just to play it safe rather than necessity), we wandered around town, taking in its old Viking cathedral – built in 1137 – and Orkney Distillery, where the hydrogen is harnessed to produce gin with no emissions other than water.

I wandered amid Pictish, Norse and medieval remains, before introducing my son to his first puffins

Heading to the island’s north-west, we explored neolithic sites, including the best-preserved prehistoric village in western Europe, Skara Brae, on the edge of Skaill Bay. A few miles up the coast near the ruined church of Saint Magnus in Birsay, we bought homemade treats made with locally sourced and seasonal ingredients. I even managed to schedule the baby’s nap time with the tides so that when he woke we could wander over to the Brough of Birsay via a causeway that is regularly hidden below the Atlantic. There we wandered amid Pictish, Norse and medieval remains, before I introduced him to his first puffins, whose colourful beaks caused him to squeal in delight.

Colourful puffins brought squeals of delight from the baby. Photograph: Phoebe Smith

That night he slept soundly as we wild-camped above the ocean, our little van swaying in the wind. The close quarters of a camper meant my nights were mainly, like his, early and subdued. I had to move all our luggage and repack it under the bed before I could turn in, and his lightweight travel cot just fitted on the shelf above the driver’s compartment when the flip-top roof was pushed up. Yet despite the minor faff, the simplicity of filling days with exploration and spending evenings doing nothing but gaze at the scenery meant I had time to contemplate the day we’d had and plan activities for the next, watching night falling and birds foraging.

The final day saw us drive a last leg to Stromness, in the south-west of Mainland, to catch the NorthLink ferry back to Thurso for our long train journey home.

The harbour at Stromness. Photograph: Alamy

But before that we made one last stop at the Ness of Brodgar, an extensive temple complex still being unearthed, said to predate and rival the Egyptian pyramids in size and sophistication – a fact not fully understood until less than 10 years ago. Back then, the man who discovered it, Nick Card, said: “London may be the cultural hub of Britain today, but 5,000 years ago, Orkney was the centre for innovation for the entire British Isles. Ideas spread from this place. This was the font for new thinking at the time.”

With renewable energy already powering the island, car and passenger ferries due to be run by emission-free hydrogen, and electric flights proposed to connect it with the rest of Scotland, it seems that here on Orkney history is starting to repeat itself.

And though I may not live to see these ideas fully trickled down to the rest of the country, my hope is that my son will, and can say, years from now, that he was there right at the beginning.

Travel Euston to Inverness was provided by Caledonian Sleeper, private rooms from £125 (under-4s free); the passenger-only twice-daily ferry from John o’Groats to Burwick costs from £16 one-way (under-5s free); the car-carrying NorthLink ferry between Stromness and Scrabster (Thurso) runs three times a day from £17.50 (under-4s free). The electric campervan (sleeps two adults) was provided through online sharing platform PaulCamper: the all-electric Spoot costs from £110 a night (3-night minimum)










@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Electric touring, Outer Hebrides

For the past five years, Stornoway on the Isle of Lewis has been home to a fleet of rentable electric cars powered from points where the electricity is generated by wind. And with 11 charge points now strategically placed from Lewis in the north to Barra in the south – drivers can traverse the full Outer Hebrides chain without using a drop of petrol. Take your tent as wild camping is permitted and there are few beaches anywhere to match those here.

Book a car at ecarclub.co.uk (sign-up required) from £45 a day

Voluntourism, Isle of Skye

Sunrise at the Quiraing on Trotternish Ridge, Isle of Skye. Photograph: Tillman Schlageter/Alamy

The hugely popular island has a Keep Skye Beautiful team that looks for volunteers to help with projects each year. Work might involve maintaining and creating hiking pathways and viewing areas, setting up signposts and removing litter. Volunteers get to explore landmarks such as the Old Man of Storr and Kilt Rock while helping restore and protect them for future visitors.

Register interest at myskyetime.com/volunteer

Camping, Isle of Arran

Red deer at Lochranza, Isle of Arran. Photograph: Tim Graham/Alamy

Camping is one of the greenest ways to stay wherever you head off on holiday, and a visit to this island – using the CalMac ferry and connecting train – can be even more so with a stay at Lochranza campsite. Not only does it have eco-friendly credentials (holding a gold award from Green Tourism) for its facilities, but its owners are committed to boosting biodiversity, which has meant deer, birds, red squirrels, bees and wildflowers have all benefited, making it environmentally sound for the campers and the wildlife.

Pitch for two from £20, arran-campsite.com

Green stay, Inner Hebrides

Eigg Shed

Having produced 95% of its electricity since 2008, via what became the first grid in the world powered by a perfect combination of wind, solar and hydro schemes, Eigg offers an almost guilt-free island stay. Not only did islanders say goodbye to all but their back-up diesel generators over 10 years ago, but they also cleverly buried all the cables underground so there are no electricity pylons spoiling the scenery. It’s accessed easily via train and ferry, and Eigg Shed is a Scandi-style modern bothy, with a low carbon footprint and a composting toilet.

From £522 a week, sleeps three, eiggtime.com/eigg-shed

Slow food break, Shetland
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I was lying on my stomach on a clifftop waiting for a puffin to stop preening long enough for me to take its photo with my little camera. A couple of women were sitting on the grass nearby, huge lenses trained on the bird. I had one eye on the puffin but my ear on the women – “I’ve only taken 86 photos, so it shouldn’t take long to edit them.”

Tiree locator map Photograph: Guardian Design

I put my camera down. Watching a puffin no more than a metre from me combing its beak through its feathers was a moment that would stick in my memory even without a great photo.

The uninhabited isle of Lunga rises out of the sea like a mythical land – its basalt cliffs jagged and intimidating, the air alive with wheeling sea birds. Nearly 50 species can be spotted here, including kittiwakes, guillemots, fulmars and shags – but it’s the 8,000-strong puffin colony that steals the show, returning from the sea with mouths full of sand eels and scurrying in and out of burrows, seemingly unperturbed by human visitors.

Atlantic puffins on Lunga. Photograph: Alamy

Getting to Lunga, a speck of land just west of the Isle of Mull, had been an adventure itself. At the tiny harbour in Scarinish on Tiree our group was split in two; ours was allocated to the 12-seater rib, which meant donning comically large waterproofs before boarding.

Half an hour after we’d checked in we were standing above Balevullin beach grinning at the wide curve of white sand

“Make sure you hold on,” Kris the captain told us. Moments later it was clear why, as the boat bounced over the waves, speeding past the other group’s catamaran. The journey there and back provided its own wildlife displays as we cruised through a pod of dolphins that leapt alongside the boat almost within touching distance. The catamaran crew even spotted a minke whale. It was only after talking to some fellow passengers that I realised how lucky we had been on Lunga. Our group of 22 had the island to ourselves. It hadn’t crossed my mind that it might be busier in a normal, non-Covid year.

“That path we walked up is usually rammed,” one of the group told me. “Hundreds of people come over from Mull on big boats.”

The prairie-like centre of Tiree. Photograph: Isabel Choat

Perhaps we had taken the peace and quiet on Lunga for granted because we’d got used to having places to ourselves on the Isle of Tiree. The most westerly of the Inner Hebrides, Tiree is only 12 miles long and three wide but the lack of hills or trees, towns or traffic, gives a sense of space that belies its size. As we drove across the “Reef”, the name given to the centre of the island, I was reminded of the American prairies or the pampas. The land is pancake-flat and dwarfed by a sky so vast it feels like it might swallow the island whole.

“It’s a very powerful landscape,” said John Holliday, a retired GP who has lived on the island for 30 years and is chair of the local museum. “But it’s almost impossible to capture. Several photographers have moved here, but it’s incredibly difficult to frame any picture, to curate a composition.”

It’s odd that the big skies are not referenced in the various monikers by which Tiree is known. It’s the Sunshine Isle, on account of its reputation as the sunniest place in Britain (not strictly true); and the Hawaii of the North, thanks to its great surf. With white-sand beaches all around its 36-mile coast, you are almost guaranteed great surf conditions. As well as board-surfing, Tiree is renowned for kitesurfing and windsurfing, hosting the longest-running pro windsurfing event in the world every October.

A bedroom at the Reef Inn

“The surf’s really good at Balevullin today,” Sian Milne, owner of the Reef Inn, the island’s first boutique hotel, said to us when we arrived. Opened this spring, a year later than planned, it didn’t have an ideal start, but the eight bedrooms are almost fully booked this summer. Inside, black furnishings and plants stand out against white walls and pale wood floors, its minimalist Nordic design a departure from the island’s two more traditional hotels, the Lodge and the Scarinish, although the latter is about to reopen after a revamp.

But if the Reef is cool and luxurious in its design, the vibe is warm and laid-back. Sian’s friendly “surf’s up” welcome set the tone for our stay: I ended up going for an early morning dip with Michelle, the waitress, after discovering she loved outdoor swimming; my son kept popping over to Sian’s garden, next to the hotel, to hang out with her four children.

Half an hour after we’d checked in we were standing above Balevullin beach grinning at the wide curve of white sand backed by marram grass dunes, with barely a soul on it.

Surfboards at Blackhouse Watersports. Photograph: Isabel Choat

Balevullin is home to Blackhouse Watersports, a surf school run by Iona and Marti Larg. We joined a group lesson and spent the next 90 minutes managing to get up on to our hands and knees, with a few brief, wobbly standups. I walked back up the beach with a sense of, if not achievement, satisfaction that I’d given it a go.

Over the next few days we returned to Balevullin to surf with Iona, watching in awe as their 16-year-old son, Ben, a competitive surfer, paddled out to catch the bigger swell. Between surf lessons we tried windsurfing on Loch Bhasapol with Wild Diamond (even harder than surfing). When we weren’t falling off boards into the water, we walked along the coast, poked about in rock pools, and even managed a swim without wetsuits one day.

Every beach we visited was ludicrously picturesque, from the dazzling Green, a short walk from the island’s only high school, to the little roadside coves just outside Scarinish. But 4km-long Gott bay is particularly mesmerising, its vast shimmering sands reflecting the sky at low tide. At its eastern end is a cluster of cottages – the traditional blackhouses that the surf school takes its name from, so called because originally these deep-walled, thatched buildings had no chimneys and their insides would blacken with smoke. Only a handful are still thatched; most roofs have been replaced with tarred felt.

The island is getting a good name for wildlife tourism Frazer MacInnes

Like its landscape, Tiree’s history is one of extremes. The island’s shallow fertile sea is rich in kelp. In the late 1700s the Duke of Argyll began to make money from this “brown gold”, which was harvested and shipped to the mainland for use by soap and glass manufacturers and for linen bleaching. The population increased threefold in 50 years, but when the price of kelp fell and the harvest failed, famine and poverty led to mass emigration.

“It’s a very extreme story: a massive increase in population, unmatched anywhere else in Scotland, then a plunge into poverty, then huge emigration. It had a profound effect,” said Holliday. Today 650 people live on the island, but the population is slowly starting to increase, creating, said Holliday, “an interesting new story for the island”.

Vaul beach, in north-east Tiree. Photograph: Max Blinkhorn/Alamy

“The signs are encouraging: there are families moving to the island. People are starting to leave the cities because they can work remotely, and taking advantage of [the better] quality of life.”

In the far south-west of the island, a former builder’s shed houses another entrepreneurial venture, the island’s first distillery in more than 200 years

People are also starting to holiday on the island more. Unable to travel abroad, fair-weather surfers, windsurfers and kite surfers who might have headed to Portugal or Tarifa in southern Spain are braving the chillier waters of Tiree. But it’s not just watersports enthusiasts who are drawn to the island. Overcrowding in Cornwall, Devon and the Lakes is encouraging UK holidaymakers to seek out more remote places where they can picnic on a beach in relative peace.

Tiree Sea tours, the company that took us to Lunga, was set up in 2018 by former fisherman Frazer MacInnes. Business is booming and he plans to buy a second rib this year. “The island is getting a good name for wildlife tourism. I made more money this May than in the whole of last year,” he said.

In the far south-west of the island, a former builder’s shed houses another entrepreneurial venture, the island’s first distillery in more than 200 years. Set up in 2019 by friends and folk musicians Ian Smith and Alain Campbell, the distillery produces Tyree Gin, using botanicals from the machair, the fertile grazing ground that is covered in wildflowers in summer.

This spring the pair opened a small terrace overlooking the rocks on the south coast serving gin cocktails (try the Tyree raspberry sour). The first batch of whisky will be ready in three years.

The Tyree Gin distillery uses botanicals from the native machair

In the evenings we ate at the Reef Inn’s restaurant; huge photos of waves and surfers decorate the walls and floor-to-ceiling windows provide light. Standout starters were mussels with pancetta and cider, and a chowder that was almost a meal in itself. I had an excellent potato-and-cauliflower curry; and some great langoustines.

Until the Scarinish Hotel reopens later this month, the only other place for an evening meal is the Lodge Hotel. We grabbed takeaway fish and chips from there one evening and ate them sitting by the harbour. There was no one else around – just some sheep nibbling at the grassy verges.

“The outside world has tended not to fix their gaze here,” Holliday told me. But with the ongoing international travel restrictions and the blossoming of new businesses like the Reef Hotel, the outside world is starting to notice the “secret island” of Tiree.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The questions

1 Who was declared son of the god Amun in 332 BC?

2 What is the UK’s smallest rodent?

3 Ecuador’s Archipiélago de Colón is better known as what?

4 Who reads the newspaper Inside Time?

5 What precedes “and Nathan the prophet” in a famous anthem?

6 Peter Bottomley inherited which title from Ken Clarke?

7 The Spanish Armada sailed from which city?

8 Which horse race might have been the Bunbury?

What links:

9 Kingdom (1795); republic (1894); territory (1900); state (1959)?

10 Pegasus; pelican; puffin; toucan; zebra?

11 Weakest Link; The Apprentice; Gillette Soccer Saturday?

12 Survival; Creative; Adventure; Spectator; Hardcore?

13 Sixty days after Easter; Texan city; Oxford and Cambridge colleges?

14 Pennywise; Rigoletto; Yorick; Arlecchino?

15 Amanda Gorman; nobody; Richard Blanco; Elizabeth Alexander?

Anne Robinson, former host of Weakest Link. Photograph: Mike Hogan/PA

The answers

1 Alexander the Great.

2 Harvest mouse.

3 Galápagos Islands.

4 Prisoners.

5 Zadok the Priest (Handel).

6 Father of the House (longest-serving MP).

7 Lisbon.

8 The Derby.

9 Hawaii (legal status).

10 Pedestrian crossings.

11 Previous shows of recent Countdown hosts: Anne Robinson; Nick Hewer; Jeff Stelling.

12 Minecraft game modes.

13 Corpus Christi.

14 Fictional clowns/jesters: Stephen King’s It; Verdi opera; Hamlet; commedia dell’arte.

15 Poets at the last four US presidential inaugurations.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Pepper meets Mr Binks for the first time and bottom-sniffs the diminutive pooch by way of greeting. As ever, I look away. But Mr Binks’s owner, dog behaviourist Anna Webb, says: “Ah, that’s nice, they’re introducing themselves.”

Pepper, my miniature schnauzer, trots off ahead down the pavement, followed by me, holding her lead, and then Mr Binks and the glamorous Anna. The two of them are walking side by side.

“Pepper shouldn’t be walking ahead,” Anna says. She immediately laughs, to soften her sternness, adding, “She’s not the Queen!”

Unbeknown to Pepper, Anna is assessing the pair of us on today’s walk on Hampstead Heath in north London to see how well we interact together, rather like a family psychotherapist sitting in on playtime with a child and their parent. Anna is also going to give me tips on how to enhance both Pepper’s wellbeing and my own by making our daily walks an interactive, quality experience for both of us.

During a dog walk, according to Anna, host of the weekly podcast A Dog’s Life, owner and pooch should be in constant communication: the hound praised by its owner, returning when it is called (recall), and rewarded with verbal cues or edible treats. The human is rewarded with companionship, devotion and increased wellbeing. “It’s a chance for you to be together, to take a break together, and to enjoy nature,” says Anna.

Disregarding our dogs’ needs, on the other hand, helps nobody. When Anna spots a human on their mobile phone, ignoring their canine chum, her stress levels rocket. “You wouldn’t expect your child to go to the park in silence,” says Anna, “no chat about the environment and what you pass on the way, would you?”

I resolve to be my best, most interactive self after hearing this, but Pepper promptly lifts her leg outside The Mutt Hut, a grooming parlour near the Heath where she gets her eyebrows trimmed and her anal glands seen to (dog ownership isn’t all photoshoots and glamour). Unsure how to join in, I send her good vibes instead. Then, the moment she sets off, I make sure to walk in step with her, albeit aided by a surreptitious tug of her lead. But I’ve been spotted by Anna.

“The lead should be taut, but not tight,” she says. “A dog that is charging ahead doesn’t know where it’s going. The dog is taking all the responsibility for the walk. Pulling ahead, panting like a train, the dog is stressed.”

A dog that is charging ahead does not know where it’s going

Walking to heel à la Mr Binks is where it’s at. It means your mutt is trained, can be recalled when necessary and knows its place in the pack. On this, at least, I have form: Pepper often walks between me and my husband when we make our passeggiata, her pointy ears and fondness for carrying a stick the width of four great danes eliciting both envy and awe.

Next, Pepper stops to sniff a freshly urine-sprayed lamp-post. I’m all over this. “Good sniffing, Pepper!” I exclaim, trying to prove Anna’s assertion that you can teach old dogs, ie me, new tricks. Usually, I keep schtum when Pepper indulges her Proustian tic. But if I am in a hurry I bark, “Not now, Pepper” and yank her lead.

It turns out I’ve misunderstood this praise business. You only praise a dog for sniffing when they are doing so on command. “This works as a focus tool that enables you to get your dog out of someone’s way, or to avoid another dog,” says Anna. “It’s a way of joining in the walking experience with your dog and a way to consciously activate their massive olfaction.”

Dogs have up to 300m olfactory receptors, map their environment through sniffing and communicate with each other through the chemical signals in their body odours. Anna says a dog can tell another dog’s age, rank, state of health and gender from a bottom whiff or urine trace.

“If they are sniffing all the time and you’re in a hurry, you can combine other tools like the verbal cue, ‘Look at me,’ or distract them with a toy to play a quick game. The dog is then focused on you as the provider of fun.”

When a runaway toddler careers down the path at killer speed Anna uses another tool. She immediately crouches down, holds her hand side on, as if she were about to slice through something, and then extends it towards shin-high Mr Binks and then back to herself. “‘Touch! Touch!” she calls, the collision imminent. Just in time Mr Binks trots out of the toddler’s way and comes straight to Anna. She gives Mr Binks the thumbs up, then rewards the superhero English toy terrier with a treat.

Anna explains her methods: “Combine the command with a happy face and a food reward and you are practising operant conditioning. It’s one step on from a Pavlovian response. The dog is doing something of their own choice and is rewarded; that principle is then transferred to everything they do, such as walking to the heel command.”

I am happy to report Pepper catches on quickly when Anna introduces her to the touch command. The treat helps. She’s never had venison before.

They know if I’m on a downer and cheer me up with a look or tail wag

In 2008, Anna helped to launch the charity Medical Detection Dogs, which trains canines to detect odour changes in people with type 1 diabetes. It is now successfully training them to detect Covid-19. Dogs thrive on such cognitive stimulation, even if it comes in the form of a humdrum game of fetch or hunting for hidden treats. But, cautions Anna, all dogs must be trained “for life’s great landscape ahead”.

When Prudence, her miniature bull terrier, recently ran up against some bullocks in a field, Anna deployed the touch command. The duo made a quick getaway. Untrained dogs can run amok. According to the National Farmers’ Union, the cost of farm animals attacked by dogs rose by 10% last year. Of the 80% of dogs walked off the lead, according to their survey, 64% don’t come back when called. “The problem is first-time owners who haven’t trained their dogs during lockdown,” says Anna. “They think they somehow come ready-trained.”

As Tintin and Snowy and Wallace and Gromit remind us, humans and canines can enjoy a symbiotic relationship, as well as adventure and derring-do. Anna does not doubt a dog’s capacity for empathy. During the “harrowing experience” of caring for her late mother as she endured dementia, Mr Binks and Prudence rallied. “They always know when I’m on a bit of a downer. They’ll cheer me up with a mindful look or tail wag. Prudence is particularly good at this and becomes very playful and distracting, getting up to mischief, making me smile even if I don’t want to, keeping me present and minimising any wallowing. But it’s their loyalty and the fact that I have them in the first place that I find so reassuring, I’m grateful I’m never alone. They offer me unconditional love, and I find that very humbling.”

Last month the government formally recognised dogs as sentient beings with the Animal Welfare (Sentience) Bill. “They are complex, emotionally intelligent creatures,” says Anna, which is why an interactive relationship with them is imperative. To this end, she gets Pepper to walk the length of a log and jump over it. Pepper, dare I say it, is a natural. Showing off, she leaps over Mr Binks. It’s like the Tokyo Olympics and I, for one, am exhausted.

What on earth does Anna get out of all this effort? “Mr Binks and I have worked as a team, he’s trusted me and challenged himself. It’s about spending time with your dog. They have short lives and leave us heartbroken, and I’m conscious I want to know I did my best, and have memories to prove it.”

annawebb.co.uk

The rules of doggie etiquette

DO…

1 Train a total recall from distractions like joggers

2 Reward with tasty, healthy treats

3 Vary your walks according to the seasons

4 Train the perfect walk to heel

5 Invest in a 5m-long line

DON’T…

1 Use a retractable lead

2 Let your dog pull in front

3 Let your dog run up to strange dogs or people

4 Let your dog off lead without a recall in place

5 Allow your dog to chase squirrels or worry livestock
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Hal on Izzy

What were you hoping for?

To be honest, I had wanted to go to the restaurant for a while, so at the very least, great food. Also, a nice evening with good conversation.

First impressions?

Izzy was lovely and down to earth, confident but not overpowering, and easy to talk to. I was a bit nervous but she made me feel at ease, or maybe it was the wine?

What did you talk about?

Travel, our work and the travesty that is online dating. We also discussed the heavy topics you should avoid on a first date: sexuality, religion, politics.

Any awkward moments?

We both didn’t really know a thing about wine and ended up with the sweetest white I have ever tasted. Then had the cote de boeuf.

Good table manners?

Hers were impeccable, I had an issue when my oyster wouldn’t detach and I had to attack it with a knife.

Best thing about Izzy?

She gave the impression she really knew who she was as a person. No false pretence, no hidden agenda.

Would you introduce her to your friends?

She could definitely handle them!

Describe Izzy in three words

Charismatic, warm, down to earth.

What do you think she made of you?

Travel snob! I was quite honest: it needs to be a hotel or I’m not going.

Did you go on somewhere?

We were last out and it was a Monday night, so taxis home in the rain it was.

If it weren’t for social distancing, would you have kissed?

Who knows, if circumstances had been different…

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?

Weather, and the day of the week.

Marks out of 10?

8.

Would you meet again?

I’d say yes!

Q&A Want to be in Blind date? Show Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.



What questions will I be asked?

We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?

No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?

No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?

Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?

Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?

No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?

We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?

Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to apply

Email blind.date@theguardian.com Was this helpful? Thank you for your feedback.

Izzy on Hal

What were you hoping for?

I was excited about being able to get a bit dressed up and hoping for good food, tipsiness and flirtatiousness.

First impressions?

I liked that Hal had worn a shirt.

What did you talk about?

Travel, food, alcohol, faith.

Any awkward moments?

When Hal brought up possible answers to the awkward-moment question, as well as how I would answer about his table manners.

Good table manners?

Hal kindly offered me some of his starter, which was thoughtful. We also ordered too much food and asked for rest to go, which he said I could enjoy – so top marks.

Best thing about Hal?

Lovely blue eyes.

Would you introduce him to your friends?

I’m not sure how well they would get along.

Describe Hal in three words

Friendly, conservative and kind.

What do you think he made of you?

I guess ordering oysters on a first date is a bit of a bold choice, so I’m not sure what he made of that. The conversation flowed well, so I’d like to think he found me friendly.

Did you go on somewhere?

It would have been a bit of a late one for a Monday to go anywhere else.

If it weren’t for social distancing, would you have kissed?

Probably not.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?

I would have ordered the magnum instead of just joking about it.

Marks out of 10?

8. Lovely guy, but unfortunately no chemistry on my side.

Would you meet again?

Not romantically.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@“Over lockdown, the soundtrack to my life was email notifications pinging – and people burping and farting,” says Emma, describing the unwavering “bodily expulsions” from her husband and their three children as a constant “21-gun salute”. Before the pandemic, her husband went to the office, her eldest child to school and her two younger ones to nursery, and she had the house to herself to work, think and breathe. Back then, the occasional bodily expulsion seemed comical: “When a kid does a burp at the table, especially if they’re not expecting it, it’s very funny.” But together 24/7, the humour was gone. “Not only was there no headspace, but I was having to put up with everyone just letting it fly. I was trapped in it, as if I was in a barn full of farting, belching animals. It started to make me feel a bit depressed. I thought, what has my life become?”

Emma was not the only one. During the third national lockdown, after the cancellation of Christmas lunches across the UK, Google searches for the following terms hit five-year peaks: “biting nails”, “farting”, “burping”, and “scratching”; June saw the peak of “snot”. We cannot know what provoked such searches to proliferate. But we can investigate what happened to couples when these formerly private explosions, explorations and excavations came out into the open and how different partners reacted. We can ask: what do these experiences teach us about relationships? About what it means to be human?

Sara first became aware of her boyfriend’s behaviour during a video call before the pandemic. “He picked his nose and he ate it. I was like: what just happened? I was shocked.” At first he denied it, before finally admitting: “Oh yeah, I do that sometimes.” Sara was disgusted. “I was horrified. It’s just gross. All the dirt from the outside world that your nose has filtered out – and you put it in your mouth! I thought about all the times I’ve kissed him. I wanted to throw up”. The next time, he did it in her flat – this time flicking away the pickings. “That disturbed me. I immediately got up and vacuumed, and then I mopped.” Undeniably disgusting, but I am struck by Sara’s urgent need to clean. Does she have high hygiene standards? “I wouldn’t discount that. This is also to do with your family culture. I have never witnessed such a thing in my home. It’s considered rude and uncouth – people who are civilised don’t do this. So that brings me on to farting…”

We’re basically a package that is wrapped in skin. Inside, it’s blood, muscle and faeces. We’re potentially very disgusting. Including to our spouse

A few months in, he farted in front of her; when she asked him to stop, “he would just persist and laugh, so it felt deliberate. He would fart at will. I don’t think he needed to – he wanted to annoy me.” There were other red flags for Sara, including the derogatory way he spoke about other women. She understood all these behaviour traits as falling into the same constellation: although he had many good qualities and she remained sexually attracted to him, “there is a strong undercurrent of childishness and a ‘stuck’ part of him that hasn’t matured, that has stayed as a stubborn three-year-old”. This was a major factor in her refusal to live with him, and decision to end their relationship. “How can you rely on someone as a grownup, mature partner when they still eat their boogers and confuse what is good and what is bad? I think the disgust I felt encompasses all of this at a visceral level.”

Catriona Wrottesley, a couples psychoanalytic psychotherapist at Tavistock Relationships in London, says that disgust is often encountered in the consulting room. “It’s more than a just bodily reaction,” she explains. “It’s a bodily, emotional, psychological and relational reaction, and must be thought about on all these levels.” Disgust can signal a breakdown in communication, as it surges up “to form a protective boundary for the individual against the threat of intrusion by their partner. It may arise with a feeling that the other is not respecting us, or when there is a need to claim our separate space.” She has seen in couples therapy that disgust often shifts as understanding grows. “Understanding can bring people together, whereas disgust is about backing off from the other.” In lockdown, lack of freedom has posed difficulties for some couples, with “no opportunity to refresh the partnership by time spent apart”. Without fresh air blowing into their relationship, the atmosphere for some has grown more than stale; it’s putrid.

Paul Rozin is known as the “father of disgust”. A professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, he says: “We’re basically a package that is wrapped in skin. And inside that skin, it’s all disgusting – you know, blood, muscle and, of course, faeces. We’ve got a bag of faeces inside ourselves all the time. So we’re potentially very disgusting. Including to our spouse.” Rozin was among the first scientists to study disgust, following Darwin and Freud, and established this new research field in the 1980s. I ask him to share the most disgusting thing anyone has ever told him and he replies, disconcertingly, “That’s like asking, what’s your favourite restaurant in the world?”

His understanding begins with Darwin, for whom disgust was primarily a food rejection system with a protective purpose. The universal, innate facial expression we make upon tasting bitter food (the mouth opening, tongue extending, nose wrinkling, upper lip retracting, lower lip protruding) has an evolutionary function: these contortions combine either to expel the disgusting thing in your mouth or to stop it getting in. The word disgust was introduced into the English language in 1601, from the Old French desgouster, or distaste.

‘They picked their nose and ate it. I was shocked’ Photograph: Kellie French/The Guardian. Photographer’s assistant: Stew Capper. Makeup and hair: Sarah Cherry. Pyjamas, by Christopher Kane, from selfridges.com . Necklace, by Fallon, and Horsebit ring, by Sophie Buhai, both from matchesfashion.com

The emotion Sara felt towards her partner when he farted is “scaffolded on to this innate rejection of bitter taste”, explains Rachel Herz, cognitive neuroscientist and author of That’s Disgusting. She should know: a renowned expert in smell, she is also “nose judge” for the annual Rotten Sneaker Contest in the US. Disgust at other people’s bodily functions, however, is not innate. It is social and cultural – learned during toilet training. Rozin sounds disappointed that there are no good studies into how disgust develops in children. “Clearly, it’s effectively done,” he says. Prior to toilet training, children happily eat their own faeces and, afterwards, usually won’t. “We don’t know how.”

We do know the areas of the brain associated with disgust are the basal ganglia and the insula – a discovery made, Herz explains, after research showed that people with Huntington’s disease, who suffer a deterioration of these areas, cannot recognise the disgust facial expression and are less offended by the smell of faeces.

The question of disgust is intriguing for philosophers as well as psychologists: Slavoj Žižek writes that while we have no problem swallowing saliva that is already in our mouths, if we were to spit into a sterile cup and drink that saliva, we would find it “extremely repulsive”; he calls this “a case of violating the inside/outside frontier”. Rozin explains that for us, “the inside of the body is disgusting”, and secretions like saliva and mucous are disgusting to us “because they emanate”. “When the inside leaks to the outside, that’s disgusting.” Spitting, farting, burping, belching, nose-picking – all disgusting.

Or are they?

Lucas and his partner lived in different countries prior to moving in together over lockdown. They had a spacious apartment with separate offices and so, with no children, their situation was less stressful than it was for many. There was, nevertheless, a point of conflict: “I didn’t like it whenever she farted or burped after a meal,” he says. It gave him a feeling of revulsion, irritation. Eventually, she asked if it bothered him when her body made noises, “I found it did, and I had to ask myself why. My only answer was that it just wasn’t the done thing, which didn’t seem like a very good answer at all.”

His partner put forward her case: at home, you should be able to let your body do what it needs to do, without shame. Lucas found her argument compelling. He concluded that his disgust was more about him than about her behaviour; that he had no real reason to get angry, he was just making himself unhappy. “Once I realised that, it was easy to let it go”; he could accept his partner as she is. They now freely fart and burp in front of each other, though he emphasises: “It’s just an occasional thing, a question of not suppressing something that is coming naturally.” This was a small change, but it felt profound. “It made me realise what is important in life. It’s not this small comedy of manners, this social dance that we engage in – it’s about who we are as people; what do we carry within us? And that’s goodness and humanity and decency and love. And those things are much more important to me than whether or not my partner needs to fart in bed in the morning.”

What we find disgusting is not an objective truth but a subjective judgment shaped by the society and culture we live in

Lucas’ reflections challenge my own sense of disgust and call into question the boundaries between what is and is not disgusting. As the anthropologist Mary Douglas wrote in Purity And Danger in 1966, “There is no such thing as absolute dirt: it exists in the eye of the beholder.” Liz Wyse, author of Debrett’s forthcoming guide to international etiquette, has found that what is traditionally seen as good manners in the UK can be perceived as disgusting in other countries – and the reverse is also true. In Korea, she says, you must “never, ever blow your nose in public – it is just about the rudest thing you can do”. Whereas in China, “many acts that offend the western sense of propriety are perfectly acceptable” – from burping after a meal to blowing your nose on the ground. In east Africa, flatulence in public is “considered with even more repugnance than it would be here,” Wyse says; in Eric Newby’s A Book Of Travellers’ Tales, published in 1985, the travel writer John Hatt refers to an individual in Lamu, Kenya, known as “the man whose grandfather farted”.

What we find disgusting is not an objective truth but a subjective judgment, shaped by the society and culture we live in. It’s about the breaking of a code. And who writes the code? If a couple can choose not to be grossed-out by each other’s bodily expulsions and find meaning and love in that acceptance; if different cultures deem different habits to be socially unacceptable and to different degrees; if, as a cloak for misogyny, menstruation can be condemned as disgusting, and women shamed and psychologically harmed because of it, then is disgust more about shame and power than anything else? I put it to Herz that the title of her book, That’s Disgusting, cannot really be applied to anything with certainty. “No,” she agrees, we can only say, “That is disgusting to me.”

When it comes to feeling disgusted by our partner’s behaviour, psychoanalyst Josh Cohen questions where the shame and power truly lie. He notes that “shameless” refers both to the infant who doesn’t know what shame is, as well as the adults who choose to ignore their shame and override it; he thinks we may look at our partners who “proudly let loose” in front of us with disgust, but also with envy, “because we are so stuck in our own shame”.

‘What’s important in life is about who we are as people, not whether my partner needs to fart in bed.’ Photograph: Kellie French/The Guardian

Rozin, on the other hand, has theorised that belching and burrowing disgusts us because it is animalistic, and we turn away from our animal nature to block our awareness that “humans, like all other animals, must die”. These behaviours are not just animalistic, but also infantile. Herz observes that children are not guided by social niceties – “we just pee, we poop, we fart, we pick”, while adults have more control over their bodies. I wonder if a partner behaving in such a childlike way might unconsciously remind us of the vulnerable, helpless, terrified baby inside each of us – the part of ourselves we cannot bear to know about, so exposed by the pandemic.

Cohen also proposes that our reactions could be rooted in the enigmatic nature of our bodily effluvia. According to the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan, we live mostly in the paternal order of regularity and structure, governed by the law and language. We can think of our spontaneous bodily discharges, Cohen suggests, as “the eruptive force at the edges that cannot be represented, which Lacan called ‘the real’”. It is impossible, for example, to spell the sound of a fart or to convey the gravy richness of a profound belch, and I learn during my research that what is commonly called snot – the mixture of mucous and particles of matter trapped in it – has no official term; it is, medically speaking, unsymbolised. We can think of all these, says Cohen, as “eruptions of the real”. A novel name for a fart if ever I heard one.

Another understanding of why the personal habits and functions of partners might be so disturbing comes from the cusp of the 12th and 13th centuries, via a Latin text called Urbanus Magnus, attributed to Daniel of Beccles. Historian Fiona Whelan and colleagues were the first to translate it into English as The Book Of The Civilised Man – a sort of medieval Debrett’s guide to manners. “There’s an unfortunate trope of looking back on the middle ages as filthy and disgusting, because that’s how it’s often portrayed,” she says. “That’s not to say it wasn’t different – it was. But some things remain the same.” (For one, readers are advised against eating food that has fallen on the floor; some variation of the two-second rule has existed for eight centuries.)

Unlike farting, which is a sign of a healthy digestive system (we emit about 15 farts a day), nose-picking poses serious risks

My favourite advice from Daniel of Beccles is, “If you wish to belch, remember to look at the ceiling.” He also suggests that if you sneeze into your hand, try not to look at what comes out; if you must spit at the dinner table, turn around and spit behind you; and do resist hunting for fleas in your chest in front of others. But then, as now, different individuals had different approaches. According to Urbanus Magnus, “flatulence should not occur… If it happens that your intestines are caught in a windstorm, look for a place where you may relieve them in private”; at the same time, Roland the Farter was famous in the court of Henry II for passing wind on demand, which Whelan says was considered hilarious. The question dividing Emma’s family in the 21st century has roots going back to the 12th. Whelan came across several fantastic terms for fart in her research, from “crepitus” and “bumbulum” to Daniel of Beccles’ more refined “the tornado beneath your thighs”.

According to Urbanus Magnus, not being able to master your bodily functions reflected your inner soul. Whelan thinks we may not have changed much, especially when it comes to disgust: “We’ve lost the religious element, but I don’t think we’ve lost the sense that how you behave is a mirror to how you are as a person; whenever someone breaks whatever code we have, we say, ‘Eugh!’” Perhaps this explains the disgust provoked in some partners: closer to medieval morality than we think, we are unconsciously disturbed by the lowly manners, and therefore lowly soul, of the person with whom we share our bed.

It is about time that we heard from one of these (allegedly) disgusting specimens. Allow me to introduce you to Nigel. “I can’t believe I’m telling you this,” he says. “The thing is, I pick my nose. And on occasion, I’ve been known to eat it.” His reasons are practical: “I can’t believe anybody doesn’t pick their nose. It’s so annoying to have a snotty nose. The process of blowing it always makes it more bunged up, and you’re left with a disgusting runny nose as a result.” But his feasting on the pickings remains a mystery, even to him: “That is the most repulsive thing.” He cannot explain it.

He grew conscious of this longstanding habit over lockdown, after moving in with his partner. They were watching television when, horrified, she asked him what he was doing with his finger. He denied it – “I was just scratching!” – but it did make him think. “It occurred to me that there’s someone else there, someone I want to fancy me.” When this happened in a previous relationship, he felt ashamed and defensive, and did not address it; he sees it as a good sign that this time he did not perceive his partner’s comment as an attack on the core of himself, but as a reasonable reaction that required a response from him.

Photograph: Kellie French/The Guardian. Photographer’s assistant: Stew Capper. Boxer shorts, by Derek Rose, from www.matchesfashion.com

Although picking his nose (and eating it) takes up a very small part of Nigel’s day, addressing this is part of a bigger theme in his life to do with growing up, self-awareness, and what it means to love. He was previously untidy at home, and self-righteously so; he was comfortable with chaos, so why should he conform to other people’s values? Over the past decade, that has changed. He is now less likely to order pizza twice in a week or leave the boxes lying around, and this is all part of the process of “reaching a settlement with who you are, recognising that it’s OK to try to fix those things”. He doesn’t care about his nose-picking, he says. “I do care that my partner is not grossed out, and I can’t apply my sense of things to somebody else.”

Nose-picking is one of many examples where our sense of disgust has an evolutionary health benefit. Unlike farting, which is a sign of a healthy digestive system (within reason – we emit in the region of 15 farts a day on average, according to Julie Thompson of the charity Guts UK), nose-picking poses serious risks. Other than the obvious danger of introducing coronavirus, or transmitting it to someone else, there are risks to the nose itself. Professor Nirmal Kumar is an ear, nose and throat consultant surgeon, and president of ENT UK. At the milder end of the spectrum, he says, nose-picking can irritate the lining of the nose, provoke bleeding and, paradoxically, create more problems with “crusting”. In more extreme cases, “it creates holes in the nose called septum perforations. It is not common in children, but in adults who’ve been doing this over the years, unfortunately, all ENT doctors and clinicians have seen it.”

You should be able to find your partner disgusting, because that means they are ‘other’ to you, not just an extension of you

Nigel picks his nose less than he did – but hasn’t broken the habit, unlike Beth, who bit her nails since she “came out the womb. Not just a little bit of nibbling, but down to the nail-bed.” She had suffered from anxiety throughout her life, and this was her coping mechanism. “It was a way to calm down and self-soothe, like a baby sucking my thumb. I used to get really angry if people told me to stop.” But she wasn’t happy about it: “It was constantly painful, bloody and a proper eyesore.” Beth hated her hands and hid them at the office, and in photographs.

After moving in with her partner, and spending every day together over several lockdowns, she became more aware of the habit than ever. He asked why, if she hated it so much, she didn’t quit. She bought some bitter-tasting nail polish, set an alarm to remind her to use it, and her boyfriend obliged by pushing her hand away from her mouth when he saw her about to bite her nails. She wasn’t always grateful and accused him of finding her habit and her hands disgusting. “I think it was my own insecurities. I was being incredibly defensive – I knew this was something I needed to change, but him agreeing with me annoyed me,” she says. Together, they conquered her nail-biting, and for the past three months she has not wanted to hide her hands. After we speak, she heads off for a manicure and later sends a photo of her glamorous long red nails. What did she learn from the experience? “It made me realise that people in my life are there to help me, and I shouldn’t be so resistant to change.”

I ask etiquette expert Liz Wyse if seeing the cultural specificity of these so-called gross habits has challenged her view of what is socially acceptable. It has not. “Everyone has their cultural norms and taboos,” she says, “but what matters is respecting someone else’s if they alert you that it makes them feel uncomfortable.” This is exactly what happened for Emma and her barnyard of farting, belching animals. When she talked to her husband and children about it, she says, “I was thinking: I love these guys, and I don’t want them to feel self-conscious.” So she simply said, “Would you all mind trying not to fart and burp around me constantly, because I don’t like it.” They apologised and stopped. “It made me really happy,” Emma says. “I felt listened to.”

Surprisingly, for Cohen, a little disgust is a sign of a healthy relationship. “I think you should be able to find your partner disgusting, because that means they are ‘other’ to you, not just an extension of you,” he says. Where there is no inhibition or disgust surrounding some bodily functions, “intimacy has become a form of aloneness – as if there’s no difference between being on your own, and thinking, oh, it’s just the wife, or the husband, or whatever”. There is a danger of becoming too comfortable, of “confusing intimacy with total familiarity”; we need to relate to our partner as a separate person with their own bodily and psychic boundaries.

It occurs to me that many of us have had the experience of being loved by someone who seems to find nothing we do disgusting, who celebrates our farts and burps as if they are remarkable, award-winning achievements. This is the love of a mother and father for a new baby. As Wrottesley observes, “The intimate adult couple relationship is the first time that we experience anything that’s close to that first, mother-baby relationship, in terms of the emotional and bodily coming together.” Perhaps this is what some people are searching for from their partner, as they burp and fart and pick and lick and roll and flick, disappointed to meet only disgust in return. 
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@53 Park Lane, London W1K 1QA (020 7629 8888). Starters £16-£42, mains £32-£135, desserts £16-£20, wines from £84

Editors don’t send their journalists to cover wars because they like misery and carnage. They do so because the readers need to know about the carnage. By the same token, albeit with rather less moral urgency, I didn’t go to the pop-up of the Polo Lounge on the rooftop of London’s Dorchester Hotel because I like watching rich people pay ludicrous prices for cack-handed food that’s a gross insult to good taste, manners and commercial decency. I went because some risible hospitality operations need to be called out. Being positive is all well and good, but that shouldn’t mean absolute shockers get a free pass.

The original Polo Lounge, so named because wealthy polo players once frequented it, opened at LA’s Beverly Hills Hotel in 1941. Obviously, nobody now goes for the Italian-accented American bistro food. They go there to be in a Hollywood power room; to eat your shrimp, as I once did, two tables down from Whoopi Goldberg, surrounded by the ghosts of Astaire, Garland and Dietrich. At the London version I got to eat a table away from Alex Salmond. And that was the least troubling aspect of my evening. I had brunch at the original a few years back. It was all perfectly adequate and perfectly overpriced, in a Beverly Hills sort of way, which is where it should remain.

‘It costs £38 and arrives looking like someone with an organising compulsion has been at the Garfunkel’s salad bar’: McCarthy salad. Photograph: Sophia Evans/The Observer

The Dorchester Group is owned by that uber homophobe the Sultan of Brunei, who introduced punishments under sharia law for homosexuality, including the death penalty, until he was forced to back down because of an international outcry. As reviews go that’s pretty damning, but let’s push on. The Beverly Hills Hotel is part of the group, so they’ve transplanted an etiolated version of the Polo Lounge to the rooftop of the mothership on Park Lane, until the end of August. On a hot London evening it’s delightful to be outside, nine floors up with a view over Hyde Park. With all that comes an expectation of greatness, reinforced by the stipulated minimum spend of £60 a head.

The menu tells me they are delighted to bring “a taste of Tinseltown” to London complete with “pink bougainvillaea”. And there it is, climbing the wall behind me. I touch it. The bougainvillaea is plastic. So are the tables, the place mats and various of my fellow diners’ body parts. There’s anatomy on display tonight that hasn’t moved since 2010. The menu promises “live music”. They have a glum-looking DJ, blundering through a soundtrack of club tunes. In the sense that she’s pressing play it is, I suppose, a kind of live, but also deathly.

‘Diminutive and with a rigid shell’: crab cakes. Photograph: Sophia Evans/The Observer

But look, we’re on the top of the world, so let’s get into it. Bloody hell, look at those prices. The bread basket is £16. The salads start at £28. A bowl of pasta is £38. A steak is £135. Certain items are described as Polo Lounge “signature” dishes. Prime among them is the McCarthy salad, named not after the commie-hunting senator, which would make a certain vindictive sense, but a polo player called Neil. It costs £38, and arrives looking like someone with an organising compulsion has been at the Garfunkel’s salad bar.

There are separate sections for chopped beetroot, skinned tomato, bacon minced to a paste, chicken breast with the texture of value-range cotton wool, cubes of sweaty, squeaky cheese, shredded egg and, on top, an avocado that’s been halfway through an egg slicer. Underneath is shredded romaine, including the gnarly hard bit at the centre. That displays serious commitment to gross profit, in all senses. They offer to toss it table-side. Once it’s been mixed with an over-emulsified, over-sweetened balsamic vinaigrette that looks like congealed gravy, I know where it should be tossed. Then I think of the poor pedestrians nine floors below. The combination of that terrible dressing, smothering over-processed ingredients murders appetite. Incidentally, get that dressing on your napkin and people will think you had gastric issues and couldn’t make it to the loo in time. (Small note: the toilets include bidets; what is that about?)

‘Grimly sweet and cloying sauce’: rigatoni bolognese. Photograph: Sophia Evans/The Observer

The three diminutive crab cakes for £32 have a rigid shell the development chefs at Findus would envy and taste only lightly of crab, as if embarrassed about the star ingredient. They come with a sauce reminiscent of school-dinner salad cream circa 1975. A £38 bowl of rigatoni bolognese has a grimly sweet and cloying sauce that tastes mostly of tomato ketchup and profit. It’s the dish an oligarch, who only sees his kids every other weekend, chooses for them. According to the menu these dishes are meant for sharing. I apologise to my companion for doing so. They will also be delivered “as they are prepared to ensure you receive them at their best”. This is their best? Oh.

Perhaps the solution is a drink. I bang on about pricey wine lists and get shouty when the cheapest bottle is over £30. Well, buckle up. The cheapest bottle here is £84 for a bog-standard Bardolino rosé which generally retails for around £13.95. Here it’s six times more expensive. I order the second cheapest, a Terrasses Rosé from Château Pesquie. It’s £90. I find that online for £12.75. That’s a multiple of seven. Almost all the wine list is marked up like this. Somebody sat in a room jack-knifed over their calculator, fingers punching furiously, and thought this was fine. It isn’t fine.

‘A true delight’: strawberry soufflé. Photograph: Sophia Evans/The Observer

But there are positives and they must be accentuated. There’s a sweet cloud of chilled strawberry soufflé, with a little compote at the bottom, which is a true delight. It’s a £20 delight, but a delight all the same. Then there are the waiters who are all friendly, relaxed and completely on it. I imagine them, on their break, with thousand-yard stares, brooding on a career move. A life in organised crime would certainly be less socially divisive.

A few years ago, my less than positive review of the Parisian gastro palace Le Cinq was dismissed by the management as “rich bashing”. Here, it’s the restaurant that seems to be bashing the rich, flogging them dismal food at inexplicable prices. At the end, a perky waiter asks me how it all was and in my gruesome passive-aggressive way I say, “Fine”. She replies, “Amazing.” I think: “Yeah, let’s go with that.” I have a bill for over £370 for a meal that included a dreadful salad, terrible crab cakes, mediocre pasta, and a grossly overpriced rosé. If that isn’t amazing, I really don’t know what is.

News bites

In other ‘give me strength’ restaurant news, the management of the Ivy Collection has issued an apology and deleted a promotional video for the newly opened Ivy Asia in London’s Chelsea from Instagram, after it was roundly criticised on social media for featuring racist stereotypes. The apology, also posted on Instagram, described the video as ‘totally inappropriate and culturally insensitive’. Richard Caring’s company promised to conduct an ‘internal review’ and ‘educate’ themselves to avoid repetition. As the Ivy Spinningfields in Manchester has featured a ‘Geisha Room’ since 2018, they certainly have a lot of self-educating to do.

And there’s more. The blind BBC journalist Sean Dilley took to social media recently to express his huge frustration after he and a friend, who is also blind, were refused entry to two restaurants around London’s Leicester Square because they had their guide dogs with them. This contravenes the Equalities Act 2010 and is therefore unlawful, however can only be challenged through the courts, which is arduous and time consuming, rather than by being reported to the police. That does not relieve restaurants of their legal duty to allow guide dogs into their restaurants. Plus, unlawful or not, it’s the civilised, hospitable and humane thing to do.

But let’s finish with some good news. Recently I reported that the great JoJo’s in Tankerton was crowdfunding to buy the freehold of their building, so the restaurant would survive. They have hit their £100,000 target. JoJo’s lives (jojosrestaurant.co.uk).

Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@The question I’m due to marry later this year and would like advice regarding my mother-in-law to be. My relationship with her tends to be strained. She lost her husband before I met my partner. I know he did an awful lot for her – I can’t help but think she feels I am taking her son away from her. Her behaviour towards me is often petty, she rarely even tries to make small talk. The way she behaves makes me feel I want to spend as little time with her as possible. She has a tendency to make the atmosphere sour. She seems increasingly selfish and she hasn’t offered to help with our wedding at all. She is spending a great amount of time and money on her appearance, she is obsessed with dieting. It makes me feel as if she is trying to compete with me.

I get upset when I hear about friends getting on well with their mothers-in-law. It is unlikely we will ever have a close bond, but I don’t want my partner and I to start our married life in this way. He seems oblivious to it all. What can I do to help ease the tension?

Philippa’s answer It is quite possible she is worried that she will see less of her son and maybe such fears are not without foundation. She might well be harbouring resentment about this possible loss of time with him and it won’t be her beloved son she’ll begrudge – so her antipathy might well be coming your way.

How are you going to ease the tension?

In a situation like yours most of us can all too easily see ourselves as being the goodie and the other as being the baddie, and then we naturally select the evidence to fit. We intensify our feeling of dislike by cherrypicking only the evidence that backs up our hunches. This makes us feel right, or even self-righteous, and we thus construct a negative lens through which to view the other – making them into the bad guy. So, your first job is to put aside the dynamic of one of you being good and the other bad. This task becomes easier when we become aware of how we interpret the other’s behaviour.

Say you are not at ease and would like to get on better with her

If you look at her actions in a positive rather than a negative light you can get different meanings from them. For example, “She hasn’t offered to help with the wedding” rather than selfishness, could be interpreted as not wanting to interfere. And her not wanting to make small talk might not be because she is in any way bad but because she is shy, or awkward or doesn’t know what to say. Shyness can easily be mistaken for haughtiness. She spends a lot of money on her appearance and diets – she might not think her appearance is good enough, she may feel inadequate, insecure or even unacceptable. Quite often people who may appear vain because they obsess about their appearance are really the opposite.

To get to the nub of the matter of your relationship I would recommend a different sort of talk than the small kind. I wonder whether you would feel able to risk saying something like: “I feel nervous around you, I guess it’s because I really want to get on well with you and know you, yet I don’t feel it’s going so well. What is it between us that seems to stop me being friends with you?” I don’t want to put words in your mouth – use your own words, but speak in “I” statements, which define your own experience and not “You” statements. So never tell her what you think she is like, but you can say how you are not feeling at ease and would like to get on better with her. When a step is taken to be more vulnerable and open in a relationship, the other person often follows suit. It is a risk. I wonder whether you will take it.

Bear in mind that it might be sad for her that her son is getting married. She may feel it’s another loss and compounds the loss of her husband. The wedding might be an occasion where she will miss the support he would have given her. If you don’t think she would find it intrusive, check out assumptions like these with her, too.

I hope you will be able to find a way to talk to her about your relationship with her – maybe the two of you could get to the point where you could share what you would wish from your relationship going forward. Perhaps she might confide that she fears losing one-on-one time with her son; perhaps you could reassure her that you would not want to get in the way of that.

Or it might be easier to start by asking her for advice, follow the advice and then tell her it was great advice, and ask her for some more. “How can we honour your husband at our wedding?” Most people love giving advice (or maybe that’s just me).

To recap: try to see her in a positive rather than a negative light, don’t fall into the trap of the good-bad dynamic, and swap your small talk for more meaningful talk. Your fiancé is oblivious to it all – he would be, whatever his mother is will be normal to him. But how about showing him your email and my reply and see what he has to say, too?

Here’s wishing you a wonderful wedding, life and a positive relationship with your future mother-in-law.

If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.uk
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@When Clare Smyth first looked round the premises of her restaurant, Core, she had a strong feeling that “the place was full of good times”. Though she did not know the history of the building, that instinct was spot on. Back in 1969 another pioneering woman, Prue Leith, had made her name at 92 Kensington Park Road, in the same knocked-through ground floor of a pair of grand stucco-fronted Victorian terraced houses. When Leith’s had opened, Humphrey Lyttelton, then restaurant critic of Tatler, urged diners to make their way to an unfamiliar part of the capital by any means possible: “If you can rob a bank, or beg or borrow a fortune, go to the seamy end of Notting Hill…” For 25 years, many followed his advice, including several Beatles and Princess Margaret.

Half a century on, this end of Notting Hill is very far from “seamy”. What was 1960s Portobello bohemia for Leith has become grown-up and gentrified – but you still would be advised to consider grand larceny in order to get a table at Core. When I visited the restaurant earlier in the summer, it was the opening week after lockdown – which meant it was also the first week that Smyth, 42, had been able to celebrate with her diners the fact that she had become the only British woman ever to be awarded three Michelin stars for her cooking. Good times, indeed.

I realised how much I identify as a chef. There were mornings where I felt I'd lost that identity

Smyth opened Core three years ago and has added a star to its billing every 12 months. The latest was the most surreal. She had been saying to her long-term head chef, the wonderfully named Jonny Bone, that as soon as they got back into the kitchen, post-Covid, they would have to “throw the kitchen sink at it” to achieve the ultimate accolade. As it was, the Michelin announcement was made in January, when the restaurant was still closed to customers. Smyth and her husband celebrated with a bottle of champagne given to her by a customer to celebrate two stars (and predictably never opened), and then she went back to her home delivery orders.

It’s a cliche to describe the workings of a tight kitchen as a ballet but standing in a corner of Smyth’s kitchen there is a strong sense that you have wandered onstage into one of those modern interpretations of Swan Lake; white-jacketed sous chefs move with serene purpose and refined muscle memory, and you quickly realise that any space you try to occupy with your notebook is required for their choreography. Smyth stands with Bone at the pass, eyeing every plate before it goes out. She has done away with the requirement to answer “chef” every time an order is called (“The fewer words the better,” she suggests, characteristically) so as service proceeds, there is a slightly breathless chorus of, “yes, yes, yes” from all corners of the kitchen, as if for lunchtime, at least, everything in the world is coming together in the affirmative.

That impression is only enhanced when you take a seat in the dining room, as I did towards the end of lunch, and a procession of plates from the kitchen starts to arrive at your table. Core represents a mixing of Smyth’s classical French training and British soul; its tasting menu features dishes such as “Isle of Mull scallop tartare with a sea vegetable consommé”; and “morel and wild garlic tartlet with Fluffetts Farm egg yolk and vin jaune”.

As these natural wonders come and go, each heralded with a short and effusive sermon about provenance from a masked waiter, I fill the short gaps by rereading a profile of Smyth that appeared in this magazine 13 years ago, when she had just taken over as head chef at Gordon Ramsay’s flagship establishment (inheriting its three Michelin stars) in Royal Hospital Road, Chelsea. She was then a precocious 29. Ramsay called her “a once in 10 years” chef, with “a tunnel vision for perfection” and “a level of composure, a posture, that is intimidating, almost like a boxer entering the ring – and who dresses food like Picasso”.

Clare Smyth on the cover of OFM in December 2007. Photograph: The Observer

Smyth, at the time, told our writer Elizabeth Day that, “I think the reason I push myself fast is because I figure that I have another, maybe, five years at the top. Then I can have a family. As a woman, you have to achieve it younger. Men have all the time in the world…” She “used to want to have my own restaurant,” she confided, “but it’s such a fickle industry that there’s no guarantee and some of the best chefs fail.” Day was left in little doubt that there was no danger that the latter fate awaited Smyth, writing, presciently, that “given her monumental drive and focus, it seems unlikely that Smyth will ever feel she has achieved all that she aspires to. She seems genetically programmed never to be entirely satisfied, always wanting to strive for more…”

When I sit down to talk with the chef after lunch, and in subsequent conversation, it’s clear those qualities haven’t changed at all. It’s hard to imagine a situation in which Smyth might not appear in unflustered control, or in which she is not eyeing up possible improvement. I wonder at one point whether she found cooking for Harry and Meghan’s 2018 wedding party at Windsor Castle more nerve-shredding than a usual afternoon, but she just smiled at the memory of the logistical nightmare and the attendant adrenaline rush, like an athlete remembering an Olympic final.

“It’s a privilege to be able to do things like that in life,” she said. “It’s what we train for. So, yeah, I loved that.”

When we talk, she is overcome with relief that lockdown appears to be coming to an end. The past year is the first break from daily service she’s had since she was 16 and she has found it extremely tough. “I realised how much I identify myself as a chef. And there were mornings where I felt I had almost lost that identity…”

She also had her team of 42 staff to worry about. To keep them engaged, she pivoted the business to Core at Home. This was no ordinary Deliveroo. The packages of food were taken to customers’ front doors by waiters in Core uniforms, along with tutorial videos and vital equipment like temperature probes and tweezers, that might allow home cooks to recreate dishes. Videos of how they got on often came back in return.

If that gave diners an appreciation of how much effort goes into each of Smyth’s plates, it gave her and her staff a new hunger to get back to what they do best: “Practise our art form on a plate and serve our guests.”

Smyth found her vocation very early in life. She grew up on a farm in Northern Ireland, on the Antrim coast. The youngest of three, she remembers being competitive in everything – from helping out with lambing, to show-jumping trials, to bread-making. Her father ran the farm and was a horse-trainer, driving his kids in the same spirit. Smyth took those lessons to heart. Having helped her mother in the kitchen and worked in local restaurants, she came across a cookery book by Anton Mosimann and knew exactly who she wanted to be. To pursue that ambition, she left school and home at 16, largely against her parents’ wishes, after having organised for herself a live-in apprenticeship at Grayshott Hall hotel in Surrey. She was a commis chef at Bibendum at 18, then persuaded her culinary heroes, Michael Caines, Heston Blumenthal and the Roux brothers, to take her on for stints, before finding her way to the kitchen at Gordon Ramsay.

Extracting all the possible flavour from one onion might take her kitchen six days

Though most aspiring chefs might have thought that they had then arrived, Smyth didn’t stop there. Despite knowing no French she talked her way into a placement at Alain Ducasse’s Louis XV restaurant in Monte Carlo for a year, before becoming embroiled in a cross-channel tug of war. Ducasse asked her to open a London outpost for him, but Ramsay offered her the opportunity to take over at Chelsea. She was in tears, she recalls, when she made the decision. When people asked why, she said: “Well, I’ve just massively pissed off the most important chef in the whole world.” Ducasse railed at her at the time, but he was magnanimous in defeat. When he came to eat at Core after it opened, she was, for once, a bag of nerves. He loved all of it but noted that she had not provided sauce spoons. “I knew that we needed sauce spoons, but I hadn’t bought them. I could have kicked myself…”

If Smyth has travelled a long way since she was 16, she holds on to the earthy values of her early life. She has a natural respect for her suppliers, knowing first-hand the life of a farm. Her cooking is a mix of Monte Carlo dazzle and County Antrim authenticity. The signature dishes on her menu combine the two. Her aunt and uncle in Northern Ireland run a potato business; one of the noted quirks of Smyth as a young chef was that she would always eat a single boiled potato with lots of good butter before service. That habit has evolved into her most famous dish, which consists of a single, exquisitely flavoursome Charlotte potato slightly softened with beurre blanc and topped with herring and trout roe. You will never think of spuds in the same way again.

She lives, she says, for that challenge of making “something quite humble be spectacular”. She performs similar sorcery with carrots and onions. The conjuring is about sustainability as much as artistry. Any good chef, she suggests, can spend 20 minutes making a great piece of steak taste great, or make a show of truffles and caviar; but extracting all the possible flavour from a single onion might take her kitchen six days. In that painstaking effort, she believes she has found a way to close the gap between fine dining and comfort food.

If the honest flavours and ingredients of her childhood inspired this aspect of her cooking, her parents never came over to taste it, either here or during her decade at Gordon Ramsay. “They were country people,” she says, by way of explanation. “And they literally never took a day off.” Her mother, Doreen, died last year. She has been sending food packages to her dad during lockdown. “He doesn’t know what it is, necessarily,” she says, “but he seems to love it.”

One of the customers she did enjoy welcoming to the restaurant was Leith, for whom the experience proved quite emotional. Leith tells me later that she was moved not only by the memories her return stirred, but by the sheer beauty of Smyth’s cooking. “In a sense, it’s not my kind of food,” she suggests. “The idea of concepts and philosophy in food always slightly baffled me. I always thought I don’t want to look at it, I just want to eat it. But Clare’s food was a revelation to me; it was simultaneously gorgeous and unbelievably delicious.”

Smyth, far left, with Gordon Ramsey, Angela Hartnett and Gemma Tuley in 2008. Photograph: Peter Payne/Peter Payne /eyevine

Leith is gratified, too, that for all her Michelin starriness, Smyth had created a dining room where people still seemed to be having a good time. “There was always such a joy in that place. If I went out to dinner somewhere else, I would always make sure the taxi went past that restaurant on the way home because I liked to look through the windows and see those little kind of Toulouse-Lautrec pictures of people enjoying themselves.”

That spirit, she suggests, persists.

Fifty years ago, Leith was very much a rarity as a woman in what remained largely a man’s world, and not all that much has changed. There are still only seven kitchens run by women in the current list of 135 that have been awarded Michelin’s highest accolade. Smyth, in this sense, represents a change that has been a long time coming and still has a long way to go. Having worked in some of the most testosterone-fuelled kitchens, she is far from convinced that hormone is a necessary ingredient. “A lot of careers probably ended prematurely,” she says, of the macho culture now in retreat. “No doubt it put some people off, or attracted the wrong types.”

She admits to no vices beyond a sometime addiction to watching 24-hour news in bed after hours (a habit she is trying to kick by reading Robert Galbraith thrillers). She had done her usual 5k run on the morning we meet, followed by some weight training. There is, she says, never a morning that she does not want to get up and at it.

When I ask if she feels that she has missed out on anything, mentioning that article in which she thought she might have slowed down at some point to have a family, she suggests she doesn’t feel she has made sacrifices. “If you are really good at something, you want to keep doing it.”

She talks about her new restaurant that is due to open in Sydney, overlooking the Opera House, just as soon as restrictions allow, and about how she has fulfilled the dream of her 16-year-old self. “I’ve got a busy restaurant that is full every day. We’ve got three Michelin stars in three years…” she pauses. “But I also know you’re only as good as your last meal.” Service starts again at 6.30pm.

Core by Clare Smyth, 92 Kensington Park Rd, London W11 2PN
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@I don’t want to seem a busybody. I like a nice social gathering as much as the next person. Wine, some snacks, good conversation – what more could you ask for?

But now? Really? Now we should all know the rules. Don’t travel from Sydney to Byron Bay to view real estate. Especially don’t travel from Sydney to Byron Bay to view real estate when you have the virus. Wear a mask. Check in using the QR code. Be super nice to shop assistants. Don’t have social gatherings with people you don’t live with, or who are not in your singles’ bubble.

I don’t want to seem a busybody, but I have a suspicion that my elderly neighbour, a highly sociable widow – who in non end-time days holds court at a local cafe – might be playing fast and loose with the rules, hosting illicit social gatherings in her garden during a rampaging pandemic. I’m agonising over what I should do about it.

I have shared my dilemma with a woman I’m going to call Doris. I’ve told Doris that I have heard a murmur of voices floating up from behind the high wall of this woman’s garden within our apartment block. I don’t want to be the one to shut down the source of society and connection for an old woman who lives alone, but nor do I want the virus to gatecrash her gatherings, her body and, potentially, our block.

Doris is a counsellor with Ethi-call, the 30-year-old, Sydney-based Ethics Centre’s free decision-making helpline. In the past year, in response to galloping demand, the volunteer-run, not-for-profit service has doubled its number of counsellors.

“It’s not a crisis line, but when you are stuck in an ethical dilemma and you’re having to make a challenging decision, it can be quite debilitating,” says Cris Parker, another counsellor with the helpline and the head of the centre’s Ethics Alliance, a community of businesses committed to raising the standard of business practice in Australia. “It can keep you up at night, you can really suffer.”

You’re asking the person who calls in, ‘what does good look like to you?' Cris Parker, Ethi-call counsellor

The pandemic and the shifting sands of the new world it has created have elevated a raft of new ethical dilemmas. The centre has received calls from parents trying to juggle their competing responsibilities – to home-schooling their children, to their colleagues, and to their professionalism. It has heard from people fearful of the vaccination but mindful of their duty to the community, and from a vaccination centre staffer concerned about the vials of unused vaccinations she was required to discard at the end of the day, but which instead might be used for family or friends. She was torn between the rules and her desire to help people who potentially could fall ill, and at the same time aware that “jumping the queue” and nepotism are frowned upon.

But the by-appointment helpline continues to field perennial dilemmas: over business issues and relationships between colleagues, over family disputes and children’s social media use. Parents disagree over what they should do after accidentally seeing messages between members of their son’s football team that are derogatory toward female classmates. A mother passes away and leaves all her money to her grandchildren. One of her daughters does not have children. “She’s really stuck around what to do about that and does she risk a rift in the family,” says Parker.

She says that often people confused by ethical dilemmas “fall into a binary state of mind where you think, ‘well, I can do this, or I can do this’”. But the centre’s counsellors undergo “robust” training so they are equipped to take callers through a formal, non-judgemental decision-making process to help them see multiple potential options and reach conclusions based on their own values and perspectives.

The process draws on philosophical theories such as deontology, the study of the nature of duty and obligation, and consequentialism, which judges whether something is right by what its consequences are.

“You’re asking the person who calls in, ‘what does good look like to you? Which way would you like to see this going’ and then you might [talk about] virtue ethics, so that’s very much around character. So you learn about these different lenses,” says Parker. “People don’t always come to a solution after an hour. But they definitely get to a point where they think, ‘cool, okay, I have a lot more options’.”

I would ask you, what do you see as your duties Doris, an Ethi-call counsellor

During my hour-long phone appointment with the helpline, counsellor Doris asks me multiple questions about the situation relating to my garrulous elderly neighbour – including about our apartment block, my relationship with other residents and what they might want, and what “non-negotiables” I might have in regard to an outcome. I tell her that I want to be a good and supportive member of the community and that I do not want a confrontation, or for any outcome that might leave a residue of bitterness or tension.

“Okay, so the next thing we’re going to do is to move into what we call the ethical lenses, and to try and flesh out your situation from the different ethical schools of thought,” says Doris. “The first one is deontology … So I would ask you, what do you see as your duties as a resident in the building, and as any other role that you play?”

As I have a “duh” moment – I realise the best solution for me is simple and staring me in the face – Doris notes another lens, the “teleological”, which relates to purpose, and then moves on to “framing the dilemma”, identifying the tensions between one approach versus another.

I feel I have a duty to my community, but I don’t want to contribute to shutting down an old woman’s only pleasure. “Which is potentially an assumption on your part, that she needs to do that,” Doris interjects.

The final phase of the model is the “sunlight test” – reviewing the option I have decided is right and considering whether I would be comfortable for others to know of it. “It’s having an external perspective,” Doris says.

I bring my decision into the sunlight and share it with Doris: as a member of the strata committee of my building I can organise for a general notice to be posted on notice boards reminding residents of government restrictions. It would be non-specific in terms of both its source and its target and might have even broader benefits for other residents unsure of what the rules are.

I think it would pass the pub test.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Eye shadow denotes an intricacy of shading, an expertise and a skill set that goes beyond normal humans. But I’ve realised if you change the language, it’s far less intimidating. So just think of it as “eye colour”. Right now a kaleidoscopic eye colour is all the rage. However, as seen at Giorgio Armani AW21, it needn’t be over the top. Take a slightly damp brush – it produces a washed effect – and paint one colour into the crevice, another over the top lid and finish with a hue along the bottom line. See, it’s just a bit of colour…

1. Makeup by Mario Eyeshadow Palette £41, cultbeauty.co.uk

2. Clinique All About Eye Shadow £17.50. clinique.co.uk

3. Christian Louboutin Beauty Eyeshadow Palette from £58, selfridges.com

4. Giorgio Armani Eye Tint liquid Eyeshadow £25, johnlewis.com

5. Kjaer Weis Cream Eyeshadow from £8, kjaerweis.com

I can’t do without… a gentle cleanser ideal for blemish-prone skins

Recently I was reminded that making blanket statements can leave you eating your words. Some people practically worship at the fountain of essential oils, but I usually give them a wide berth and don’t recommend them. While I am not anti-fragrance per se, I had experiences years ago where my skin kept reacting horribly to any product teeming with essential oils. I’ve written them off ever since. But, unless you know you have an allergy, the truth is not everything with essential oils is bad. How a product is formulated, what percentage of the oils are in the product, which other ingredients the product includes… all of these things make a difference. And this cleanser by Caudalie proves that. I was initially attracted to the range because it deals with blemish-prone skin – which I have. But it’s created for grownups – which I am (mostly). And it includes exfoliating ingredients such as salicylic acid – which I love. It was only a few days into trying it (and loving it) that I realised it had – shock horror – essential oils in it. Lavender, lemongrass, rosemary, geranium… But instead of being an irritant, the cleanser cleared, smoothed and cleaned my skin. Which was a wonderful surprise. So I concede. Bad formulations are the enemy. Essential oils are not. Caudalie Vinopure Purifying Gel Cleanser, £16, caudalie.com

On my radar… reef-friendly SPF, luxe washes, and hair care

Reef encounters Tons of sunscreen is deposited in oceans annually, contributing to coral damage. This hydrating SPF, however, is 100% reef safe. Grown Alchemist Natural Hydrating Sunscreen SPF 30, £33, grownalchemist.com

Pure indulgence There are body washes and then there are rosemary, spearmint and eucalyptus-scented cleansers that turn every shower into an event. This is the latter. Neom Super Shower Power Body Cleanser, £26, neomorganics.com

Curl power Shampoo bars traditionally dehydrate curly hair. Not this. The inclusion of hydrating avocado and kukui nut oils helps this sulphate-free bar buck the trend. Only Curls Curl Cleansing Shampoo Bar, £12, onlycurls.com

Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Two years ago, wild-west style – dubbed the yee-haw agenda – exploded into the world like a glitter bomb. Led by the pop culture juggernaut that was Lil Nas X’s Old Town Road, the new trend was black, queer and subversive.

There was an authentic history to the black cowboy since one in eight cowboys were African American in the wild west, a fact lost to the segregated history books. In 2019, America was in the grip of Trump’s administration, deeply split into red and blue states, and yee-haw was a provocative bit of historical correction.

Now, one pandemic later, yee-haw is back. It’s bigger, weirder and with a deeper cultural footprint than before.

“While the western trend of circa 2019 was all about softly Little House on the Prairie vibes, the 2021 aesthetic champions the bold and the brash,” says Aoife Byrne, analyst from retail intelligence company Edited.

She believes lockdown has emphasised the mood of this new era of yee-haw. “Following a year of austerity, the thirst for playfulness and the great outdoors have played a pivotal role in the trend’s revitalisation.”

To wit: on 19 August, Beyoncé releases her fourth Ivy Park collaboration with Adidas. Entitled Rodeo, it includes denim chap trousers, fringed face coverings and a slashed skirt with a purple cow print design.

Elsewhere, the uniform of the American west continues to be a potent and ageless sartorial symbol of being an outlaw and going against the grain. Recently, we’ve had the lead character of the Gossip Girl reboot, Julien Calloway, pairing white cowboy boots with a shaved head, posing provocatively on the steps of her fictional high school, and the world’s biggest boyband, BTS dressed in chaps and bolo ties for the Permission to Dance music video. Meanwhile, global searches for cowboy boots have increased by 54% in the last two years, according to Digitaloft.

I saw denim chaps in the trailer, with Adidas stripes, which is something completely new. Bri Malandro

Bri Malandro, who first coined the phrase yee-haw agenda, and runs an Instagram feed that archives African American cowboy history, says this new wave of yee-haw is trying new things.

“People are becoming more and more creative. Companies like Neon Cowboys [the company behind Dua Lipa’s LED stetson in her Love Again video] are consistently rolling out new futuristic cowboy-themed products, which is a delight to see.” Malandro says she sees fresh, athleisure twists in Beyoncé’s Rodeo collection. “I saw denim chaps in the trailer, with Adidas stripes, which is something completely new. Bullriding is a sport, after all so it’s nice to see those worlds collide.”

Beyoncé’s inspiration may have come from her Houston-based childhood steeped in rodeo culture, but there is a political side to yee-haw too. Speaking to Harper’s Bazaar about the collection, the singer underlined why it was still important to tell the story of the “overlooked” black cowboy. “Many of them were originally called cowhands, who experienced great discrimination and were often forced to work with the worst, more temperamental horses,” she said.

Regina King in Netflix film The Harder They Fall, celebrating the true-life story of black outlaw cowboy, Nat Love Photograph: David Lee/NETFLIX © 2021

Malandro points to yee-haw’s continued appeal, especially to the socially conscious generation Z. “The aesthetic itself is attractive but the fact there’s so much history behind it is what will keep it alive,” she says.

For her, Netflix’s forthcoming western The Harder They Fall, starring Idris Elba and Regina King, which tells the true story of black outlaw cowboy, Nat Love, is an important moment. “No matter how much we discuss these things in print, it has a different impact when it’s presented in film,” she says.

“It just puts all that history on the main stage and makes it almost impossible to be unaware.”

Antoinette Messam, the costume designer for the film, says she found it stimulating to create a costume for a period of time that was not well documented. “There is so little known about the black cowboys from that era,” she says. “I found that and the thought of bringing them to life through costume exciting.”

She says: “Jeymes Samuel [the director] wanted to show black people in the parts that he loved as a child, watching westerns. To see us in a genre that we are not normally depicted in when we think of westerns; cowboys, gunslingers and owners of property. It is important to know that they existed and that they contributed. They were a part of the building of the old American west. We were more than slaves at that time, black cowboys rode beside white, Native (American) and Spanish-speaking people.”
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@All I ever wanted was to feed people; to bring them something good to eat, to offer a drink; make them feel comfy and replete. I spent years waiting table, working front of house in hotels, country inns, cafes and a hotel restaurant. There wasn’t a day I didn’t collapse into bed, exhausted and happy. Don’t be surprised if I come to your table with a menu one day. A job I enjoyed so much I could return in a heartbeat.

Our restaurants are in something of a crisis. We have the talent in the kitchen and front of house but not enough to go around. There’s a shortage of chefs and waiting staff, baristas and kitchen porters. Professionals who have left the country because of Brexit; some who have simply decided not to go back to the industry after their furlough. Others have left because the places they owned or worked at couldn’t survive the months of pandemic-induced closure.

In this issue, we talk to those who are trying to recruit help; those who are training the restaurant staff of the future – and one chef who tells us why he won’t be going back.

For this, our restaurants issue, we chat to Florence Knight, much missed from her days at Polpetto – I loved her partridge with soft polenta – who is heading back to the kitchen after a long break. She brings us recipes including potato and chard croquettes and linguine with lovage and clams.

Another chef who couldn’t wait to get back into their whites is Clare Smyth. Reading Tim Adams’ interview you are struck by how frustrated the Michelin-starred chef must have been during lockdown, desperate to once again have a dining room buzzing with happy diners.

Jay Rayner wonders if you can predict whether a restaurant is for you by checking the price of its entry level wine: Fred Sirieix tells us what is on his table and we take lunch with Maggi Hambling.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@James Cochran has never been happier. A wildly inventive and ambitious cook, he trained for almost a decadeunder the chef Brett Graham, first at the Ledbury and then the Michelin-starred Harwood Arms. In 2018, on his first appearance, he won the ultimate prize on the BBC’s Great British Menu: the champion of champions. And experience, he thinks, has taught him restraint at his Islington restaurant 12:51. “I used to have 23 dishes on the menu, and it was intense,” says Cochran. “Covid maybe opened my eyes and made me think, ‘I put myself under so much pressure’. Now it’s just a dream.”

There’s good news for the rest of us, too: Cochran has supplied five summer recipes for OFM. Raised in Whitstable, Kent, by a mum from St Vincent and a Scottish dad, he wanted to pick dishes that nodded to his background. But mainly he chose food that would be fun to eat outdoors on a sunny day. “We’ve all been cooped up for so long,” says Cochran. “And I just think they’re great elements that can be taken to the beach, or to the park, or in your back gardenanywhere now we can have friends round. With my style of food, it’s important it packs a lot of flavour and you can look across the board and there’s a lot of punchy flavours going on. there.”

James Cochran. Photograph: Antonio Olmos/The Guardian

One particularly irresistible offering is his barbecue jerk chicken with burnt scotch bonnet salsa. “Jerk chicken is super close to my heart,” he says. “I’ve had mad reviews from Fay Maschler and Jay Rayner for that. So this recipe is just bringing my buttermilk fried chicken, but to barbecued jerk. If we have nice weather, then that’s great to put on the barbecue.”

Some of the dishes come from 12:51, but Cochran’s adamant they won’t be too much of a stretch for home cooks. “If I can be honest with you: half the chefs in my kitchen are not even chefs,” he says, laughing. “One was a banker who came to Great British Menu just for the meal and got super-hammered. Now she works three days a week at 12:51. So if you’re asking whether these dishes can be put across by anybody following a recipe then, yeah, they can be.”

Like most in hospitality, Cochran has experienced a topsy-turvy 18 months: when we speak he has Covid, and 12:51 has been forced to shutter for 10 days. But in the early stages of the pandemic, he pivoted better than most, turning his more formal restaurant into the delivery service Around the Cluck. The star of the show was Cochran’s fried chicken: brined for 24 hours, marinated in buttermilk for 48 hours (“so it’s double tenderising it”) and then coated in semolina and tapioca flour to give it the perfect crunch and keep the juices in. “I’ve not stopped working,” says Cochran. “Well, until now.”

Around the Cluck was such a hit there has been clamour to make it permanent. (It did a good turn, too: raising money for those displaced by the eruption of La Soufrière volcano in St Vincent in April.) For now, Cochran is unsure whether he will make it an official spin-off restaurant. “My background is in Michelin-starred restaurants, but I’m not too bothered to be honest with you,” he says. “I’m old enough now, I’ve nothing to prove with what I cook.”

Watermelon, mint and barbecue feta salad with grilled king prawns

A simple but deliciously zingy marinade really makes these prawns sing and they’re done in a matter of minutes. The salad is so fresh and works like a dream with the warm prawns. Watermelon and mint are a match made in heaven, while blackening the feta really adds oomph.

Serves 2

watermelon 1kg

mint 1 bunch

olive oil 50ml (plus a little extra)

limes 2

feta cheese 200g

garlic 2 cloves

bamboo sticks soaked in water

large king prawns 12, ask the fishmonger to leave the heads on but remove the shells and devein them or buy the best-quality, pre-prepared king prawns you can from the supermarket – they’ll work just fine

Quarter the watermelon, remove the skin and slice to about 1cm thick. Lay it out on a large serving plate and season with a little salt.

Pick the mint leaves, tear them roughly over the watermelon and drizzle with a little olive oil and the juice of 1 of the limes.

Barbecue the feta until it is charred, or grill it on high until it is completely black – don’t be afraid to really char it. Then crumble the cheese over the watermelon slices and mint. This can be done a few hours in advance and kept in the fridge.

Peel and finely grate the garlic and add it to a bowl with the zest and juice of the remaining lime. Mix this with the 50ml of olive oil to make a marinade for the prawns.

Use the soaked bamboo sticks to skewer the prawns – 3 to 6 per skewer, depending on size, and season them.

Barbecue the prawns for 1½ minutes on each side or grill them in the oven on a high heat for 1½ minutes on each side, then lay them in the marinade to soak up all the flavours.

Serve them while still nice and hot with the watermelon and feta.

Barbecue jerk chicken, burnt scotch bonnet salsa, wet polenta, salad of peas, courgettes, parsley

Barbecue jerk chicken, burnt scotch bonnet salsa, wet polenta, salad of peas, courgettes, parsley. Photograph: Romas Foord/The Observer

This fiery and fragrant charred chicken and zesty salsa is offset by a cooling salad and rich polenta, to bring heat but not blow your socks off. Don’t be afraid to really get some strong colouring on the chicken. Jerk should be black on the outside but, don’t worry, brining the chicken will give you delicious, moist meat under all that crispy, smoky exterior.

Serves 2

vegetable oil 100ml

jerk seasoning 6 tbsp

chicken thighs 4

chicken drumsticks 4

scotch bonnet chillies 4

beef tomatoes 4

red onion 1, diced

limes zest and juice of 4

coriander 1 bunch

olive oil

courgettes 2

frozen peas 300g

parsley 1 bunch, finely chopped

milk 200ml

polenta 200g

unsalted butter 50g

parmesan cheese 50g

salt and pepper

Mix the vegetable oil and jerk spice in a large bowl or container and, using your hands, thoroughly coat the chicken, really rubbing the marinade in. Ideally, leave it to marinate in the fridge for 24-48 hours (it’s worth it) but for a minimum of 4 hours – the longer the better.

Leave the scotch bonnets and beef tomatoes whole and either barbecue or stick them under a grill on a very high heat until completely black on the outside.

Dice the tomatoes and scotch bonnets and add to a bowl with the red onion and the zest and juice of the limes, season with a pinch of salt, the chopped coriander and a little glug of olive oil to loosen it up.

This can be done a few hours in advance and kept in the fridge.

Quarter the courgettes and season with salt and pepper. Then either barbecue, griddle or grill them at a high heat to give a little colour to the outside. Chop them into 1cm pieces.

Run water over the frozen peas to defrost and mix them with the chopped courgette and parsley. Check for seasoning.

If using a barbecue, cook the chicken for 16-18 minutes on each side over a medium heat and get a nice charring on the outside. Or, put it on a baking tray and cook it in the centre of the oven at 180C fan/gas mark 6 for 30-40 minutes, depending on the size of the drumsticks.

Bring the milk to a simmer, season with a pinch of salt, whisk in the polenta and cook, stirring, on a low heat for 15-20 minutes or until the polenta comes away from the sides of the pan. Add the butter and parmesan and mix. Check seasoning and finish with a grating of parmesan.

If you are oven cooking, finish the chicken off under a very hot grill to char – really blacken the skin, don’t be scared. Rest for 3-4 minutes before serving. Plate up a few bits of chicken each, though you’ll quickly be diving back in for more. Leave the salsa on the side so people can make up their own minds about how much of a scotch bonnet kick they want to have.

Chilled courgette soup, goat’s curd, dukkah, mint

Chilled courgette soup, goat’s curd, dukkah, mint. Photograph: Romas Foord/The Observer

It’s light, it’s refreshing.

Serves 2

courgettes 1kg

vegetable oil

some water

salt and pepper

mint 1 bunch

room temperature water 100ml

goat’s curd (or goat’s cheese) 100g

dukkah 50g, available from most supermarkets

Top and tail the courgettes, then skin them until you have removed all the green bits – this is the part you need – and finely slice them. (Don’t waste the white middles, keep them and add them to a salad.)

Heat a tablespoon of vegetable oil in a very hot pan and add the finely sliced green bits of courgette, season well with a pinch each of salt and pepper and 10 mint leaves and fry for a minute.

Stirring all the time, add room-temperature water a little bit at a time to steam the courgette pieces for about 3-4 minutes until they are cooked through.

Empty the pan into a blender and blend for 2 minutes. Transfer to the fridge straightaway and leave until chilled.

Put the soup in bowls with the goat’s curd or cheese broken into it in small chunks and, just before serving, add the dukkah to give a bit of crunch and texture, and scatter a few mint leaves on top.

Tomahawk pork, roast garlic puree, hispi cabbage with dried shrimp butter, crushed new potatoes with sage and crispy onions

Tomahawk pork, roast garlic puree, hispi cabbage with dried shrimp butter, crushed new potatoes with sage and crispy onions. Photograph: Romas Foord/The Observer

Say goodbye to uninteresting pork, say hello to the tomahawk. Juicy and succulent, this thick cut banishes any notion of dryness and is full of flavour. It’s all about the baste and rendering down the fat. Follow the simple steps and it’s just as good as any steak. The richness of the pork is perfectly matched by the umami of the dried shrimp butter.

Serves 2

hispi cabbage 1, quartered

unsalted butter 200g (and a bit more for basting), at room temperature

dried shrimp 50g, available online

new potatoes 400g, unpeeled

sage 1 bunch

tomahawk pork chop 1 (around 750g boneless or 1kg bone in – you can get this from your local butcher – call ahead and order it or opt for two smaller but thick chops, the best quality you can afford)

For the garlic puree

garlic 1 bulb

double cream 300ml

milk 300ml

good quality crispy onions 10g

salt and pepper

Blanch the cabbage in boiling water for 2 minutes, remove and refresh it in cold water until completely chilled.

Squeeze out all excess water and, using tongs, hold the cabbage quarters over your open gas flame on the hob. Make sure to wear kitchen gloves and hold the cabbage away from your body. Alternatively, put it under the grill at a very high heat, turning the cabbage until it is blackened all over; around 10 minutes should do it. Season with a little bit of salt.

Mix 100g of the butter with the shrimp; either use a blender or crush the shrimp by hand and then mix them into the butter. Spread this mixture liberally over the hispi cabbage and leave to one side.

Place the new potatoes and 20 sprigs of sage in a pan of cold water and bring them to the boil. Simmer until cooked through, around 10-15 minutes.

Drain the potatoes and, while they’re still hot, use a fork or masher to crush them down and season with salt and pepper.

Gently melt the remaining 100g of butter in a frying pan and chop the remaining sage into the butter to infuse, then mix the potato in with the sage butter and keep it warm until ready to serve.

Preheat the oven to 180C fan/gas mark 6.

Roast the whole bulb of garlic on a tray in the oven for around 20 minutes or until it’s completely roasted and soft. Let it cool slightly, then squeeze the flesh out of the skin into a pan with the cream and milk. Bring to boil and reduce down, right until the cream and milk might split, then take the pan off the heat, add salt and pepper, blend until smooth and pass through a sieve.

You can make the puree in advance, then keep it in the fridge and reheat on the hob for 10 minutes before serving.

Season the pork heavily with salt and pepper, then place it in a hot pan. Seal it really well on both sides until there’s a nice caramelisation, pop a knob of butter in and baste.

Put it in the oven on a rack with a tray underneath and cook for 18 minutes. The chop should feel firm and slightly bouncy to the touch but not hard. If it is still soft to touch, cook for a few minutes more. Let it rest for 10 minutes and carve into 10-12 slices before serving.

Put the shrimp butter-covered hispi cabbage in the oven for 4 minutes or until the butter is melted. Scatter the crispy onions over the top of the cabbage and serve with the sliced pork, crushed potatoes and garlic puree.

Mascarpone cream, hibiscus syrup, black pepper, summer berries

Mascarpone cream, hibiscus syrup, black pepper, summer berries. Photograph: Romas Foord/The Observer

Simple cream and berries are really lifted by aromatic hibiscus. It’s sweet and creamy, as you’d expect – but also brings an added complexity. The black pepper offers a punchy point of difference, making this one a real winner. And it can be whipped up in no time at all.

Serves 2

mascarpone cheese 250g

vanilla extract 2 tsp

icing sugar 3 tbsp

whipping cream 125g

peppercorns 10

hibiscus tea bags 2

caster sugar 100g

water 300ml

summer berries of your choice (blueberries, blackberries, strawberries, raspberries, redcurrants and blackcurrants) 200g

Drain any excess liquid off the mascarpone and place the creamy cheese in a bowl with the vanilla extract. Mix them together until smooth. In a different bowl, use a sieve to sift the icing sugar over the whipping cream. Whip the cream and sifted icing sugar until thick peaks form.

Add the whipped cream to the mascarpone and gently beat or fold until light and velvety – do not over beat it – and put the mixture in the fridge until ready to use.

Gently crack the peppercorns, tear open the teabags and add both to a pan with the caster sugar and water. Bring to the boil and then simmer for 5 minutes on a medium heat until it’s reduced by half. Pass the liquid through a sieve to remove the bits.

Chop any larger berries in half and serve them over a big dollop of the mascarpone cream with a good drizzle of hibiscus syrup on top.

James Cochran is chef-owner of 12:51 and Around The Cluck, London N1
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@After a few years away from the pass at Soho’s Polpetto, I’m heading back to a restaurant kitchen. Swapping one family for another. I’m sure I’ll look back on this summer as the calm before the storm but I cannot wait to start.

Of course, I follow the seasons as new fruits and vegetables are coming and going on an almost daily basis. Whether I’m cooking for family or for diners at Sessions Arts Club in London’s Clerkenwell there is no reason to deviate when choice is abundant.

Summer starts with tender leafy lettuces and runner beans, and a fleeting show of elderflower. Over the following months, this shifts into deeper flavours, such as chard, ripe, fleshy fruits and the last of the tomatoes.

Stone fruits, especially succulent cherries, don’t last long in our house. Like birds, my children devour them in one sitting, the only evidence being the stained faces and scattered pits.

Clams, lovage, linguine

Clams, lovage, linguine. Food styling Jules Mercer. Prop styling Kate Whitaker. Photograph: The Observer

Lovage leaves are one of my favourite herbs of the summer. Think freshly cut grass with an intense herbal flavour that is often described as similar to the centre leaves of celery or a more complex parsley. Both flat leaf parsley and celery tops work well as an alternative.

Serves six

clams 1kg, net weight, palourde or manila

extra virgin olive oil 4 tbsp, plus more for serving

banana shallots 2, peeled and sliced horizontally thinly

salt ½ tsp

garlic 1 clove, peeled and grated

dried chilli flakes ¼ tsp

linguine 400g

riesling wine 250ml

creme fraiche 75g

lovage 1 bunch, or flat leaf parsley, picked and roughly chopped

lemon juice to taste

salt to taste

Start by preparing the clams. There are many ways to do this but I find the best is to simply remove any broken, chipped, open or sluggish clams. Then place them under cold running water and, using your hands, knock them about like they would be on rough shores for at least 5 minutes. Keep removing the water until no grit is visible. Alternatively soak them in heavily salted water for 20 minutes. Store them covered with a damp cloth on the surface in the fridge.

Place a large pot of salted water on a high heat and bring to the boil.

Heat the olive oil in a large, deep pot with a lid over a low heat. Add the shallots, salt and cook them for 10 minutes until soft and translucent. Stir through the garlic and chilli, and cook it for a further 3 minutes.

Add the linguine to the boiling water and cook for about 7-8 minutes according to the packet instructions until al dente.

Turn up the heat and lower the clams into the pan with the shallots and add the wine. Cover and cook them for 2-3 minutes, until the clams have popped open. Remove from the heat and discard any clams that are still closed. Stir through the creme fraiche and bring the sauce back to the boil for a couple of minutes. Drain the linguine, reserving a ladleful of pasta water, and combine both with the clams, turning gently to mix them through. Stir in the chopped lovage or herbs and pour over a little extra virgin olive oil. Taste, season with lemon and salt and serve immediately.

Mackerel, tomatoes and olives

Mackerel, tomatoes and olives. Photograph: Kate Whitaker/The Observer

Look for a mackerel with glassy clear eyes, claret-red gills and a firm body. Ask your fishmonger to butterfly and bone the mackerel as it makes for much simpler eating, or take on the task yourself.

Serves 4, or 2 if hungry

baby plum tomatoes 500g, halved

banana shallot 1, finely sliced into rounds

taggiasca olives 100g

caster sugar 2 tsp

apple cider vinegar 2 tbsp

fish sauce 1 tbsp

ground espelette pepper 2 tsp (available in good Spanish food shops or Sous Chef online)

extra virgin olive oil 100ml

mackerel 2 x 300g, gutted and butterflied

lemon 1, cut into quarters

Blister the tomatoes in small batches in a hot dry pan for 5 minutes or until charred.

While warm combine the tomatoes, shallot, olives, sugar, vinegar, fish sauce, ground espelette pepper and oil in a bowl. Cover and set aside at room temperature.

Heat a grill or oven to the hottest setting. Lightly oil and season the mackerel all over. Place on a tray and grill for 3-4 minutes until the skin is charred. Rest the mackerel and allow the residual heat to finish the cooking process.

Place the mackerel on a warm plate and spoon over the marinated jammy tomatoes.

Serve with lemon.

Potato and chard croquettes

Potato and chard croquettes. Photograph: Kate Whitaker/The Observer

Hot fried morsels are a good way to start any meal. Large, fleshy, deep green chard leaves have a similar flavour to spinach but with a stronger earthiness that helps to balance the richness of the buttery mash. If, like me, the potato skins are your favourite part, keep them andfill them with butter and cheese and eat while warm with a sprinkling of salt.

Makes enough for 6, any extras can be frozen

king edward potatoes 1kg, washed

green chard 300g, washed

unsalted butter 170g, diced, at room temperature

parmesan 55g, grated, plus some for serving

extra virgin olive oil 1 tsp

egg yolk 1

fine sea salt 15g

lemon zest to taste

whole nutmeg grated, to taste

black pepper to taste

free range eggs 2

milk 200ml

plain flour 180g

breadcrumbs/panko 400g

vegetable oil 500ml, to deep fry

Preheat an oven to 180C fan/gas mark 6. Bake the potatoes for 1 hour or until cooked through. Meanwhile, place a large pot of salted water on a high heat to come to a boil. Cut away the stems from the leaves and trim and discard the rough ends of the chard stalks.

Once the water is boiling, lower the stalks into the pot and cook them until tender for 3-4 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, remove the stalks and add the leaves for 1 minute until just wilted. Pour through a colander and refresh both in ice water.

Once cool enough to handle, roughly chop the chard stalks and leaves into small pieces.

Set a fine sieve over a bowl and add the chopped chard, cover with a cloth then place a few tins on top or, alternatively, wrap the vegetable in a cloth and squeeze the chard as hard as you can to remove the excess water. It is very important to remove excess liquid from the chard as it can force the mixture to pop in the fryer.

Remove the potatoes and leave until cool enough to handle, then halve and scoop the flesh from the skins into a large bowl. Mash or use a ricer to create a smooth texture, then beat in the butter, parmesan, oil, yolk, salt, lemon zest, nutmeg and black pepper to taste, and add the chopped chard. Check the seasoning.

Spoon the mixture into a piping bag and pipe a thick finger of potato mixture the length of the tray then place into the fridge to chill for at least 2 hours.

Beat the eggs and milk together and set aside. Place the flour and breadcrumbs into separate shallow dishes and set aside.

Use a sharp knife to cut the potato finger into 4cm lengths. Place the little batons into the flour tray and shake to coat, then transfer them into the milk and egg mixture and repeat, then into the breadcrumbs so that each one is evenly and thoroughly covered. Best chilled for a further few hours and buried in extra breadcrumbs until needed.

Half fill a deep, heavy-bottomed pan with vegetable oil. Heat the oil over medium heat to 180C. It is best to test the oil temperature with a small piece of bread if you don’t have a thermometer: once the oil is hot, the bread should crisp up and be golden within a few minutes.

Carefully place a few croquettes into the hot oil and deep fry for 3 minutes, until crisp and golden in colour. Remove from the oil with a slotted spoon and place on a cooling rack set over a tray. Repeat with the rest of the croquettes, being careful to not overcrowd the pan, which would result in a drop in oil temperature and leave them soft and oily.

Season with fine salt while they’re warm and serve immediately with a good helping of parmesan cheese scattered over the top.

Orecchiette, pork, milk and fennel

Orecchiette, pork, milk and fennel. Photograph: Kate Whitaker/The Observer

The pork is slowly cooked until the meat is tender and plump after absorbing all the stock and milk. The orecchiette (meaning “little ears” in Italian) of Puglian pasta cup the braised pork and capers perfectly.

This dish is best finished with plenty of parmesan and, if you wish, a little more chilli.

Serves 6

olive oil 3 tbsp

banana shallots 2, peeled and finely diced

salt ¼ tsp

garlic 1 clove, peeled and crushed

dried chilli flakes ½-1 tsp

rosemary sprigs 2, picked and roughly chopped

fennel seeds ½ tsp, toasted and ground

pork mince 500g

dry white wine 125ml

chicken stock 200ml

whole milk 120ml

baby capers 40g, rinsed

small unwaxed lemon, zest of ½

dried orecchiette 340g

To serve

parmesan 80g

Place a large heavy-bottomed pan over a low heat and add the olive oil. Once warm, add the shallots and salt and cover with a lid for 10-15 minutes until soft but without colour.

Stir through the garlic, chilli, rosemary and fennel, and cook for a couple of minutes.

Turn up the heat and crumble in the pork mince. Stir to separate the mince with a wooden spoon for a few minutes. Pour over the wine. Once bubbling add the stock and half the milk. Reduce the heat to a gentle simmer and cook over a low heat for 30-40 minutes or until the liquid has been absorbed and the meat is tender.

Take the pan off the heat and stir through the remaining milk, capers and lemon zest.

Bring a large pot of salted water to the boil. Add the pasta and cook for 10 minutes or until al dente (reserving the cooking water). Stir the orecchiette into the sauce adding two large ladlefuls of the cooking water to encourage the starch to bind it all together. Grate one third of the parmesan into the pasta and stir to combine.

Serve hot with plenty of freshly grated parmesan.

Ricotta and cherry cake

Ricotta and cherry cake. Photograph: Kate Whitaker/The Observer

This is a soft sponge studded with plump cherries. Best served with double cream.

Serves 6

cherries 200g, halves and pitted

sugar 50g

red wine 100ml

For the sponge

free range egg 1, room temperature

yolks 2, room temperature

caster sugar 180g

ricotta 100g

butter 65g, melted (plus a little extra for greasing the tin)

plain flour 130g, sifted

baking powder ¾ tsp, sifted

salt a good pinch

To serve

double cream 125ml

Preheat the oven to 160C fan/gas mark 4. Lightly butter and line a 20cm cake tin with greaseproof paper.

Add the cherries, sugar and wine to a pan and simmer for 8 minutes until glossy but holding their shape. Remove the pan from the heat and set aside.

In a large bowl beat the whole egg, the yolks and sugar until pale and thick. Slowly add the cooled butter followed by the ricotta to the thickened eggs. Once the batter is smooth, fold through the flour, baking powder and salt. Spoon the mixture into the tin and smooth the top with the back of a spoon. Scatter over the drained cherries, reserving the syrup for later.

Place the cake into the middle of the oven and cook for 20-25 minutes or until a skewer comes out clean when inserted into the centre. Meanwhile, reduce the cherry liquor to a syrup over a medium heat until glossy and thick.

Allow the cake to cool in the tin before serving wedges with cream and cherry syrup.

Sessions Arts Club, 24 Clerkenwell Green, London EC1R 0NA
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@A pair of waterfalls tumble out of a sinuous, rocky cataract into a deep, blue-green pool with a magnificent ash tree curling out above it, the leaves on one of its broad boughs almost touching the surface. The water in the pool ripples and sparkles in the late June sunshine, and a couple of brown trout dart away out of sight. A “beach” of smooth, jade-coloured rocks, polished like gemstones, slips into the water.

We have only been walking for about 45 minutes, but the lure of a dip in Tongue Pot is irresistible. I jump off a craggy ledge and feel a delicious rush of cold clarity as I plunge in. My brother-in-law Chris leaps off a much higher spot, maybe five metres high. I walk up to the same ledge and take a look down. The water seems laughably far away and I decide I’m happy to skip this particular test of bravery. We dry off, hoist our backpacks again and continue our climb into the fells.

We walk across the expanse of Great Moss, which gives a spectacular view of the south side of the Scafell massif

We are at the start of an effort to lasso together the fells known as the Eskdale Horseshoe, surrounding upper Eskdale. Taking in England’s highest mountain, Scafell Pike, along with several others, over a 14-mile hike with about 1,800 metres of ascent, it is a spectacular but formidable route, and our plan is to complete it over two days, split by a wild camp high in the fells.

There’s an important caveat to be made here: wild camping – in the form of discreet one-night stays in the hills and mountains at some distance away from civilisation – is traditionally tolerated in the Lake District, provided it is done responsibly. The National Trust acknowledges that “there’s a long tradition of wild camping in the Lake District”, but in response to the surge in people wanting to camp there and some of the problems that has brought, emphasises that your campsite should always be above the highest wall boundary on the mountain (usually about 400 metres), should not involve more than two tents in the same spot, should not involve fires or barbecues, and should always “leave no trace” of litter or waste.

The stark emptiness of upper Eskdale

Carrying a large pack on a muggy summer day is hot, heavy work, but it’s made considerably easier if you can regularly cool off. As well as mountain drama, I’ve chosen our particular take on the horseshoe for aquatic appeal, which is found in abundance around here in the form of waterfalls, plunge pools and tarns, rather than big lakes. Wild walking, wild sleeping and wild swimming – could there be a more wholesomely satisfying combination?

After leaving Tongue Pot, one of the better-known highlights of the upper River Esk, we carry on up the moodily dramatic gorge. The Esk is fed by streams that rise from the highest ground in England, and tumbles into the Irish Sea near Ravenglass just 15 miles later. The erosive power of that fast-flowing water has carved a host of cataracts, canyons and plunge pools from the volcanic rock, and as we walk, we pass several more superb spots for a splash. Even if the best-known places are busy, finding our own little enclave in the smoothly sculpted, serpentine gorge isn’t difficult.

Chris walking above the pastoral patchwork of Langdale

We emerge into the highest part of upper Eskdale, a spectacular mountain sanctuary surrounded by giants: Scafell Pike and other big-hitters such as Bowfell and Crinkle Crags, enclose this hanging valley. It’s also rugged, remote and lacking in any obvious tourist “draws”, so the crowds have never found their way here, and development is nonexistent (the Friends of the Lake District saw off a proposed hydroelectric scheme in the 1940s).

Although actual wildlife is a bit thin on the ground – the hungry Herdwick sheep, with their propensity for devouring vegetation, see to that – it certainly feels wild, a long way from the bustle of Bowness or Grasmere. We walk across the expanse of Great Moss, which gives a spectacular view of the south side of the Scafell massif: a craggy, complex mass of bulging ridges and blank walls of rock.

We make the scrambly climb up a gully via Foxes Tarn to the summit of Scafell, the second-highest mountain in England. At 964m, it is just 13 metres lower than its sibling, but with the exception of a croaking raven, we were alone on its summit. By contrast, about 40 people were milling around Scafell Pike’s crowning cairn, just a few hundred metres away across the col of Mickledore. The air was still enough for us to hear snippets of their conversation.

A perfect wild pool in upper Eskdale

Our wild camping spot was near a well-known upland tarn, embedded like a jewel below Great End, with shelves of rock sloping temptingly into its green depths. Before we set up our tents I took a brief, bracing dip, the water distinctly nippier at this higher altitude. Chris went in up to his waist, uttered an oath and demurred.

Dragonflies danced across the water, Bow Fell looked down on us and a nearby ledge acted as a natural diving board

The cloud lowered soon afterwards to encase us in claggy mire. But on the climb up to Esk Pike the next morning, the world gradually started brightening, and we found ourselves emerging back into the sun above a sea of cloud, with the clear mountain summits of Great Gable and the distant Langdale Pikes protruding above it like volcanic islands. Moments like this crystallise the appeal of wild camping up high: being able to experience the mercurial, shapeshifting magic of mountainous places at dusk or dawn in all their glory.

As we walked over Esk Pike, Bow Fell and Crinkle Crags, the cloudscape thickened, but occasionally peeled apart, revealing contrasting views: the cosy patchwork of Langdale on one side, and the stark emptiness of upper Eskdale on the other. Sun the colour of wild honey trickled across the landscape.

Clouds lifting the morning after a wild camp in the Lake District fells

There are few better feelings after the grime of a wild camp than plunging into the icy freshness of a mountain river, and after descending back into upper Eskdale, we found another exquisitely framed plunge pool in a tributary of the Esk where we could do just that.

Dragonflies danced across the water, Bow Fell looked down on us from the head of the valley, and a nearby ledge acted as a natural diving board. There are nameless gems like this all across the Lake District: make the effort to get off the beaten track, even just a little, and they can be yours alone for a precious hour or two.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@St Martin’s, Isles of Scilly

For a true sense of escape bypass the Scilly’s Big Three (Tresco, Bryher and St Mary’s) and head to the most northerly island in the archipelago. Just two miles long, St Martin’s is home to some of the most glorious beaches in the UK, with heathery cliff walks and skies full of rare birds. There are just 120 permanent residents, but the island boasts its own vineyard, dive school, bakery and jewellery designer, along with holiday cottages, chalets and camping.

visitislesofscilly.com

Tiree, Inner Hebrides

‘Fringed with white sand beaches’: Tiree. Photograph: Cavan Images/Getty Images

The most westerly of the Inner Hebrides, Tiree is fringed by white-sand beaches that could have been transported straight from the Caribbean. Just 12 miles by three, the island is relatively flat, making for easy hiking or cycling – and if you can manage 46 miles you’ll cover the entire coastline. It claims to be one of the sunniest places in the UK, thanks to the proximity of the Gulf Stream. Tiree is steeped in tradition, and there are two heritage centres on the island with stories, poems, relics and maps that keep its history alive. The island is dotted with self-catering cottages, and there are a couple of simple hotels.

isleoftiree.com

Osea Island, Essex

‘A bolthold beloved of celebrities’: Osea Island, Essex. Photograph: Tim E White/Alamy

Situated in the estuary of Essex’s Blackwater river, Osea is a lush, 38-acre swathe of land, connected to the mainland at low tide by a Roman causeway. Only accessible to guests of the Osea Island Resort, this is a bolthole beloved of celebrities (it was rumoured Rihanna booked the entire island in 2019), who come for the unfussy luxury. There are walks through fruit orchards, long sandy beaches and bikes to borrow, while accommodation is in luxury beach cottages, apartments and village houses, available to book individually when the island isn’t hosting a wedding or events.

oseaisland.co.uk

Burgh Island, Devon

Novel adventure: Burgh Island Hotel, where Agatha Christie wrote two books. Photograph: Marco Kesseler/Alamy

Getting to this dollop of land just off the Devon coast is an adventure in itself. At low tide it’s possible to walk across a sandy causeway, but when the water is up, a sea tractor rumbles to and from Bigbury-on-Sea. It is most famous for the art deco Burgh Island Hotel – beloved by Agatha Christie (who wrote two books there), the Beatles, and Edward VIII and Mrs Simpson – and non-residents can book lunch or afternoon tea, while an overnight stay requires black tie for the formal dinner dance. For something less upmarket, the Pilchard Inn is a whitewashed 14th-century pub with a sunswept terrace that has sea views.

burghisland.com

Inner Farne, Northumberland

Nature reserve: Inner Farne is famous for its puffin colonies. Photograph: Sally Anderson/Alamy

Nature lovers flock to this rocky island off the Northumberland coast – one of the National Trust-owned Farne Islands (the others will not reopen until 2022) – famous for its puffin and seal colonies, and the 100,000 seabirds that make the islands their home each year. David Attenborough called the Farne Islands his favourite place in the UK to see “magnificent nature”, and every autumn the rocky landscape becomes a maternity ward for hundreds of seal pups. Access to Inner Farne is only possible through a pre-ticketed boat trip, bookable on the National Trust website.

Bardsey Island, Gwynedd

‘Home to shearwaters, grey seals, puffins, 300 bird species, and just one permanent household’: Bardsey Island. Photograph: Getty Images

Two miles off the coast of the wild Llŷn peninsula, Bardsey is home to shearwaters, grey seals, puffins, 300 bird species, and just one permanent household. Day trips allow three or four hours to explore, or there are nine holiday cottages. There’s no electricity, houses have outside compost toilets and visitors should bring their food and drink, although evening meals can be booked at the farm. If peace is what you’re after, it delivers in spades.

bardsey.org

Brownsea Island, Dorset

‘Tranquil lagoon’: Brownsea Island in Poole Harbour. Photograph: Ian Woolcock/Alamy

The largest of the islands in Poole Harbour and a protected nature reserve, Brownsea is a world away (and a short ferry ride) from the bustling seaside resorts that surround it. The tranquil lagoon seethes with avocets, spoonbills and wildfowl. Between April and September it’s possible to camp, and the Villano Café is a great spot for lunch, with glorious views across to Sandbanks from its waterfront terrace.

nationaltrust.org.uk

Iona, Inner Hebrides

Scotland’s ‘Cradle of Christianity’: the Benedictine Abbey on Iona Island. Photograph: Robert Harding/Alamy

It may be small – just three by one and a half miles – but Iona is one of Scotland’s most legendary places, known as the country’s “Cradle of Christianity”. In AD563 Saint Columba and 12 companions founded a monastery that became one of the most important in the British Isles, and pilgrims still come today to visit the Benedictine Abbey and soak up Iona’s uniquely spiritual atmosphere. There are self-catering cottages, campsites and two hotels, and alongside the historic and religious sites, there are white-sand beaches, walking routes and one of the wildest golf courses on the planet.

welcometoiona.com

Monkey Island, Bray, Berkshire

‘A slab of land in the middle of the Thames’: Monkey Island, near Bray. Photograph: M Sobreira/Alamy

This leafy slab of land in the middle of the Thames has been welcoming the great and the good for centuries –the Duke of Marlborough originally built the grandiose pavilion and temple in 1723 as a fishing retreat. It’s recent conversion to a luxury hotel has seen the island return to its halcyon days, when it welcomed Edward VIII, Siegfried Sassoon and HG Wells. It has 40 elegant rooms, a floating spa on a teal-blue narrowboat and an upmarket restaurant serving modern British cuisine. Non-residents can book for lunch, dinner, or a drink on the terrace.

monkeyislandestate.co.uk

Lindisfarne, Northumberland

High point: the 16th-century castle on Lindisfarne. Photograph: Trevor Chriss/Alamy

Cut off from the mainland for five hours in every 12, Lindisfarne (also known as Holy Island) is famous for its dramatically situated 16th-century castle perched on an outcrop of rock, and the 11th-century priory from where Christianity spread across northern England. Stroll around the Gertrude Jekyll garden, taste locally produced mead at St Aidan’s Winery and visit the remote beaches on the north of the island, which remain quiet even in high summer. There are holiday cottage and guesthouses, and a handful of places to eat – booking in advance for dinner is advisable.

lindisfarne.org.uk
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Click here to access the print version.



Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines.

Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@How does your brain know that you know something without being able to remember it at the time? For example, knowing a word that could be used perfectly in context but not being able to remember the word. Felix Buda

Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com.

Readers reply

I look forward to the answers, because this is something I’ve been wondering about, too. I guess it’s something to do with the fact that the “word” isn’t the “thing”, so it’s possible for the brain to know that it has a “thing” inside it without being able to remember the “word” for it. But that’s as far as I can get, and sometimes I get the feeling that it’s not a satisfactory answer, though I can’t quite work out why. petekreff

That thingumajigery with forgetting oojamaflips is a mystery, isn’t it? If I remember rightly, they call it lethologica – and it can last a long time, too. For example, I recently found myself repeatedly trying to recall a particular word for two weeks, with no luck at all. Then one day when I was thinking about something else altogether, it suddenly floated into my consciousness. A fortnight. ThereisnoOwl

A related question might be: “Why does your brain recall the translation of a word you frustratingly can’t drag out in your native tongue?” I’m far from fluent in Spanish but when I’m struggling to remember an English word while in the UK, out pops the Spanish version. What is really odd, though, is that, when in Spain, the opposite happens. IanSouth

It’s a long time since I studied psychology but “metamemory” is the concept that covers these processes. If I remember correctly. OldFuzzface

A lexical entry (or word in the mental dictionary) is composed minimally of three parts: a phonological representation (what the word sounds like); a semantic representation (the meaning); and a representation of the grammatical category (noun, verb, and so on). All three are necessary in order for a word to be understood when heard and to be used correctly when speaking. The tip-of-the-tongue experience involves activation of the semantic and grammatical components of a word, but failure to access the phonological component. Similarly, a person may recognise a spoken form (or be able to recall and produce a form) without being able to remember what it means – an experience of “I know that’s a word but I have no idea what it means” (although the person may know whether it is a noun, verb, adjective and so on). CanadaRabbit63

Different types of memory are processed in different parts of your brain. Feelings about something, for example, are in a different area to the details of it. Familiarity is also stored in a different area. I had a brain injury and often have the “this idea/face is familiar/important and I’ve forgotten it” feeling, without having a clue what “it” was. alasdair19

As an occasional writer, I suffer this phenomenon quite often. Often enough to have created a term for it: mercury word. If you ever “‘played” with mercury in science class in school you will recall how it becomes more difficult to get hold of the more you try to hold it. I put a nonsense word into the sentence instead. For example, “Creatures that prefer to live their lives during the hours of dark are referred to as …” er, um, blast, I forgot “ … referred to as hairbrush animals” or “ … referred to as aubergine animals.” The third time is invariably the charm and the word appears in my head like a waiter when you had given up all hope of getting another drink. JayeKaye

I think you remember knowing it, and only find out that the details are missing when you try to access them. It’s a bit like a computer that sometimes has the icon for the program, in the menu, even though the software has been deleted. I had a very strange demonstration of this effect while my late partner was dying with early onset dementia (grim at the time, but thankfully now long in the past.) There was a phase when, if asked by the doctor whether she could make a sandwich, she said she could. Now at the time I knew that wasn’t correct, but for many many years previously she had indeed been an accomplished cook and clearly she remembered this fact, even though when asked to talk the doctor through the process, she had entirely forgotten the steps involved. Rejennyrated

As I’ve aged, I’ve noticed this is a more frequent occurrence. My way of explaining to others is this. A computer hard disk has both a section for storing a string of bits (call it the file), and it has a second section that records the location of that string of bits – called the file allocation table (Fat). As I get older as my Fat is getting full, and to make more room some of the Fat is rearranged, during which process there are addressing errors introduced. When I try to recall something, the Fat tells me it’s at location X but, unfortunately, that is sometimes incorrect and so it is inaccessible. It’s probably more complex but conceptually, that’s what it feels like. Monkeybiz

All information retrieval systems consist of the data store itself and an index to navigate it. Your brain, under the hood, is no different; your brain is essentially a fiendishly complex pattern-matching database. The phenomena you describe is simply your awareness of the concept/word being in your index, but the pointer in the index to where it is in the actual data store being wrong, misfiled, refiled under something else or that part of the store being temporarily inaccessible.

To make things even more flaky, your brain has no objectively structured model of information with which to build a coherent index. Instead it just builds its index from the context of when, where, how and any other parallel subjective experiences specific to the time the information was first filed (no matter how irrelevant those are to the information itself – your brain has no idea what’s relevant, nor cares). Stupidly, you’ve as much chance of remembering how to do differential calculus thinking about the pen you used at school as thinking about maths.

Hence it’s particularly hard to access memories when attempted in an unfamiliar context (such as a new place, surrounded by different people, doing a different task, or even just using a familiar word in a new syntactic context). This is why your mind goes unhelpfully blank during, say, a job interview, where literally every possible contextual cue will be unfamiliar. It’s also why memories and ideas flood back unbidden when you return to a familiar place, company, sensations etc that are enough to match and trigger the index, even if retrieves information conceptually irrelevant to whatever you’re currently doing.

Your brain often manages to find memories anyway, presumably by trying lots of partial matches and/or context substitutions in the background till eventually it throws the right bit of information into your conscious mind almost magically (usually a few minutes late).

It then adds the new, current context and sometimes the sensation itself of trying to remember the idea to its index (especially if it was a notably embarrassing social situation). This leads to the counterintuitive but familiar experience of trying to remember an idea only from the memory of when you last tried to use it.

People who seem to have good memories actually just have particularly plastic mental indexes that better handle partial contextual matches – but often at the cost of lots of throwing up flotsam and jetsam ideas, leading to difficulty focusing. Hence the stereotype of the erudite, knowledgable but ditzy academic. HaveYouFedTheFish

I remember our AI lecturer telling us how throughout history thinkers had used the technology of their time as an analogy for the workings of the mind – printing press, jaquard loom, clockwork, steam engine, etc. He opined on how futile these efforts were, but then went on – without a hint of irony – to demonstrate the analogies between computers and the mind. kneejerkreactionary

This recent Guardian article has this: “A few years ago the psychologist Robert Epstein challenged researchers at one of the world’s most prestigious research institutes to try to account for human behaviour without resorting to computational metaphors. They could not do it. The metaphor has become so pervasive, Epstein points out, that ‘there is virtually no form of discourse about intelligent human behaviour that proceeds without employing this metaphor, just as no form of discourse about intelligent human behaviour could proceed in certain eras and cultures without reference to a spirit or deity’.”

The physicist David Bohm wrote with his colleague Basil Hiley (The Undivided Universe) that people over various times have compared the brain and mind to something mechanical, then as a telephone exchange, then a computer and so on. But all this is contingent, so the better approach would be to explore the relationship of mind and matter and then be free to explore what kind of model comes up for the mind and not be dependent on analogies. Each model being a limitation, you see.

The problem with a computer idea is that such is human-made, finite in software/hardware, whereas any living thinking matter (maybe all matter/energy) is ultimately based on some ultimately unknown substrate (beyond even quarks, gluons, leptons etc). So how can we model the mind/brain on something which is a human-made idea? everchanging

The software analogy is terribly faulty. We recreate our memories constantly in the form of electrical signals and neurochemistry, and, the more often we revisit a thought or memory and the more context that surrounds it, the more travelled and stable that path is. If we neglect it, it degrades. Much of dreaming is stimulating those pathways.

When you were in high school, you remembered everyone’s name, your classes; decades later much of that is gone, but if you went to a reunion the context would stimulate those pathways. It doesn’t mean the information was stored the whole time like in a hard drive, you’re actively rebuilding pathways and “memories” as you go. Which is why it’s all so much easier to remember a word in context. Plus, in context, you are likely to be able to guess the definition as well. Thomas1178

It’s an interesting question but an imprecise one and we should be careful to not assume we know the writer’s intended meaning. There is, for example, a difference between lethologica (the “tip of the tongue” phenomenon) and anomic aphasia (a word-retrieval disorder – a description that connotes assumptions around how the brain works). In that context it’s worth first understanding what is meant by the brain “knowing” that it knows something. This is not a trivial difference. Unravelling the causes of lethologica might lead to advances in understanding how the “normal” brain works. Unravelling someone’s anomic aphasia might lead to a diagnosis of brain damage or neurodegenerative disease. Dorkalicious

We store knowledge in distributed networks. When we try to remember something, it can start to activate a node in the network, so you are aware that there is something there, as opposed to knowing that you don’t know it. If you haven’t retrieved it for a while, the connections weaken. If you give it time, the network will be slowly activated by your goal to remember it in a process called “spreading activation”. Eventually, it will hit a threshold and voilà! I find that if I don’t force it and just think of something else, the answer will often pop into my head in a few minutes. I am a cognitive psychologist who studies learning and I have been very interested in this process, including its relationship to creativity. jeanmck

After reading Thinking, Fast and Slow by Daniel Kahneman, I started playing with memory recall. According to Kahneman, the human brain has two speeds. He called the fast function System One and the slow one System Two. System Two is where complex thinking takes place. System One is very fast but superficial and does not process any serious intellectual work. System Two is a bit lazy and lets System One run the show.

When watching TV or a movie, I would regularly see an actor or actress I’d seen before but couldn’t remember their name or the show or movie I saw them in. The same would happen when listening to music and trying to remember the artist’s name. The fact that I couldn’t remember bothered me to such an extent that I would stop paying attention to whatever I was watching or listening to. When this happened one day, instead of getting obsessed with my memory’s lack of results, I said out loud “System Two, get me the answer” and continued watching/listening. Within a few minutes, the answer I was looking for just popped up in my mind! Lesunsetlesautres

First time I’ve heard anyone refer to their partner as “System Two”. Seems to work a charm though … maybe a bit of blowback at first, so I’ll keep my defences up. 44N79W

This is an example of meta-consciousness. It is arguable that many animals show signs of being conscious, but humans are the only animals who realise they are conscious, and can think what being conscious means. Other animals certainly forget things, but it is very doubtful whether they are conscious that they have forgotten anything. The question “What is consciousness?” is known as the hard problem, and it hasn’t been solved yet. Jon1306

Interesting question. I don’t know the answer but I have an equally difficult, related, question. When you finally (or immediately) dredge up the memory you are looking for, how do you know it’s the right one? It must somehow match the “hole” in your memory that allows you to know that you know. DaDooq
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Michael Rapaport does not want to lose his cool. And for most of our otherwise pleasant and meandering visit over Zoom in June, he doesn’t. Until Kevin Durant’s name comes up.

Back in April, Rapaport tweeted screenshots of a private Instagram exchange with the Brooklyn Nets swingman that came after Rapaport criticised one of Durant’s post-game interviews. In it, the 11-time NBA All-Star unleashes a fusillade of profane insults – leaning on homophobic and misogynistic language as hard as he does undersized defenders on the low block – before invoking Rapaport’s wife and challenging him to a fight.

“Me and mike talk CRAZIER than this on the regular and today he’s pissed,” explained Durant. “My bad mike, damn!!” Rapaport then replied with misogynistic language of his own.

The entire back-and-forth had NBA Twitter in a froth, and before long their fiery feud was singeing the eyebrows of the league itself. After, the NBA condemned the remarks as “offensive and derogatory”, Durant was forced to accept a $50,000 fine and issue a public apology.

When I speak to Rapaport he’s beaming in from his Brooklyn home on a bright late morning, and is every bit as irascible as this Twitter exchange suggests. I ask if he’s cut Durant a refund check yet, and holy hell does he hit the ceiling. “Fuck him and his disrespect and thinking he can tweet people and shit on them,” Rapaport snarls. “The 50 grand, that’s part of [his] deal, you know? And anyway, it’s like a normal person buying a 50-cent candy bar. Stop DMing people. This is not banter.”

Damn, Mike. I thought y’all were friends?

“He misreported it!” Rapaport says. “We’re not fucking friends. That’s not the way I talk to friends.”

Rapaport made his name as a character actor playing the classic, fast-talking New York noodge. In fact, you’d be hard-pressed to name another career scene-chewer that’s matched Rapaport’s 30-year run. He’s gone line-for-line with Arnold Schwarzenegger, Leo DiCaprio and Will Smith, taken direction from Tony Scott and Spike Lee. He had an arc on Friends as Phoebe’s cop boyfriend and another on Boston Public as the teacher who made his class read The N Word. He’s even directed two fine documentaries dedicated to his great loves, the New York Knicks, and A Tribe Called Quest respectively. Nowadays Rapaport is the dad on Netflix’s Atypical, and is the host of the sports and culture podcast I Am Rapaport (Luminary) which is edging toward its 725th episode.

Michael Rapaport, right, is seen in Friends with David Schwimmer and Matthew Perry. Photograph: NBC/NBCUniversal/Getty Images

But Rapaport has become most-known – and perhaps even notorious – for his public feuds. Besides Durant, he’s kept a beef with LeBron James simmering for years after the NBA superstar allegedly evaded Rapaport’s young children. He’s in litigation with Barstool Sports, which abruptly ended its partnership with Rapaport after he turned his sharp tongue on the brand’s employees and fans. (“I didn’t know a lot about the company,” he says. “They pursued me. I can’t fully talk about the lawsuit because we’re still in the middle of it.”)

Rapaport even holds an open grudge against the Root for calling him “the worst kind of white man” following his exchange with the Real Housewives of Atlanta star Kenya Moore on Bravo’s Watch What Happens Live – a talkshow where messiness is celebrated, showcased and arguably exacerbated (note: he is a genuine fan of the Real Housewives franchise). Rapaport and Moore are arguing performatively, going jab for jab. “We were bantering!” explains Rapaport. “She said, ‘You’re old, fat and white’ – and I took it. But later she said something again, and I said, ‘Your feet are ashy’ because they were. I was speaking the truth.”

Rapaport was roundly criticised by the Root and others for his use of the term “ashy”, which is nearly exclusively applied to darker skin, not to mention the connotations of poor self-care, and poverty that owes to white subjugation. There was also the matter of a picture Rapaport posted of Moore alongside a gorilla which was subsequently deleted.

“First of all, I post monkeys all the time on my stories – I love them,” says Rapaport. “The night I was taping Watch What Happens Live, somebody took the clip with Kenya and [another post] with a seven-hour difference and made it seem like I posted her next to a gorilla. Of course that’s fucking racist. Tell my Black wife, tell all my Black friends and put me on an island alone. Please cancel me!”

OK, and the part where you call her feet ashy?

“[We’re] snapping, playing the dozens, whatever you want to call it. People thought it was funny, but then it took on a whole race connotation. But we were just talking shit!”

Taken altogether, it’s enough to make you wonder: when did Michael Rapaport become such a contrarian?

The pot-stirring started seven years ago, with Rapaport’s public war of words with Spike Lee over gentrification. After Lee ranted about its deleterious effects on the historically Black neighborhoods in his native Brooklyn, Rapaport, in a HuffPost interview to promote Eden’s Tribeca film festival run, dismissed Lee as an out-of-touch Upper East Side resident who was biting the hand that fed him. Things quickly escalated from there, with Lee dissing Rapaport as “not even a good film-maker” and Rapaport finally calling Lee “a shit stain”.

Michael Rapaport records a show for his sports podcast at his home in Los Angeles. Photograph: Jenna Schoenefeld/The New York Times/eyevine

That was the first bad day. “At the time what I was really trying to say was, like, ‘Yo, stop screaming on everybody,’” Rapaport explains. “My point was there were pros and cons to it, and people shouldn’t be displaced. But some of the neighborhoods that have been gentrified were places nobody wanted to go. And I should’ve articulated myself as I just did. But I went into attack mode, and it became a whole thing.

“As far as me calling him a shit stain and people thinking that’s racist, understand: I love that insult and use it all the time. White, Black – it never crossed my mind to even try to turn it into something racist. It’s a great insult. I called Donald Trump that many times during my infamous rants against him.”

With all the shit I talk, you never know when your next tweet could be your last

Indeed, Rapaport did seem to revel in his Durant-like strafing of the 45th president. After Trump’s “shithole countries” comment made the rounds, Rapaport slammed him as a “dick stain” in an online tirade. While the country was under lockdown last year and Trump insisted that people “want to get back to work” as Covid death tolls mounted, Rapaport dared Trump to expose his kids to the virus. (“You wanna make the American people your guinea pigs?” Rapaport raged. “All so you can get re-elected? You fuckin’ clown.”) When Trump equivocated when asked if he’d leave office in the event he lost the election, Rapaport threatened to hog-tie him, stick an apple in his mouth and toss him “out on the street on Black Lives Matter Plaza”.

Many would find Rapaport’s rants cathartic, as he not only expressed the anger and frustration shared by a plurality of the country at the time, but he was speaking truth to power with a bombast and an attitude that rang true to the Queens-born president . Yet for all the famous New Yorkers that Trump has lashed out at for having the temerity to scorn him – Robert De Niro, Alec Baldwin, Rosie O’Donnell – Rapaport never saw an angry tweet in response to his rants. And while on some level that probably bruises Rapaport’s ego (he went to all that trouble, after all), at the end of the day he was true to himself – or, as he says, he “represented”.

Rapaport grew up on New York City’s Upper East Side in the 1970s. His mother worked in radio and his father was the general manager of WKTU, then a soft rock station transitioning into disco. “Occasionally, we’d go to work with him, and they’d let me and my brother inside the booth while the DJs would be putting the needle on the record,” says Rapaport, whose seven-year foray into podcasting stems from his early bond with radio. “Back then there was no internet, no DVDs, no cassette tapes. And when they came, we started recording the radio.”

He had no idea how much his life would change when his father brought home an orange, 12in promotional copy of Rapper’s Delight. “As a nine-year-old at the time, it was like a new existence, hearing that record,” he says. “It was like a new world opening up.”

Michael Rapaport speaks to Frank Session in July 2019. Photograph: Mike Stobe/Getty Images

He was further shocked to learn that this world, the New York City outer boroughs, was a bus ride away. Basketball, his first love, gave him an excuse to explore the world and hang out with Black and Puerto Rican kids. “I learned a lot from going to the projects, sleeping at their homes,” he says. “It’s influenced who I am, how I speak, the roles I’ve taken, my outspokenness – the sort of hip-hop attitude. You had to represent.”

Banging around New York City’s outdoor courts, Rapaport aspired to play in the NBA. He prioritized practice over Hebrew school and getting bar mitzvah’d. He didn’t realize he was “100[%] Ashkenazi Jewish until I got a 23andMe during the pandemic”, says Rapaport, who takes pride in representing that, too. When it comes to defending Black Lives Matter, Stop Asian Hate or the LGBTQ+ communities, Rapaport doesn’t hesitate. “But it gets a little scarier when you’re like, cut the antisemitism,” he says. “And it gets complicated and convoluted because we’re in such a sensitive time right now with everybody afraid to get fucking canceled. For me, with all the shit I talk, you never know when your next tweet could be your last. I try to be aware of that, but not compromise who I am. But it ain’t easy.”

I wanted to be Rocky, to be Tony Manero – to be the characters

Standup comedy didn’t seem like a worthwhile career choice until Eddie Murphy came along in the early 80s. “I wanted to be him,” Rapaport says. “I’m 13 years old walking around the streets in a white leather jacket, no shirt with gold chains. I looked insane on the school bus.

“Growing up I didn’t want to be Sylvester Stallone in Rocky or John Travolta in Saturday Night Fever. I wanted to be Rocky, to be Tony Manero – to be the characters.”

During an extended visit to Los Angeles that summer, he’d become an underaged regular at the Improv (one of the co-founders, Mark Lonow, is his sister’s stepdad; “It’s complicated,” Rapaport says), marveling at Jerry Seinfeld, Keenen Ivory Wayans, Roseanne Barr and other upstart comics.

But it’s not until Rapaport accepts that there’s no basketball scholarship coming (he was kicked out of high school for fighting), that he decides to become an open mic-er.

What was his comedy like back then? “Just attitude,” he says. “Just New York shit-talking and fucking with the audience.” He didn’t realize some of those revelers were casting agents until he started receiving audition calls.

After a year of cracking jokes on stage, Rapaport booked the lead in an Oliver Stone-produced romantic thriller called Zebrahead, where he plays a teen rapper-DJ who falls for a Black classmate. And while the ensuing years would see Rapaport take on all kinds of roles, he nonetheless developed a reputation as “the white guy in the Black movie”.

Michael Rapaport and N’Bushe Wright on the set of Zebrahead in 1992. Photograph: Michael Ochs Archives/Getty Images

On the one hand Rapaport deserves some credit for his off-screen commitment to this character; he’s not code-switching when he’s in the company of other white people, he’s always reminding you that he’s down. But after a while, the hip-hop lyric quotes, the reference to his “Black wife”, the yo-yo-yo talk gets exhausting at best, cringey at worst. It opens him to charges of culture vulturing.

Rapaport scoffs at it all. To those who find his AND1 affect a touch too strong, who say that no white man should ever get this comfortable with Black things, around Black people, well, he says this: “I’ve grown up around Black people my whole life. I’m comfortable with myself. This weaponizing of race [that’s happening] … I should be able to have these conversations.”

As for his scrapes with celebrities, all of whom are Black save Trump, well, it’s clear that “professional troll” isn’t just the role he was born to play, but a role that doesn’t do justice to the other side – like the off-air resolutions he says he has reached with Lee, Moore and the like in the wake of their spats.

For nuance, you might have to check out his standup or download his podcast. Chances are the longer you spend time with him, the more likely you are to find him – as I did – to be quite a lovely guy whose passion and impatience blinkers him at times. And that’s after he even roasted me for taking too long to run this piece. (“Hey, whatever happened with that [interview] I did?” he asks in an email. “I gave you guys over 90 minutes of my time.”)

And if his attitude still offends you, and his lack of nuance should indeed get him canceled one day? Hey, he accepts that as part of his deal, too.

This article was amended on 16 August 2021 to remove an unnecessary stereotype.




@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@